Race is “an explosive subject”, says a theatre director to actors limbering up for a “coloured show” on Broadway. But Al Manners is hoping to make this subject less “antagonising” for a New York audience of 1955, whatever the cost to his black actors. So the rehearsal room becomes a battleground in Alice Childress’s play, as some submit to playing mammies, servants and lynched victims, while others – namely the veteran actor Wiletta (Tanya Moodie) – rises up to challenge Manners (Rory Keenan) after a lifetime of quiet compliance. Childress’s play was staged off-Broadway in the same year it is set, just as America was tipping into the civil rights movement, and she captured the very live anger of her era, as it was being experienced. This backstage microcosm paints a picture of a nation still acclimatising to the push and pull of racial integration. Its four black characters, Wiletta, John (Daniel Adeosun), Millie (Naana Agyei-Ampadu) and Sheldon (Cyril Nri), are actors struggling to survive in an industry filled with overt racial prejudice, and they remind each other to smile, nod and act out the reductive roles assigned to them without complaint at the start. It is ironic, then, that real-life Broadway producers withdrew the play from its scheduled premiere in 1957 because the dramatist refused to make it more palatable for its producers. Under Nancy Medina’s dynamic direction in a preview performance of the show, the tension is still felt now, especially between Wiletta and the pompous Manners, who disguises his micro-aggressions towards her with shallow flattery and flirtation. In other moments, the friction feels a little diluted, and without quite enough of a sting, perhaps because of our distance from this time or maybe because the play demands a tricky braiding of anger and satire. This satire comes mainly through the play being rehearsed on Rajha Shakiry’s shabby, half-covered stage within a stage. That play is set in the deep south and fixes all the black actors to outrageously caricatured parts: Sheldon is a father who does nothing but whittle on a rocking chair; Millie is a servant in a cotton dress whose lines consists of short exclamations such as “Lord have mercy”; Wiletta is a mother who effectively sends her son to his lynching. Some satire is built around the white characters in the rehearsal room, especially the bright-eyed Yale graduate Judy (Emma Canning), who is quick to perform white guilt but reveals an offensive naivety – in one hectoring moment she tells fellow black actors to “never have limitations on your horizon”. Wiletta’s stand does not spark concession or guilt in Manners but a chilling rage. “People think it’s wonderful to be white,” he barks, with a list of all he has had to contend with in his career. The drama – and anger – builds promisingly but an explosive denouement never comes. The closing moments are instead rather too oblique. “Tomorrow is another day,” says Millie, and it sounds like a play on Scarlett O’Hara’s sentiment in Gone With the Wind. It is intriguing to watch a cast of actors who are themselves playing actors but it sometimes appears too flamboyant and actorly, their comic exaggerations undercutting rather than compounding the tension. The play’s quieter questions around representation are where its real power lies. There is a discussion about language and whether it is ever legitimate to speak a racial slur on stage – from the mouth of a racist character – or if its utterance is always gratuitous and offensive. There is an especially interesting argument between the actors about whether being compliant – an “Uncle Tom” as Wiletta calls it – is the only way to exist in the industry or to protest against its prejudices. Rather than presenting this as a simple binary argument, Childress’s script shows the personal cost of protest and also the financial necessity of “Tom-ing”. As Sheldon says, he needs this job to pay his bills and cannot afford to protest. And while typecasting in theatre may not be as glaring today, Childress’s themes do not feel nearly as distant as they should. At the Dorfman theatre, National Theatre, until 29 January.1) Key clash for sliding promoted sides The teams that came second and third in last season’s Championship –and now sit in the form table’s bottom four – meet in what looks a seriously important encounter. Brentford go into it without Ivan Toney, who has tested positive for Covid, and Sergi Canós, suspended after getting a fifth booking of the season for taking off his shirt when celebrating a goal against Leeds last weekend. Watford also have significant injuries, most notably to the winger Ismaïla Sarr, and after a run of encouraging performances in extremely difficult fixtures must seize the opportunity presented by their next few games to haul themselves away from the bottom three. As Claudio Ranieri said after they lost to Manchester City last weekend: “Our Premier League starts now, we have to get some points.” SB Brentford v Watford, Friday 8pm (all times shown GMT) 2) Leaky defence a concern for City Manchester City have not kept a clean sheet in their past five games. Admittedly, four of those matches have ended in victories, with the only defeat in the midweek Champions League trip to Leipzig. City had already secured top spot in their group but only Zack Steffen’s saves stopped them from conceding many more on Tuesday. It is a sign something is not right in the City defence, which could also explain Kyle Walker’s frustrations and his subsequent red for lumping André Silva into the air. John Stones looked out of form, while Nathan Aké has struggled to earn a consistent run in the team. City have conceded only nine in the league, so the issues are not fatal for the table-toppers, but the run of failing to keep teams out will not do much for the morale of a regularly rotating defence. Shutting out low-scoring Wolves on Saturday would be a timely confidence booster. WU Manchester City v Wolves, Saturday 12.30pm 3) Gerrard back at Anfield with Villa Steven Gerrard returns to Anfield four games and three wins into his time in the Aston Villa dugout. A few interesting statistical themes have emerged from Gerrard’s games in charge: all are among the five Villa performances to feature the fewest lofted passes and fewest attempted long passes this season, and are among the six with the most completed short passes. Somewhat counterintuitively, despite playing fewer risky passes and more straightforward ones, Gerrard has presided over the four Villa matches in which they have had the lowest possession statistics. Still, results have been good, even if they had the good fortune to convert a combined xG of one into four goals against Brighton and Crystal Palace in Gerrard’s first two games. Liverpool’s fans are likely to be more welcoming than their team and, aside from the manager’s pride, Villa’s two games next week – at Norwich and at home to Burnley – are likely to be more significant. SB Liverpool v Aston Villa, Saturday 3pm 4) Phillips a huge miss at crucial time In their past five league games Chelsea have drawn at home to Burnley and Manchester United, lost to West Ham, beaten Leicester and, in Thomas Tuchel’s words, “stolen three points” from Watford. But they have also had a collective 91 shots to their opponents’ 35 (only the Hornets outshot them, by 13-8). Their recent poor run does not appear in danger of becoming a crisis, particularly with Romelu Lukaku returning to fitness. Leeds will be without their captain, the centre-back Liam Cooper, as well as Kalvin Phillips. Reports suggest the England midfielder may be out for two months, which is bad news given their fixture list. After the trip to Stamford Bridge, Leeds play Manchester City, Arsenal, Liverpool and Aston Villa before the new year. Marcelo Bielsa’s side have lost nine of the 12 games Phillips has missed since Leeds were promoted in 2020. SB Chelsea v Leeds, Saturday 3pm 5) Saints call on Caballero to solve crisis Southampton head for the Emirates Stadium without three of their four most-used players this season. Mohammed Salisu and Oriol Romeu are suspended after both were booked in the draw with Brighton – the fourth time both players have been cautioned in the same game. Alex McCarthy apparently hid the extent of the hamstring injury that stopped him from saving Neal Maupay’s late equaliser at St Mary’s. “I had one [substitution] and we couldn’t take it because he didn’t say anything,” raged Ralph Hasenhüttl. “This for me is unacceptable.” With Fraser Forster also injured, Southampton have signed Willy Caballero on a short-term contract to cover in goal. Should he start on Saturday, this will be the eighth successive Premier League season in which the 40-year-old has appeared. Aside from 2016-17, when he enjoyed an extended spell as Manchester City’s first-choice keeper, he averages 2.7 appearances and one clean sheet per season. SB Arsenal v Southampton, Saturday 3pm 6) Moyes has defensive problem to solve After Kurt Zouma’s injury, which is set to keep him out for up to 12 weeks, David Moyes will need to fill the void left by a player who has been integral to the West Ham defence. The Hammers sit fourth in the Premier League and have a fine opportunity for another three points at Burnley but, with Zouma and Angelo Ogbonna absent, they could be vulnerable. The Clarets are struggling at the moment but Chris Wood certainly knows how to exploit defensive weakness. Craig Dawson and Issa Diop will likely start but if Moyes is to continue with three at the back, he must find a third central defender. Tomas Soucek could potentially drop back, with Mark Noble replacing him in midfield. Declan Rice is another option to play at centre-back but his manager will surely not want to move him from his usual position. Moyes must find a way to get through to January, when he can sign a replacement, and hope it does not cost West Ham in the meantime. WU Burnley v West Ham, Sunday 2pm 7) Smith must decide to stick or twist Last weekend, for the first time under Dean Smith, Norwich played with a back three and a front two in an attempt to curb the threat of Tottenham’s Lucas Moura, Son Heung-min and Harry Kane without simultaneously curbing their own. The result was an xG of 1.6 – their joint highest of the season – and an xGa (expected goals against) of 1.7, which while not exactly outstanding is still the seventh best of their campaign, and more encouraging than the final score. “I felt three centre-backs would nullify them a bit and it did, but on the other side of it I wanted to play with two up top to give them some problems and I felt we did that,” Smith said after the 3-0 defeat. “I thought we adapted to the game plan really well.” This weekend he must decide whether to stick with it without Brandon Williams, on the pitch for all but 17 minutes of Smith’s tenure so far but unable to play against his parent club, Manchester United. SB Norwich v Manchester United, Saturday 5.30pm 8) Newcastle players must seize moment Newcastle have finally won a Premier League match this season, and momentum is often key when battling relegation. Conveniently, they are playing Leicester next. Brendan Rodgers’ side have struggled for consistency this season and crashed out of the Europa League on Thursday, so Eddie Howe will be optimistic that Newcastle can add to their points tally. Some Newcastle players might justifiably be distracted by someone different being linked every day to replacing them in the team. Those whose places are under threat will not want to be forced out the door, when there is a chance to stay part of a team potentially on the up. Howe’s current crop have a few more chances to prove their worth before the chequebook and exit door are opened in January. WU Leicester v Newcastle, Sunday 2pm 9) Benteke is causing problems for Eagles Crystal Palace have lost their past three games by a single goal, a sign of falling short in the final third. In that period, they have managed only six shots on target. Christian Benteke, Wilfried Zaha and Conor Gallagher have four goals each this season butPalace are lacking a prolific scorer as they face opponents they have failed to beat in their last 13 league meetings. There is no shortage of attacking talent available to change that on Sunday – but Patrick Vieira’s players must start showing greater composure in front of goal. Benteke has missed eight big chances this season, on a par with only Sadio Mané in the Premier League – and Mané has scored seven goals. Liverpool can afford to waste opportunities, whereas Palace cannot. It may cost them severely if they rely on Benteke for too long. WU Crystal Palace v Everton, Sunday 4.30pm 10) Players should get their Covid jabs Tottenham’s Sunday fixture at Brighton has been postponed due to a Covid-19 outbreak in the Spurs camp which has ruled out a number of players and also heavily affected staff. The club have shut down their training ground and had already called off Thursday’s Europa League game against Rennes. In mid-October it was confirmed that 68% of Premier League players had received two vaccination jabs and 81% had received a first dose. These figures will have improved over the past two months but there will undoubtedly be a minority who are still unvaccinated among Premier League ranks. Although a Covid vaccine does not guarantee avoiding infection, research shows it reduces the risk of death or serious illness. To those players who are avoiding it for whatever misguided reason: get jabbed for yourself and others. WUIt’s been another busy 24 hours on the Covid front as the world attempts to understand the possible consequences of the new Omicron variant. That’s all for today’s coronavirus blog. Thanks for joining us and please follow our latest Covid coverage here. Cases of the Omicron variant could be spreading even faster in England than in South Africa, according to a senior scientific adviser, who warned that the variant was a “very severe setback” to hopes of bringing the pandemic under control. European Union countries are expected to agree to limit to nine months the duration of Covid-19 certificates for travel around the bloc, three EU sources told Reuters, but some states are concerned that such a limit could hinder travel. Slovakia is to give cash handouts to people over 60 who get vaccinated or have their booster shot. Austria’s planned vaccine mandate has a minimum age of 14, the health minister said. The government also said holdouts face fines of up to 3,600 euros ($4,071) every three months. Malta will return to mandatory mask-wearing in outdoor and indoor spaces as from Saturday, Health Minister Chris Fearne said. The United States rushed millions of vaccine doses for children ages 5 to 11, but demand for inoculations for younger children has been low, more than a dozen state public health officials and physicians said. The US Food and Drug Administration authorised booster shots of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for those aged 16 and 17. Early hospital data from South Africa shows less than a third of patients admitted for Covid-19 during the latest wave linked to the Omicron variant are suffering severe illness, compared with two thirds in the early stages of the last two waves. Covid cases in South Africa surged by 255% in the past seven days (the Omicron variant produced a record 22,391 new cases) but there is mounting anecdotal evidence that infections with the Omicron variant are provoking milder symptoms than in previous waves (only 22 deaths were recorded). Germany’s vaccination advisory commission recommended the Pfizer/BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine is given to children aged five to 11 with pre-existing conditions. The World Health Organization warned wealthy countries against hoarding vaccines for booster shots as they try to fight off the new Omicron variant, threatening supplies to poorer countries where inoculation rates are low. The European Union’s drugs regulator said it could make sense to administer vaccine boosters as early as three months after the initial two-shot regimen. Brazil will require international travellers who aren’t vaccinated against coronavirus to quarantine for five days in the city they arrive by plane. Australian children aged five to 11 will receive the Pfizer Covid vaccine from 10 January, after the federal government accepted a recommendation for its use from immunisation experts. Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison has just spoken regarding the announcement to offer Covid jabs to children aged five to 11 from January. He said: Today we can announce there have been more than 40m doses of vaccine delivered in Australia and that is a great achievement by the entire team who have been involved in delivering these doses all around the country. ... Back in September, we made the decision, based on the best possible medical advice that we would extend [the] vaccination program to 12- to 15-year-olds, and that program has been going extremely well and now we have taken the decision, based on the best possible medical advice, through the TGA, that we’ll be extending that vaccination program to five to 11-year-olds and giving parents the choice. To all those five- to 11-year-olds, those brave five- to 11-year-olds, they will come to places like here ... they will now join this program which has helped to keep Australians safe. The fact that we’ve achieved such a high rate of vaccination means we can look into 2022 with confidence. Even though other strains come, as we’ve seen with Omicron and Delta and others in the past, is Australia is set up to live with this virus, to live together with this virus.” Hi, Samantha Lock here, taking over from my colleague Tom Ambrose. Some more news out of Australia, where I will be reporting to you from. It was another relatively high day of cases for NSW with 516 new infections recorded in the last 24 hours. No deaths were reported. Victoria recorded 1,206 new Covid-19 cases and two deaths. Tests are also underway to determine if the new Omicron variant has been detected in South Australia. Australia will begin administering Covid vaccines for children aged 5 to 11 from 10 January, Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced. “This will be welcome news for millions of families across the country who want the opportunity for their children to be vaccinated,” Morrison said in a statement. After reviewing clinical data from Canada, the country’s vaccination advisory group recommended an eight-week interval between the two doses, which can be shortened to three weeks if there is an outbreak. Pfizer doses will be administered in the initial phase, while regulators assess the suitability of Moderna shots. A decision is expected in the coming weeks. The decision comes as Australia seeks to accelerate the rollout of booster shots after becoming one of the world’s most-vaccinated countries against Covid, inoculating nearly 90% of its population above 16 with two doses. US president Joe Biden said the United States was making progress in the battle against Covid and it was good news regulators had expanded eligibility for coronavirus vaccine booster shots to 16 and 17-year-olds. Biden also said it was encouraging news that preliminary data shows three doses of Pfizer’s vaccine offers protection against the Omicron variant. “My message is very straightforward and simple. If you got vaccinated six months ago ... get your booster right away,” he said. People should take a lateral flow test before going out Christmas shopping or to a festive party, the Welsh government has said. The first minister, Mark Drakeford, is also asking people to wear face coverings in pubs and restaurants except when they are eating or drinking. Drakeford said he expected cases of the Omicron variant to rise “quickly and sharply”, though there have only been a handful in Wales so far. There will be no new restrictions in Wales when Drakeford announces the results of its regular three-weekly review on Friday. Many of the “plan B” measures the UK government is bringing in for England, such as wearing masks in indoor public places, are already in force in Wales. But the Welsh government has said it is “strongly advising” that people “flow before they go”. This means taking a lateral flow test before going out – for example to a Christmas party, shopping, visiting friends or family, to any crowded or busy place, or before travelling. If the test is positive, they should not go out but arrange for a PCR test and self-isolate, the government said. Brazil will require international travellers who aren’t vaccinated against coronavirus to quarantine for five days in the city they arrive by plane. The decision issued by the ministries of health, justice, infrastructure and the government’s chief of staff was published on Thursday. The administration of President Jair Bolsonaro, who is unvaccinated himself, will start enforcing the measure Saturday. It is unclear how effectively Brazil can or will track those required to quarantine. The head of the country’s health regulator, Antonio Barra Torres, told The Associated Press that the policy will “mean discouragement of anti-vaccine tourism to Brazil.” The quarantine requirement “is a deterrent and educational measure,” Torres said by phone. Travellers coming to Brazil still need to submit a negative PCR test result before boarding in their country of origin and submit a declaration to the country’s health regulator. Unvaccinated travelers will have to take a new virus test after the five-day quarantine period and must check in with a health agency center that will have their addresses. Revelations surrounding a number of coronavirus rule-breaking gatherings appear to have had an impact on the opinion polls in the UK as the opposition have opened up a six-point lead over the governing Tories. The survey was conducted by Survation for the Daily Mirror after its story about the alleged Christmas party at 10 Downing Street last year. The Mirror reports: An exclusive survey, conducted by Survation on December 1, after the Mirror’s bombshell story about No 10’s lockdown-breaking festive knees-up, sees support for Labour soar to 40% (+1%) while the Conservatives slump to 34%. It represents a breakthrough for Keir Starmer as it is the highest poll lead for his party since Boris Johnson took power. The last time backing for Labour reached 40%, with the same pollster, was January 2, 2019, when Theresa May was PM and Jeremy Corbyn was at the Opposition’s helm. However, it is important to note that because the UK uses the First Past The Post voting system, a party’s vote share in the polls does not equate to winning that percentage of seats in a General Election. The next General Election is not due to be held until 2024. A probe into alleged Covid rule-breaking parties in Government last year has been branded a “sham” as fresh claims emerged about a Christmas gathering reported to have taken place in Downing Street. According to reports, No 10’s most senior spin doctor, Jack Doyle, made a speech and handed out awards at the alleged event on December 18 2020. PA Media reported: The Prime Minister announced on Wednesday that an internal investigation led by Cabinet Secretary Simon Case would look into reports of a staff gathering held at Downing Street on that date. The probe was subsequently widened to include another festive celebration and a reported staff leaving do. ITV News reported on Thursday that Mr Doyle, who was then deputy director of communications at No 10, addressed up to 50 people at the Christmas gathering - said to have been held on December 18. It is understood that Mr Doyle spoke to the press office to thank them for their work, as he did every week, and presented some awards to mark the team’s efforts. Following the latest claims, Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner said the inquiry “has been exposed as a sham” as she argued more detail had emerged from the media than the Cabinet Office. Ms Rayner said: As more details emerge about the Downing Street Christmas party, the Government’s internal investigation has been exposed as the sham it is. The investigation has only just published its terms of reference and we are already seeing more details from the media than the Cabinet Office about the parties. We all know there was a party that broke the rules. The Conservatives think it’s one rule for them, and another for everyone else. The Prime Minister is unfit to lead. US health authorities said Thursday that 16 and 17-year-olds should get a booster dose of Pfizer’s Covid vaccine once they’re six months past their last shot. The US and many other nations already were urging adults to get booster shots to pump up immunity that can wane months after vaccination, calls that intensified with the discovery of the new Omicron variant. The Associated Press reported: On Thursday, the Food and Drug Administration gave emergency authorization for 16 and 17-year-olds to get a third dose of the vaccine made by Pfizer and its partner BioNTech. And hours later, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lifted the last barrier — saying those teens should get their booster as soon as it’s time. Boosters are important considering that protection against infection wanes over time and “we’re facing a variant that has the potential to require more immunity to be protected,” Dr. Rochelle Walensky, CDC’s director, told The Associated Press. About 200 million Americans are fully vaccinated, including about 4.7 million 16 and 17-year-olds, many of whom got their first shots in the spring and would be eligible for a booster. “Vaccination and getting a booster when eligible, along with other preventive measures like masking and avoiding large crowds and poorly ventilated spaces, remain our most effective methods for fighting Covid-19,” Dr Janet Woodcock, acting FDA commissioner, said in a statement. Cases of the Omicron variant could be spreading even faster in England than in South Africa, according to a senior scientific adviser, who warned that the variant was a “very severe setback” to hopes of bringing the pandemic under control. Prof John Edmunds, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a member of the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said that plan B measures announced by the prime minister were “absolutely not an overreaction” even if Omicron turned out to be milder than the current dominant variant. Edmunds told a Royal Society of Medicine webinar on Thursday that it was “extremely likely” there were many more cases of Omicron in the community than those confirmed by testing, and that the numbers were set to soar in the weeks ahead. The UK Health Security Agency identified a further 249 Omicron cases on Thursday, almost twice the number announced the day before, bringing the UK total to 817. Edmunds said that if the UK had 1,000 cases today, then a doubling time of two to three days would drive the number up to 8,000 in a week and 64,000 in two weeks. Those would come on top of the continuing wave of Delta infections. “Nobody wants to have to reintroduce these measures. It’s very damaging for parts of the economy – the hospitality and retail sector, in particular, are going to be affected – but unfortunately we have to do it,” he said. “With the speed of spread of this virus, we may well have really significant numbers of cases by Christmas,” he added. “I suspect that whatever we do now, we are unlikely to overreact.” Given the rate of community transmission, he said, travel restrictions were “not really going to do much now”. Nightclubs have said they face rising costs and lost bookings amid confusion over Covid regulations for England being introduced at their busiest time of year. Bookings have been cancelled and visitor numbers have already dropped, club owners said. The introduction of Covid passes in Scotland and Wales earlier this year hit takings by up to 30%, according to figures from the Night Time Industries Association. Peter Marks, the head of the UK’s biggest nightclub and bar operator, Rekom, which runs 42 venues, said the group would need to hire about three extra security staff at each venue to implement the measures, which make proof of two Covid vaccine doses or a negative lateral flow test mandatory for entry to nightclubs. “It is all a nightmare,” he said. “We need more staff in an age where security staff are hard to come by.” He said bookings at the group’s clubs in Scotland and Wales had taken a hit after mandatory Covid passports were introduced there. Good evening. I’m Tom Ambrose and I will be bringing you all the latest Covid news throughout this evening. We start with news that South Africa’s regulatory authority has approved the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine as a booster shot, opening the way for third doses to be administered to fight the current surge driven by the Omicron variant. The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority approved the Pfizer vaccine as a booster shot for people 18 years and older, six months after they received their second dose, the Associated Press reported. The regulatory body also approved a third dose for people aged 12 years and older who were “severely immunocompromised”, which may be taken 28 days after their second dose. The regulatory body encouraged vaccine manufacturers to provide data regarding the use of different vaccines on an individual, known as “mix-and-match”. Teaching at Imperial College London has moved online because of rapidly rising Covid cases – including Omicron – on campus and in the wider community. Students and staff were informed that urgent measures were needed to reduce the spread of the virus and teaching would be moved online for the final days of term from today. Only essential in-person teaching and research will be allowed to continue, in small groups with social distancing. Staff have been asked to work remotely where possible and both staff and students have been advised to either postpone or scale back large Christmas gatherings. Emails went out on Wednesday, shortly before the prime minister announced the implementation of plan B for England, which asks people to work from home where possible. Department for Education guidance published today, however, said face-to-face teaching in universities should continue. Here is a recap of some of the main developments from today so far: People and businesses in Scotland have been urged not to go ahead with parties over the festive period, in light of the rising number of Omicron cases. Public Health Scotland said the warning follows a number of outbreaks caused by Omicron being linked to Christmas parties. Dr Nick Phin, its director of public health science, said early evidence suggests Omicron is much more transmissible than previous variants, and postponing plans would help to “protect ourselves and our loved ones”. Story here. Michael Gove is the third UK government minister to enter isolation after coming into close contact with the Australian deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, who later tested positive for coronavirus. Gove came into close contact with Joyce when he visited London this week, as did the deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, and the transport secretary, Grant Shapps. They are isolating while they wait to hear if Joyce is infected with the Omicron variant. Story here. Malta will return to mandatory mask-wearing in outdoor and indoor spaces from Saturday as a precautionary measure amid fears over Omicron, the health minister, Chris Fearne, said. He added that the administration of booster doses was being brought forward and people would be eligible for the vaccine four months after having had their second jab, instead of six months, as was the case to date. Children aged 5 to 11 will start getting their own vaccine from Tuesday. The Mediterranean island has not yet detected cases of the Omicron variant. It has also had one of the highest vaccination take-ups in the EU, with well over 90% of the adult population vaccinated. The US Food and Drug Administration authorised booster shots of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for those aged 16 and 17, as public health officials urged Americans to get the additional shots amid concerns about the Omicron variant. The emergency use authorisation (EUA) will allow 16- and 17-year-olds to receive their third shot at least six months after their second vaccine dose. Regulators from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) need to sign off on the shots before the teenagers can begin receiving the doses. The UK reported another 50,867 coronavirus cases and a further 148 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s Covid dashboard. Covid cases in South Africa surged by 255% in the past seven days but there is mounting anecdotal evidence that infections with the Omicron variant are provoking milder symptoms than in previous waves. South African and other experts have said it is still too early in the Omicron outbreak to determine the longer-term course of the illness, and the younger population profile of South Africa means other countries may not necessarily see the same public health outcomes. But early hospital data released by South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases shows less than a third of patients admitted for Covid during the latest wave linked to the Omicron variant are suffering severe illness, compared with two-thirds in the early stages of the last two waves. And South Africa’s biggest private healthcare provider, Netcare, said data from its facilities indicated less severe Covid symptoms in the current fourth wave than in previous waves. More here and here. Austria’s planned Covid vaccine mandate will apply to people 14 and over and holdouts face fines of up to €3,600 (£3,080) every three months, the government announced. “We do not want to punish people who are not vaccinated. We want to win them over and convince them to get vaccinated,” the minister for constitutional affairs, Karoline Edtstadler, told a news conference with the health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein. The mandate, which must be approved by parliament, is due to start in February and last through January 2024. Two opposition parties support it, suggesting it will pass easily. There will be quarterly vaccination deadlines, Mückstein said, adding that the authorities will check a central vaccination register to see if members of the public are in it. “If that is not the case, proceedings will be brought. In regular proceedings the amount of the fine is €3,600,” Mückstein said, adding that fines would be means-tested. “As an alternative, the authorities have the option to impose a fine in shorter proceedings immediately after the vaccination deadline. Here the amount of the fine is €600,” he said, adding that if this was not paid it would lead to regular proceedings. There would be exemptions for pregnant women and people who could not get vaccinated for medical reasons. The EU medicines watchdog said preliminary data on Omicron suggested it may be more transmissible than Delta but cases appeared to be mostly mild. “However we need to gather more evidence to determine whether the spectrum of disease severity caused by Omicron is different to that of all the variants that have been circulating so far,” Marco Cavaleri, the head of biological threats to health and vaccines strategy at the European Medicines Agency, said said. “Only time will tell.” He said it appeared that the currently approved Covid vaccines were considerably less effective in neutralising Omicron, but “we need to gather a more precise picture around the level of immunity that can be retained”. More than 40 people in the US have been found to be infected with the Omicron variant so far, but nearly all of them were only mildly ill, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said. But, Dr Rochelle Walensky said, the data was very limited and the agency was working on a more detailed analysis of what the new mutant form of the coronavirus might hold for the US. More here. This post was amended on 10 December 2021. Dominic Raab is deputy prime minister and justice secretary, not foreign secretary as an earlier version said. People and businesses in Scotland have been urged not to go ahead with parties over the festive period, in light of the rising number of cases of the Omicron variant. Public Health Scotland said the warning follows a number of outbreaks linked to Christmas parties. Dr Nick Phin, its director of public health science, said early evidence suggests Omicron is much more transmissible than previous variants, and postponing plans would help to “protect ourselves and our loved ones”. He said: There is much that we still need to learn about Omicron, but early evidence suggests that this new Covid variant is much more transmissible. The impact of this transmissibility has been seen in recent weeks, with a number of Omicron outbreaks linked to parties. He continued: To help minimise the further spread of Covid-19, and Omicron in particular, I would strongly urge people to defer their Christmas parties to another time. I appreciate that everyone is keen to celebrate this festive season, particularly after the pressures of the last 20 months, but by postponing some plans we can all do our bit to protect ourselves and our loved ones. One case of Omicron was detected in Scotland on Thursday, taking its total to 109 – though the true number is believed to be much higher. Nicola Sturgeon is expected to give a televised update on Omicron in Scotland on Friday. PHS’s warning stands in stark contrast to the message given at Thursday’s Downing Street press conference from the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, who said Christmas parties could take place if people exercised caution. He said: “We don’t want people to cancel such events.” Scientists have voiced fears over the plan B measures for England, given Johnson’s advice to go ahead with parties despite cases climbing at the current rate. Indeed, Christmas parties and large indoor gatherings have already been linked to Omicron super-spreader events. Dr Deepti Gurdasani, a clinical epidemiologist and senior lecturer at Queen Mary University of London, told the Guardian: People working from home makes a lot of sense as it can massively reduce contacts at a population level. Having said that, the other measure that has the largest effect is reducing gathering sizes. For me it makes no sense to be instituting working from home policies and saying go ahead with parties. That is frankly ridiculous. Prof Paul Hunter of the University of East Anglia told the Guardian: The problem with Christmas parties, unlike clubbing, is that you get senior managers – wrinklies like me, who are not normally in high-transmission environments.” The advice I gave my university was to shut down faculty-level Christmas parties. Going out with a few direct colleagues doesn’t worry me. It’s where you get the whole faculty turning up and cramming into the atrium of a building and mixing for a few hours that is a risk. Prof Susan Michie, the director of the Centre for Behaviour Change at University College London, told the Guardian: To tell people to work from home then to say to go to Christmas parties is contradictory and lacks coherence. It’s a high-risk situation and it undermines the message to work at home where you can and to be cautious. It’s a problem for both those reasons. Let’s learn from the past. This is the third time of delaying measures when we have clear exponential growth of infection. Related: Stricter measures than plan B may be needed to rein in UK’s Omicron growth Michael Gove, the UK communities secretary, is self-isolating after coming into close contact with the Australian deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, who later tested positive for coronavirus. Gove is the third cabinet minister to have gone into isolation after coming into close contact with Joyce when he visited London this week – the others being the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, and the transport secretary, Grant Shapps – while they wait to hear if he is infected with the Omicron variant. Under the law, close contacts of positive Covid cases do not have to isolate as long as they get a PCR test and the result comes back negative. However, anyone who is a close contact of someone confirmed or suspected of being infected with Omicron must take daily tests. Aubrey Allegretti has the story: Raab, Shapps and Gove in isolation after close contact with Australian deputy PM Malta will return to mandatory mask-wearing in outdoor and indoor spaces from Saturday, the health minister Chris Fearne said on Thursday. The measure is being taken as a precaution to prevent any significant increase in Covid-19 cases, although the Mediterranean island has not yet detected cases of the Omicron variant. “It has been shown that masks, as well as booster doses, are effective to ward off the virus, including the new Omicron variant,” Fearne told media. He added that the administration of booster doses was being brought forward and people would be eligible for the vaccine four months after having had their second jab, instead of six months, as was the case to date. Children aged 5 to 11 will start getting their own vaccine from Tuesday. Malta had 81 Covid cases on Thursday, with 26 patients needing hospitalisation. Fearne said the situation was well under control and the government did not intend to introduce further restrictive measures, as long as everyone acted responsibly. Malta has had one of the highest vaccination take-ups in the European Union, with well over 90% of the adult population vaccinated. Work from home but keep going to Christmas parties: Boris Johnson’s advice has prompted questions about the logic behind plan B for England and left a lingering sense of confusion about the scale of the threat posed by the Omicron variant. So does the plan stand up to scrutiny? Scientists say that making working from home a first line of defence, before social gatherings, is not necessarily a frivolous choice. In the hierarchy of measures that can be deployed, working from home is an effective way to bring down people’s daily contacts and is relatively painless economically. Nevertheless, many fear that the threat posed by Omicron will require more than the first line of defence and that plan B does not go far enough. “People working from home makes a lot of sense as it can massively reduce contacts at a population level,” says Dr Deepti Gurdasani, a clinical epidemiologist and senior lecturer at Queen Mary University of London. “Having said that, the other measure that has the largest effect is reducing gathering sizes. For me it makes no sense to be instituting working from home policies and saying go ahead with parties. That is frankly ridiculous.” The problem is that the UK is on such a steep trajectory that hospitals could easily be overwhelmed by January, depending on how case numbers translate into severe illness. “What we are doing now is very unlikely to be sufficient,” said Gurdasani. This view is hinted at in official advice to the government by the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling this week that outlines a number of scenarios the UK could face. Under the worst three scenarios, which together are judged to be almost inevitable for the UK, “very stringent measures” are expected to be needed to control the growth of infections. Read our science correspondent Hannah Devlin’s full analysis here: Stricter measures than plan B may be needed to rein in UK’s Omicron growth The US Food and Drug Administration has authorised booster shots of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for those aged 16 and 17, as public health officials have urged Americans to get the additional shots amid concerns about the Omicron variant. The emergency use authorisation (EUA) will allow 16- and 17-year-olds to receive their third shot at least six months after their second vaccine dose. Regulators from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) likely need to sign off on the shots before the teenagers can begin receiving the doses. About 4.7 million 16- and 17-year-olds in the US are fully vaccinated and more than 2.5 million of them are six months past their second dose. Some scientists have raised concerns about additional shots for the age group because of the elevated risk of rare cases of heart inflammation in young men that have been linked to messenger RNA vaccines such as the Pfizer/BioNTech shot. All US adults are eligible for booster shots of the three authorised Covid vaccines. The FDA’s authorisation comes a day after Pfizer and BioNTech released data suggesting that booster shots could be vital for protection against infection from Omicron. The CDC has identified fewer than 100 cases of the variant in the US, but they are expected to increase in the coming weeks and months. Meanwhile, the dominant Delta variant, which is very transmissible and can be passed on by people who are fully vaccinated, has driven up infections. Regions where activities have moved indoors for winter, such as the north-east, have had some of the biggest increases in new cases, which average close to 120,000 each day. The UK has reported another 50,867 coronavirus cases and a further 148 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s Covid dashboard. That is compared with 51,342 infections and 161 fatalities reported in the previous 24 hours. Covid cases in South Africa have surged by 255% in the past seven days but there is mounting anecdotal evidence that infections with the Omicron variant are provoking milder symptoms than in previous waves. According to a South African private healthcare provider, the recent rise in infections – which includes the Omicron and Delta variants – has been accompanied by a much smaller increase in admissions to intensive care beds, echoing an earlier report from the country’s National Institute for Communicable Disease (NICD) [see 2.32pm]. The World Health Organization said Africa accounted for 46% of reported Omicron cases globally. South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, has said that despite the global concern over Omicron, it was still unclear whether it was more transmissible or caused more severe disease, and he criticised western countries for imposing a travel ban on the country. South Africa’s biggest private healthcare provider, Netcare, said data from its facilities indicated less severe Covid symptoms in the current fourth wave than in previous waves. “Having personally seen many of our patients across our Gauteng hospitals, their symptoms are far milder than anything we experienced during the first three waves,” Netcare’s Richard Friedland told the Daily Maverick on Wednesday. “Approximately 90% of Covid-19 patients currently in our hospitals require no form of oxygen therapy and are considered incidental cases. If this trend continues, it would appear that, with a few exceptions of those requiring tertiary care, the fourth wave can be adequately treated at a primary care level.” Friedland said that in previous waves 26% of Netcare’s Covid patients were treated in high care and intensive care units. Friedland’s comments echo earlier analysis from Dr Fareed Abdullah, of the South African Medical Research Council, who said many of the patients diagnosed with coronavirus in hospitals in badly hit Gauteng province and elsewhere were often “incidental” identifications in patients presenting with other conditions. “The main observation that we have made over the last two weeks is that the majority of patients in the Covid wards have not been oxygen dependent. Sars-CoV-2 has been an incidental finding in patients that were admitted to the hospital for another medical, surgical or obstetric reason,” Abdullah said. “A snapshot of 42 patients in the ward on 2 December reveals that 29 (70%) are not oxygen dependent. These patients are saturating well on room air and do not present with any respiratory symptoms. A significant early finding in this analysis is the much shorter average length of stay of 2.8 days for patients admitted to the Covid wards over the last two weeks, compared to an average length of stay of 8.5 days for the past 18 months.” South African and other experts have said it is still too early in the Omicron outbreak to determine the longer-term course of the illness, and the younger population profile of South Africa means other countries may not necessarily see the same public health outcomes. South Africa has struggled at times with initially distinguishing between Covid variants, with some testing equipment unable to quickly spot Omicron without sequencing. Read the full story here: South African Covid cases up 255% in a week as Omicron spreads Austria’s conservative-led government on Thursday gave details of its plan to make coronavirus vaccines compulsory, saying it will apply to people 14 and over and holdouts face fines of up to €3,600 (£3,080) every three months, Reuters reports. Roughly 68% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against Covid-19, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. Many Austrians are sceptical about vaccines, a view encouraged by the far-right Freedom party, the third biggest in parliament. As infections set records three weeks ago, the government announced a fourth national lockdown and said it would make vaccinations compulsory for all, the first country in the European Union to do so. “We do not want to punish people who are not vaccinated. We want to win them over and convince them to get vaccinated,” the minister for constitutional affairs, Karoline Edtstadler, told a news conference with the health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein. The vaccine mandate, which must be approved by parliament, is due to start in February and last through January 2024. Two opposition parties support it, suggesting it will pass easily. There will be quarterly vaccination deadlines, Mückstein said, adding that the authorities will check a central vaccination register to see if members of the public are in it. “If that is not the case, proceedings will be brought. In regular proceedings the amount of the fine is €3,600,” Mückstein said, adding that fines would be means-tested. “As an alternative, the authorities have the option to impose a fine in shorter proceedings immediately after the vaccination deadline. Here the amount of the fine is €600,” he said, adding that if this was not paid it would lead to regular proceedings. There would be exemptions for pregnant women and people who could not get vaccinated for medical reasons, he added. The EU medicines watchdog has said there are early indications the Omicron variant may cause milder disease, AFP reports. The tentative judgment from the European Medicines Agency comes after the World Health Organization said this week there was some evidence that Omicron causes less severe disease than Delta, the currently dominant variant. The EMA echoed the finding, but said more investigation was being done. “Cases appear to be mostly mild, however we need to gather more evidence to determine whether the spectrum of disease severity caused by Omicron is different [to] that of all the variants that have been circulating so far,” said Marco Cavaleri, EMA’s head of biological health threats and vaccines strategy. The highly mutated variant sparked global panic when it emerged last month, prompting fears it could be more transmissible than others, and could cause more severe illness or evade vaccines. The WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said on Wednesday that “emerging data from South Africa suggests increased risk of reinfection with Omicron”. Cavaleri said that early data suggested Omicron was more infectious than Delta, but it was not year clear whether it would replace the older dominant strain. He also stressed that there were better means of prevention and treatment available than last winter. Pfizer and BioNTech said on Wednesday that a third dose of their vaccine was effective against the variant, and that they were developing an Omicron-specific jab that should be available by March. The WHO vaccines chief, Kate O’Brien, said the WHO was examining data from Pfizer and BioNTech about the booster shot, and that it may turn out that “additional doses have benefit to provide added protection against Omicron”, but stressed it was still “very early days”. Cavaleri also said that “at this stage we do not have enough data”. The UN health body’s Africa branch said, meanwhile, that detections of new coronavirus cases had almost doubled over the past week, to 107,000, as the new variant “is reaching more countries in Africa”. The biggest surge in numbers – 140% on average – was in the south of the continent. However, in South Africa, which discovered the new variant last month, “severe cases remain low,” the WHO said [see 2.32pm]. More than 40 people in the US have been found to be infected with the Omicron variant so far, and more than three-quarters of them had been vaccinated, the chief of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has said. But she added nearly all of them were only mildly ill. In an interview with the Associated Press, Dr Rochelle Walensky, director of the CDC, said the data was very limited and the agency was working on a more detailed analysis of what the new mutant form of the coronavirus might hold for the US. “What we generally know is the more mutations a variant has, the higher level you need your immunity to be … we want to make sure we bolster everybody’s immunity. And that’s really what motivated the decision to expand our guidance,” Walensky said, referencing the recent approval of booster shots for all adults. She said “the disease is mild” in almost all of the cases seen so far, with reported symptoms mainly a cough, congestion and fatigue. One person had been admitted to hospital, but no deaths had been reported, CDC officials said. Some cases can become increasingly severe as days and weeks pass, and Walensky noted that the data was a very early glimpse of US omicron infections. The earliest onset of symptoms of any of the first 40 or so cases was 15 November, according to the CDC. The first US case was reported on 1 December. As of Wednesday afternoon, the CDC had recorded 43 cases in 19 states. Most were young adults. About a third of those patients had travelled internationally. More than three-quarters of those patients had been vaccinated, and a third had had boosters, Walensky said. Boosters take about two weeks to reach full effect, and some of the patients had received their most recent shot within that period, CDC officials said. Fewer than 1% of the US Covid cases genetically sequenced last week were Omicron; the Delta variant accounted for more than 99%. The CDC has yet to make any projections on how the variant could affect the course of the pandemic in the US. Walensky said officials were gathering data but many factors could influence how the pandemic evolved. “When I look to what the future holds, so much of that is definitely about the science, but it’s also about coming together as a community to do things that prevent disease in yourself and one another. And I think a lot of what our future holds depends on how we come together to do that,” she said. The CDC is also trying to establish whether Omicron causes milder – or more severe – illness than other variants. The finding that nearly all of the cases so far are mild may be a reflection that this first look at US omicron cases captured mainly vaccinated people, who are expected to have milder illnesses, CDC officials said. Another key question is whether it is better at evading vaccines or the immunity people build from a bout with Covid-19. Read the full story from AP here: CDC chief says omicron is ‘mild’ as early data comes in on US spread of variant Early hospital data from South Africa shows fewer than a third of patients admitted for Covid during the latest wave linked to the Omicron variant are suffering severe illness, compared with two thirds in the early stages of the last two waves, Reuters reports. Data released by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) for Tshwane, the metropolitan area which includes Pretoria where the first suspected Omicron outbreak occurred, showed 1,633 admissions in public and private hospitals for Covid between 14 November and 8 December. Of those, 31% were severe cases – defined as patients needing oxygen or mechanical ventilation – compared with 66% early in the second wave of the coronavirus pandemic and 67% in the early weeks of the first. South African scientists first sounded the alarm on the Omicron variant late last month, when they noticed it had an unusually large number of mutations, especially on the spike protein that the virus uses to enter human cells. Since then, they have been urgently trying to figure out whether the mutations make Omicron more transmissible or more severe, and the extent to which they can help it blunt protection from vaccines or past Covid infection. The NICD cautioned that the study had some inherent limitations – it is not yet peer-reviewed – and that severe cases could rise as the fourth wave gets going. “It may take a few weeks for hospitalisation outcomes to accumulate,” the report said. The report also said nothing about whether the patients studied had been vaccinated, so it wasn’t clear to what extent higher vaccine coverage was keeping symptoms milder. Early evidence suggests Omicron is far more transmissible than any previous variant, but that symptoms may be less severe, with lower levels of hospitalisation, especially in vaccinated patients. South Africa reported nearly 20,000 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, a record since the Omicron variant was detected, and a further 36 Covid-related deaths. An Italian dentist who presented a fake arm for a Covid vaccine says he has since been jabbed and that the vaccine “is the best weapon we have against this terrible disease”. Dr Guido Russo faces possible criminal fraud charges for having worn an arm made out of silicone when he first showed up at a vaccine hub in the northern city of Biella. Italy has required doctors and nurses to be vaccinated since earlier this year. Russo insisted during a Wednesday night appearance on the Italian talkshow La7 that he was not trying to defraud the government nor dupe anyone because the arm was obviously not real. He said he wanted to make a personal protest against vaccine mandates. Here is the full story from AP: Italian who presented fake arm for Covid jab ‘has since been vaccinated’ The price of a pint could rise by about 10p as a result of the latest Covid restrictions for England, according to the chairman of the City Pub Group, who said Christmas party cancellations had risen since the move to plan B was announced on Wednesday. Clive Watson said the cost of a pint was already on course to rise by about 25p as a result of higher costs, including energy and wage bills, but that weaker than expected trading over the key Christmas period would lead to further hikes. “From about 10 days ago, office parties started to get cancelled, particularly those office parties which were being funded by companies, so typically parties for 40 to 50 people,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. While some companies had postponed their celebrations until the new year when there may be more certainty, others had cancelled their parties outright. “After yesterday’s announcement, that has again accelerated, so we’ve seen … a meaningful drop off in those types of bookings,” Watson said. It could result in further pain for chains such as City Pub Group, which has 50 pubs in market towns and cities nationwide. “Not only are you not making the money, but you’re not building out the cash to help you in the very lean periods in January and February … It’s almost like just taking off the life support machine,” he said. “Energy prices have gone through the roof. Labour prices … have also gone up significantly. Inflation is running at 5%. A price of beer in London could be £5. So that comes out at 25p but probably has to increase even more over the course next year. “But … now we haven’t got the Christmas froth that we were anticipating and somehow we have got to try and recoup that,” Watson said. “[So that’s] probably another 10p.” He joined a chorus of hospitality bosses now calling for government support to help prop up the sector amid restrictions that include work-from-home orders, which could reduce footfall in city centre establishments over the crucial Christmas period, which makes up a third of some businesses’ annual profits. Read the full story here: Pubs bracing for disastrous December after Covid plan B adopted in England A parliamentary commission grilled Denmark’s prime minister on Thursday over her government’s illegal decision last year to cull all farmed minks nationwide over fears of a new coronavirus variant, which she insisted was the right thing to do, AFP reports. Formerly the world’s leading exporter of mink fur, the Scandinavian country in November last year controversially decided to kill all of its 15-17 million minks after studies suggested the variant found in some of the animals could jeopardise the effectiveness of future vaccines. A large crowd of protesters gathered outside the court in Copenhagen, booing the prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, as she arrived. “We unfortunately had to make a decision a year ago to cull all minks, and that was the right decision,” Frederiksen told reporters before rushing into the courtroom where the hearing was held. The commission is seeking to determine whether the prime minister was aware that the order had no legal basis – a fact that emerged soon after the cull was under way and led the country’s agriculture minister to resign. “It was in my view crucial that we acted quickly,” the prime minister told the hearing, adding that she knew the decision would be devastating for the industry. At the time, the government only had the authority to ask mink farmers in the seven municipalities affected by the mutation to cull their minks. An agreement was reached retroactively, rendering the government’s decision legal, and the nationwide cull went ahead as planned. Prior to the cull, Denmark was also the world’s second largest producer of mink fur after China. At the outset of her hearing, Frederiksen stressed that government decisions are made by the relevant cabinet ministers, even though she formally announced the cull. A specially appointed parliamentary commission has since April been scrutinising the government’s decision and all documents related to it, as well as questioning witnesses to dissect the decision-making process. Ultimately, the commission will decide whether to recommend Frederiksen’s impeachment before a special court that judges the actions of cabinet members while in office. Frederiksen has maintained that she did not know her decision was unlawful, and has insisted that it was “based on a very serious risk assessment”. In October, controversy around the decision was reignited when it was revealed that Frederiksen’s text messages from the time had disappeared. Her office said they had been automatically deleted after 30 days for security reasons. But many politicians greeted the claim with scepticism. Only two of the 51 ministers and ex-ministers interviewed by the public broadcaster DR said they had the same setting installed on their phones while in office. The commission called on police and intelligence services to help, but they were unable to recover the text messages. Media and lawmakers have repeatedly questioned Frederiksen on the issue. A few weeks after the cull in the North Jutland region in north-western Denmark, where many mink farms were concentrated, the mutation was declared “very likely extinct”. The Danish parliament later passed an emergency law that banned the breeding of the mammals in 2021, which was then extended to 2022, a blow to the industry. Mink is the only animal so far confirmed to be capable of both contracting Covid-19 and recontaminating humans. Related: Mink farms a continuing Covid risk to humans and wildlife, warn EU experts The Lebanese health ministry is investigating what could be the country’s first two cases of the Omicron variant in passengers tested on arrival at the airport, AFP reports. “Two cases detected in airport testing” are suspected to be Omicron, the health minister Firass Abiad told a press conference. He said both passengers had flown in from the African continent and had been placed in quarantine. The minister did not specify which country or countries they had arrived from. The two people were “in good health” and experiencing mild symptoms, Abiad said. Lebanon reported 1,994 new Covid cases on Wednesday, one of the country’s highest figures for a single day since the start of the pandemic, the minister said. Abiad voiced concern over a resurgence of the virus. The country’s ailing health system, in the midst of a severe financial crisis, was even less prepared to handle than during previous waves. When cases surged in late 2020, the influx of critical patients had brought Lebanon’s hospitals to breaking point. A worsening depreciation of the local currency and the mass emigration of health workers has only made the situation worse. Last week, Lebanon declared a night-time curfew for the unvaccinated ahead of and during the holiday season, in a bid to stem a recent rise in infections and as a precaution against the new variant. Lebanon has recorded more 683,000 cases of Covid-19 since the start of the pandemic, and 8,804 deaths, according to government figures. The Austrian government is due to announce details of a plan to make Covid vaccination compulsory, which according to officials will include a minimum age of at least 14 and a fine of more than €3,000, but not prison, for holdouts. The health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein, and the minister for constitutional affairs, Karoline Edtstadler, said this week the specifics were subject to change in talks with experts and opposition parties. However, the scheduling of an announcement for Thursday suggested major shifts were unlikely. Since the conservative chancellor, Karl Nehammer, took office on Monday, Mückstein and Edstadler have repeated that there will be no jail terms for those who still refuse to get vaccinated even once this becomes compulsory in February. In an interview with the national broadcaster ORF on Tuesday, Edtstadler stopped short of confirming media reports that the minimum age would be 14, but said the government had received legal advice that it would be hard to set the age lower than that, adding that children below 14 would be exempt. We have set a maximum fine of 3,600 euros but I emphasise again that we are still in discussions with experts because of course the fine should be dissuasive, but it should not be so dissuasive that we generate more resistance... While some countries have introduced vaccine requirements for parts of their populations like health workers, Austria is the first European Union member state to announce a general requirement. There will be exceptions for some categories of people like pregnant women, Edtstadler said. A news conference with Edtstadler and Mückstein is due to be held at 1pm, the government announced on Thursday morning. The UK government has rushed in plan B Covid restrictions in England after confirming that cases of the new Omicron variant are doubling every three days or faster. It brings England closer in line with elsewhere in the UK, but rules and guideline still vary between England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. For England, Boris Johnson announced four new measures as part of the move to plan B: From Friday 10 December the legal requirement to wear face masks in shops and on public transport will be extended to most public indoor venues, including theatres and cinemas. But you will not have to wear masks in cafes, restaurants or pubs. From Monday 13 December people have been urged to work from home. “Go to work if you must but work from home if you can,” Johnson said. From Wednesday 15 December the NHS Covid pass or negative lateral flow test will be mandatory in nightclubs and other large venues. The venues are listed as: nightclubs; indoor unseated venues with more than 500 people; unseated outdoor venues with more than 4,000 people; any venue with more than 10,000 people. Daily tests for contacts of people suspected of having the Omicron variant will be introduced to replace the current isolation rules. But until the new tests are available, contacts of suspected Omicron cases will be required to self-isolate for 10 days, regardless of their age or vaccination status. Anyone who tests positive for Covid is still required to self-isolate. These measures are in addition to the existing travel restrictions requiring anyone entering the UK to take a PCR or lateral flow test within 48 hours of departure. Travellers also have to take a PCR test within 48 hours of arrival in the UK and self-isolate until they have a negative result. Here is the full explainer of the restrictions in each of the four nations from my colleague Matthew Weaver: What are the Covid rules and guidelines in the four nations of the UK? Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has now been reported in 57 countries and continues to spread rapidly in South Africa, the World Health Organization (WHO) says. However, they maintain it is too early to tell if it is more infectious. Prof Alejandro Cravioto of WHO has warned that in the context of ongoing global supply constraints, “broad-based administration of booster doses risks exacerbating inequities in vaccine access.” WHO also said wealthy countries donating Covid-19 vaccines with a relatively short shelf life has been a “major problem” for the Covax dose sharing programme. Kate O’Brien, the WHO’s vaccine director, warned that in the face of the Omicron variant, there is a risk that wealthy countries go back to hoarding vaccine supplies. Travel bans imposed on African countries are likely to affect supplies of materials needed for the fight against Covid-19 to the continent, the head of the Africa Centres for Disease Control, John Nkengasong, has said. Denmark has decided that school students up to the 10th grade must study remotely for the last few days before Christmas and ordered nightclubs, bars and restaurants to close at midnight in an attempt to counter an uptick in cases. Prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, warned there was “a significant risk of critically overloading the health service.” Two UK cabinet ministers – Dominic Raab and Grant Shapps – have gone into isolation after being in close contact with the Australia’s deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, who has tested positive for Covid while in Washington, following his UK trip. British prime minister Boris Johnson imposed tougher Covid-19 restrictions in England, ordering people to work from home, wear masks in public places and use vaccine passes to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. The Democratic-controlled US Senate approved a Republican measure that would overturn president Joe Biden’s Covid-19 vaccine-or-test mandate for private businesses, with two Democrats joining Republicans to back the initiative. Andrew Sparrow has our UK live blog at the moment – where Covid and politics are very heavily inter-twined. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to pick up the rest of the days global coronavirus news. And I am off to host the comments on our Thursday quiz. I’ll maybe see you there. While the World Health Organization briefing expressed some reservations about broad-based booster jab programmes exacerbating vaccine inequity around the world, they did suggest that booster jabs could be useful if administered to elderly and immunosuppressed people. The Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (Sage) on immunisation chair, Alejandro Cravioto, said emerging data showed that vaccines’ efficacy against Covid-19 wanes, with a significant decline seen in older people in particular. Covid-19 vaccines protect “very well” through six months after the last dose with some “minor, modest reduction” in protection, said Kate O’Brien, the director of the WHO’s immunisation department. Worries about the new Omicron variant have prompted some countries – including the UK – to expand the use of booster jabs to larger portions of their populations. But, Reuters report, with vaccination rates worryingly low in much of the developing world, the WHO has said that administering primary doses – rather than boosters – should be a priority. Wealthy countries donating Covid-19 vaccines with a relatively short shelf life has been a “major problem” for the Covax dose sharing programme, a senior official at the World Health Organization has said. Kate O’Brien, the WHO’s vaccine director, said in a briefing the proportion of wasted doses is smaller in countries receiving doses through Covax than in many high-income countries. Her comments come as concerns grow that many African countries in particular are finding they do not have the capacity to get shots in arms before they expire. Reuters reported on Tuesday that up to 1m vaccines are estimated to have expired in Nigeria last month without being used, one of the biggest single losses of doses during the pandemic. O’Brien also said that in the face of the Omicron variant, there is a risk that wealthy countries go back to hoarding vaccine supplies. Two UK cabinet ministers have gone into isolation after being in close contact with the Australian deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, who later tested positive for Covid. Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister and justice secretary, and Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, pulled out of events after their contact with Joyce when he visited London earlier this week. Joyce, who is fully vaccinated, has since left the UK and only tested positive once he was in Washington. In an interview on Sky News, Joyce said he did not know when he acquired Covid-19 – but that the UK was crowded with people preparing for Christmas and going shopping. “You wouldn’t think there’s a pandemic on in areas of the UK,” he noted. Read more of Aubrey Allegretti’s report here: Raab and Shapps in isolation after close contact with Australian deputy PM Travel bans imposed on African countries are likely to affect supplies of materials needed for the fight against Covid-19 to the continent, the head of the Africa Centres for Disease Control, John Nkengasong, has said. Nkengasong also said during an online media briefing that his organisation was not recommending blanket booster shots in Africa, and that anyone who was offered a booster should be elderly or immunocompromised, Reuters reports. For Dr Rina D’Abramo of the MetroHealth System in Cleveland, it’s difficult when patients in the emergency room tell her they have not been vaccinated. “You can hear it in their voice when you say, ‘Are you vaccinated?’” said D’Abramo, who works at a hospital in the Brecksville suburb. “They shrink down and are like, ‘No. Now I know why I need to be vaccinated.’ ” Unfortunately, there are plenty of people in Ohio and the rest of America too who have not yet learned that lesson, even as infection rates nationally start to surge again amid fears of the highly contagious new Omicron variant. Ohio is one of the states that has seen the largest recent increases in hospitalizations due to Covid amid a surge in cases across the country. There has been 19% increase in hospitalizations over the past two weeks in the United States, according to a New York Times analysis of data. While the increased number of people vaccinated against Covid had inspired hopes that Americans would be able to experience a relatively normal winter, the rise in Covid cases; holiday gatherings; and unanswered questions about the Omicron variant have sparked fresh concerns and warnings from doctors and public health officials in the US. “The yellow caution light has gone on because I think our progress in vaccination has slowed,” said William Schaffner, an infectious diseases expert at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. Read more of Eric Berger’s report: US Covid cases surge as vaccine progress slows and Omicron variant sparks fears Andrew Sparrow has our UK politics live blog. It feels like everything is very intertwined there with Covid and the new restrictions for England, so I will be leaving all of that to him unless there are major developments, and will be concentrating on global news here. The two main points from that World Health Organization briefing came from Prof Alejandro Cravioto. WHO believe it is more important to be vaccinating people for the first and second times rather than distributing booster doses. They believe it is still best to use the same vaccine for the two primary doses, though mix’n’match can be done where there are supply constraints. He said: The primary public health goal of the acute stage of the pandemic is to reduce deaths and severe disease and to protect the health systems. In this context of ongoing global supply constraints, broad-based administration of booster doses risks exacerbating inequities in vaccine access. The vast majority of current infection are the results of infections in non-vaccinated people, who we believe should be vaccinated instead of giving further doses to those that have already received the full immune system. The Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (Sage) from the World Health Organization (Who) are giving a briefing this morning on booster jabs. You should be able to see a live feed of it at the top of the page. You may need to refresh the page if it doesn’t appear. I will be following along too, so I’ll bring you any top lines that emerge. Associated Press are carrying this update on the latest situation in Denmark, where the government has decided that school students up to the 10th grade must study remotely for the last few days before Christmas and ordered nightclubs, bars and restaurants to close at midnight in an attempt to counter an uptick in cases. The prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, also recommended that people work from home, banned concerts with more than 50 people standing, and ordered people to wear face masks in eateries when not seated. The measures apply as of Friday and are set to last for four weeks. Speaking of the Omicron variant, Frederiksen said that it was “expected that this will mean more infected, more sick and thus potentially more hospitalised patients. Thus, the new variant also entails a significant risk of critically overloading the health service, and that is why we now have to do more.” Dr Mike Tildesley, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Modelling group (Spi-M), which advises the UK government, has also made some comments about whether people should be enjoying Christmas parties this year. PA Media quote him telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: It’s a really difficult one because I do think we do need to be responsible, of course. We do need to be aware of the fact that this variant has not gone away, and so we have to take that into account. But of course we do need to think about people’s mental health and wellbeing as well. We had a really, really tough year last year around Christmas, and I think it’s actually very important that we allow people to be together but to be together in a safe way. There is a bit more from Labour deputy leader Angela Rayner here. She said people should be “diligent” when getting together in groups, and test themselves for Covid-19 beforehand. Asked if she was happy for Christmas parties to go ahead, PA Media report Rayner told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I think people are looking at this now and they’re looking at whether or not they can get together and how they do that. “People should be diligent about that. Obviously the more we interact in groups, especially in indoor settings, the more opportunity there is for the virus to spread. “We’ve been very clear from the Labour Party that if you are going out to an event, a Christmas party or an event, that you should take a test beforehand and therefore you’ll know that you’re safe and you’re keeping other people safe.” We reported yesterday that the Serum Institute of India (SII), the world’s largest manufacturer of vaccines, was planning to cut production of its Covishield-branded AstraZeneca shots due to sluggish demand. There’s been some pushback on that today. Krishna N Das reports from New Delhi for Reuters that co-lead Gavi has said the global vaccine-sharing network Covax is still seeing strong demand for India-made doses. Gavi said Covax had allocated 40m Covishield doses to countries after the Indian government last month let the SII resume supplies for the first time since April. It said it had the option to buy vaccines keeping a “flexible approach as the pandemic and countries’ needs continue to evolve”. “We are still experiencing robust country demand for SII-Covishield ...” a Gavi spokesperson said in an email to Reuters. “Covishield will continue to play an important role within Covax’s diverse portfolio of vaccines ... to achieve higher coverage rates in lower-income countries.” “Covax’s goal is to protect populations as quickly as possible but every care must be taken to ensure recipient countries are able to deploy the doses we send them,” Gavi said. “And this is why it is so important that all manufacturers provide as much transparency as possible as to when and in what quantity volumes will be supplied.” In the UK, Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner has been doing the media round this morning. She has called for the government to act on sick pay for those affected by the Omicron variant and the new measures, and also for more effort to be made on ventilation in schools. She told Sky News: We had a meeting, and Keir Starmer spoke to the chief medical officer and had a briefing from those in the position of knowledge, who said that we need to take these measures. So the Labour party are clear that we’re following the medical and the science and expert advice on this, and we hope that people will do that. Boris Johnson has completely undermined those efforts. And we you know, it’s incredibly disappointing. I am calling on the government today to provide sick pay for people. This is a massive big problem when it comes to people being able to do the right thing and self isolate. They need sick pay so that that can happen. And that will help control the virus. And we need to make sure that we have proper ventilation in schools. It’s cold this time of year. Many schools have still not got adequate ventilation. We know this would help and we know the infection spreads in school. So we’re calling on the government to really step up their efforts to make sure that people have got access to the booster jabs, access to vaccines, but also to fix sick pay, and that they sort out the situation with ventilation in our schools. Martin Kettle’s latest column has his focus on the Boris Johnson Christmas party furore. He writes: The question facing British politics today is whether the image of a Downing Street Christmas party, and the excruciating insensitivity there would be in holding it on a day when nearly 500 people were dying of Covid, may be the event to burst Johnson’s bubble. Last week an online video spoof showed Johnson apparently receiving a Covid booster jab, then shrivelling up like an empty balloon. That video was someone’s fantasy. Now nature is imitating art. It was a deflated Johnson, a rare sight in any season, who turned up to answer prime minister’s questions today. ITV’s toe-curling video of staffers smirking and joking about the party is the real thing, not a spoof. The reality it portrayed is likely to lodge in the collective mind. In less than a minute, the video captures all the shallow amateurism of modern politics: its absence of moral awareness, its capacity for awful judgment and its corrosive sense of entitlement, acted out against the backdrop of a wholly unnecessary, flag-draped new briefing room that is an expensive monument to a man-child prime minister’s ego and his absurd great-man view of himself. Read more here: Martin Kettle – Will the furore over the No 10 party be enough to burst Boris Johnson’s bubble? Prof Andrew Hayward, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) from University College London, has described the new restrictions in England as “an essential first move.” PA Media quote him telling Sky News “virus is moving very fast so it’s important that we react to that fast”. He said a doubling time of every two to three days was “very fast” and “you’ll get a very large peak”. “And it’s a bit like if you think of a month’s worth of rain falling in a few days, that leads to flooding and it’s a similar type of scenario … we can reduce that by reducing social mixing and allow time to slow the virus down and get vaccine into more people’s arms.” He said Plan B measures would “slow the spread” but “it’s not going to turn it around”, adding: “I think you would need much more severe restrictions to turn it around, but I think what the encouraging thing is that we’ve started to see, through some of the laboratory data, is sort of that third dose of vaccine is really providing much better immunity, whereas just with the two doses, it’s not really so good. “So this idea of slowing it down ... more social distancing, not going to work if you don’t have to, not going on public transport to go to work when you don’t have to, will make a difference. “I think it’s very difficult to predict whether that’s going to be enough but I think it’s an essential first move.” The Covid-sceptic Conservative MP Marcus Fysh has described plans to bring in vaccine certificates as “really draconian” and an “utter disgrace”. PA Media quote him saying on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that vaccine passports are “such a massive imposition on our liberties” and a “massive attack” on personal freedom. “Of course I’ll vote against it. Everybody should vote against it. This is a fundamental thing about what sort of society we want to live in. “It’s a disgrace that they’re pursuing that, utter disgrace,” he told the programme. Fysh, who studied literature at university, also said: “The Sage panel and the CMO etc do have a history of over-egging the data and picking data points out that suit their narrative.” This week the Office of National Statistics reported that between March 2020 and November 2021 there had been 128,740 excess deaths above the five-year average in England and Wales. Away from the UK for the moment, Sangmi Cha report for Reuters from Seoul that several parents associations in South Korea held protests today against a vaccine pass mandate for children aimed at containing the spread of Covid-19 among teenagers. The government has said that from February, anyone aged 12 years or older will have to show a vaccine pass to enter public spaces, including private tuition centres, libraries and study cafes that most students attend after school. The exemption age is currently set at 17 years. The mandate, however, has sparked uproar among some parents who refuse to vaccinate their children, citing potential side effects. At least 70 members of parents associations gathered in front of the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency building in Cheongju city on Thursday, holding up signs that read “Vaccine Dictatorship”. On Sky News, the UK health secretary Sajid Javid has explained why he made a no-show on the UK media round yesterday. After the emergence of the video of Downing Street staff laughing and joking about holding a party, no government minister appeared on television and radio. Sajid Javid and Maggie Throup, the vaccines minister, had both been due to appear on various outlets to celebrate the anniversary of the first Covid vaccination in England, and the further expansion of the booster jab programme. This morning, Javid said: Well, I didn’t appear because I saw that video, the video you’ve just played again. It upset me. Upset a lot of people across the country. And upset the prime minister. He was pressed on whether he had refused to come on, and replied: No it wasn’t that. I spoke to my colleagues in No 10, and I said “Look …” and we actually agreed that it’s best to have some time to respond to the video in the way that the prime minister has now, by ordering an investigation by the cabinet secretary. And so I think that the idea was just to give them space to react. But I’m pleased the prime minister has asked for the investigation. And I can see also why so many people would have been upset by that video. He also repeated a line we have heard a lot over the last few days, that he wasn’t there – Javid was at pains to point out he wasn’t even in government at the time – that he doesn’t know what happened, but “senior people have assured me that rules have been followed”. And he replied to one question with a line about alleged Christmas parties and the investigation that I expect we will hear a lot of in the coming days, too: “I don’t want to pre-empt the outcome of it.” UK health secretary Sajid Javid appears to have ruled out any further financial help for the hospitality sector in England, following the imposition of new rules regarding face masks and vaccine passport which are due to take effect over the coming days. Asked on Sky News if a financial package was coming, he said: The measures we’ve taken under the plan B, although they have an impact, they’re designed to have a minimal impact. So whether it’s wearing face masks, exempting hospitality from certain measures and the Covid passes. We’ll keep that under review but the measures are designed to have this minimal impact. On Sky News this morning, UK health secretary Sajid Javid was asked if the government were considering making vaccines mandatory. He categorically dismissed the idea, saying: No. I mean, I’ve got no interest in mandatory vaccination, apart from the high risk settings like in the NHS and social care which we’ve already set out, and we will legislate for that in future. Other than that, if you are talking about universal mandatory vaccination, I think, ethically it is wrong. But also at a very practical level, it just wouldn’t work. Getting vaccinated has to be a positive decision. The first question to the UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, on Sky News is why act over Omicron now. He said: On this new variant, our strategy has been to buy time to assess it and also to build up protective defences. In recent days, we’ve started learning more about the variant. And one of those things we’ve learned is that it spreads very, very quickly. It spreads faster than any other Covid we’ve seen so far. It’s doubling time, that’s the number of days it takes for the number of infections to double in the community, we estimate it is between two and a half to three days, which would mean that by even this month, we could get about a million infections in the community throughout the UK. And we’ve always been clear that actually if the data changes and should move in the wrong direction, that looks like the NHS might come under unsustainable pressure. Remember what that would mean. We wouldn’t be able to get emergency care, not just for Covid, but for a car accident or anything like that. We would act and implement that. I don’t enjoy doing that. No one does. It’s a very difficult thing for many people to ask them to work from home or wear face masks and things. So it’s a real impact on our liberties. But I hope that most people will understand that by taking some decisive action now, we could potentially avoid action later, and our vaccines and our antivirals also remain a very important part of our defences. Here’s a reminder of what those new “Plan B” rules are for England. From Friday face masks will be a legal requirement in most public indoor areas such as theatres and cinemas, with exemptions for eating and drinking in hospitality venues. People must work from home where possible from Monday From Wednesday vaccine passports available to the double-vaccinated on the NHS app will be necessary for those wanting to attend large, potentially crowded venues such as nightclubs. Proof of a negative lateral flow test will also be accepted. However, people are being told they can still attend Christmas parties and nativity plays, and nightclubs will remain open. These rules broadly bring England into line with rules that have continued to be in place in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, is doing the UK media round today, after yesterday’s no show. I’ll being you the key points from those interviews. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. Doesn’t time fly? It feels like only two days ago I was live blogging UK deputy prime minister Dominic Raab saying “No 10 have been very clear. There was no party, and there were no rules breached” and “We don’t think plan B is required. Why? Because of the success of the vaccine programme.” And that’s because I was. Here are the latest Covid stats from the UK: Over the last seven days there have been 339,861 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 11.3% week-on-week. There have been 847 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have decreased by 0.8% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have increased by 0.8% week-on-week. This is a change today, they were previously decreasing slightly. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 7,317 people in hospital in total, of whom 880 are in ventilation beds. Health experts have expressed fears over the impact tighter Covid restrictions in England could have on cancer patients as alarming new figures reveal that the number taking part in clinical trials plummeted by almost 60% during the pandemic. Almost 40,000 cancer patients in England were “robbed” of the chance to take part in life-saving trials during the first year of the coronavirus crisis, according to a report by the Institute of Cancer Research (ICR), which said Covid-19 had compounded longstanding issues of trial funding, regulation and access. Figures obtained from the National Institute for Health Research by the ICR show that the number of patients recruited on to clinical trials for cancer in England fell to 27,734 in 2020-21, down 59% from an average of 67,057 over the three years previously. The number of patients recruited for trials fell for almost every type of cancer analysed. Health experts said the relentless impact of Covid on the ability of doctors and scientists to run clinical trials was denying many thousands of cancer patients access to the latest treatment options and delaying the development of cutting-edge drugs. Read the full story by our reporter Andrew Gregory here. Japan’s Covid-19 infections are falling in contrast with rebounds in other parts of Asia, baffling experts. New daily infections have slowed to fewer than one per million people, the fewest among major economies except China, and there have been very few fatalities recorded in recent days. One new hypothesis to explain the divergence is that the type of coronavirus dominant in Japan evolved in a way that short-circuited its ability to replicate. Ituro Inoue, a professor at Japan’s National Institute of Genetics, said that a subvariant of Delta, known as AY.29, now may be conferring some immunity in the population. “I think AY.29 is protecting us from other strains,” Inoue told Reuters, cautioning that his research remained a theory. “I’m not 100% confident.” Japan’s late start on vaccination means that the potency of the shots are still strong. Others point to seasonal trends, that the virus tends to crest and fall in two-month intervals. China’s drug authority has granted emergency approval for the country’s first specialised treatment against Covid-19, found in clinical trials to significantly reduce hospitalisations and deaths among high-risk patients, Agence France-Presse reports. China has several conditionally approved vaccines as well, but their published efficacy rates lag behind rival jabs developed in other countries. In an official notice published Wednesday, China’s National Medical Products Administration said it has granted “emergency approval” for a monoclonal antibody treatment. A monoclonal antibody is a type of protein that attaches to the spike protein of the coronavirus, reducing its ability to enter the body’s cells. The treatment involves a combination of two drugs, administered through injections, and can be used to treat certain cases that are at risk of progressing in severity, the drug authority said. It was co-developed by Tsinghua University, the Third People’s Hospital of Shenzhen and Brii Biosciences. Trial data showed that the combination therapy could reduce the risk of hospitalisation and death in high-risk patients by around 80%, Tsinghua University said in a statement on social media late Wednesday. A state media report last month added that the treatment has also been used on patients infected in local flare-ups. Authorities in Pakistan have detected the first case of the Omicron variant of coronavirus in the South Asian nation, a provincial health ministry official told Reuters on Thursday. The spokesperson in the southern province of Sindh said the infection was found in an unvaccinated patient being treated at a private hospital in Pakistan’s most populous city of Karachi. The patient had travelled abroad, said the official, who gave no details of the location, but added that contact tracing was underway. We will have more on this story as it develops. The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has now been reported in 57 countries and continues to spread rapidly in South Africa, the World Health Organization (WHO) says. However, it is too early to tell if it is more infectious. British prime minister Boris Johnson imposed tougher Covid-19 restrictions in England, ordering people to work from home, wear masks in public places and use vaccine passes to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. The UK Health Security Agency said the Omicron variant was likely to outcompete Delta and replace it to become dominant, and that it could account for at least half of new cases in the next 2-4 weeks. The Democratic-controlled US Senate approved a Republican measure that would overturn president Joe Biden’s Covid-19 vaccine-or-test mandate for private businesses, with two Democrats joining Republicans to back the initiative. France may introduce a fourth Covid vaccine booster shot, the government’s top Covid-19 adviser Jean-Francois Delfraissy has said. Cuba detected its first Omicron case in a person who had travelled from Mozambique, Cuban state media agency ACN reported late. Indian Covid-19 vaccine makers are lobbying the government to authorise boosters as supplies have outstripped demand. South Africa reported nearly 20,000 new cases on Wednesday, a record since Omicron was detected, and 36 new Covid-related deaths. The US Food and Drug Administration authorised the use of AstraZeneca’s antibody cocktail to prevent Covid-19 infections in individuals with weak immune systems or a history of severe side effects from coronavirus vaccines. Three doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine are likely to protect against infection with the Omicron variant but two doses may not, according to laboratory data. A mix-and-match approach to Covid-19 vaccines is safe and effective, and some combinations even improve upon immune responses, UK researchers found. Australia’s strict border closures became the subject of international criticism throughout the pandemic. Findings from a national audit office report now reveals Australian families separated by international border closures during the pandemic were frustrated by inconsistencies from government decision makers on travel exemptions. The department of home affairs also failed to give applicants specific reasons about why applications for travel exemptions were refused. Nor did the department have an adequate review process in place. An audit of Australia’s international travel restrictions between March 2020 and June 2021 found the department’s management of those restrictions during the Covid-19 pandemic had “been largely effective”. But it found decisions on exemptions made by home affairs officers were not consistent with the department’s own policies. A sample of 71 inward travel exemption cases finalised between August 2020 and March this year showed 12 decisions (17%) were not consistent with policy requirements. The auditors found: Decisions about inward travel exemptions have not consistently been managed in accordance with policies and procedures.” Home Affairs spent $2.85m on an online travel exemption portal for prospective arrivals to provide relevant documentation to support their case. Yet, the audit office found the decision-making framework still allowed officers “considerable discretion” when assessing applications. India has just released its daily Covid figures. A total of 9,419 new coronavirus cases were reported in the last 24 hours, according to the ministry of health. It is so far unclear how many deaths were also reported during the past day. The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has now been reported in 57 countries and continues to spread rapidly in South Africa, the World Health Organization (WHO) says. But the latest epidemiological report from WHO says given the Delta variant remains dominant, particularly in Europe and the US, it is still too early to draw any conclusions about the global impact of Omicron. The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control has predicted that the Omicron variant could become the dominant variant in Europe within months. For now, though, the Delta variant continues to dominate cases, and more data is needed to determine Omicron’s infectiousness and severity, WHO says. “While there seems to be evidence that the Omicron variant may have a growth advantage over other circulating variants, it is unknown whether this will translate into increased transmissibility,” the WHO report said. Read the fully story here. As the Omicron variant continues to spread, here is a quick recap of where the world stands. Cuba has detected its first case of the Omicron Covid variant, according to Cuban state media agency ACN. The case was identified in a person who had travelled from Mozambique. The traveller, a health worker that resides in Cuba’s Pinar del Rio province, returned to the Caribbean island on 27 November and tested positive for Covid-19 the following day, according to the ACN report. Health officials are monitoring the traveler’s contacts since arriving in Cuba, ACN said. The Caribbean nation previously tightened travel rules for inbound international passengers arriving from southern African nations, requiring travellers to show vaccination certificates and negative results of PCR tests taken within 72 hours before arrival. In addition, arrivals are required to take PCR tests on arrival and on the sixth day of their visits as well as to stay in quarantine hotels for a week at their own expense. The Democratic-controlled US Senate on Wednesday approved a Republican measure that would overturn president Joe Biden’s Covid-19 vaccine-or-test mandate for private businesses, with two Democrats joining Republicans to back the initiative. The 52-48 vote sends the legislation to the Democratic-led House of Representatives, where it faces strong headwinds, while Biden has threatened to veto it. The legislation would overturn administration rules ordering businesses with 100 workers or more to require vaccinations or coronavirus testing for millions of employees. The measure was not subject to Senate rules that require 60 of its 100 members to agree on most legislation, meaning it could pass with just a 51-vote simple majority. Two Senate Democrats - Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Jon Tester of Montana - joined 50 Republicans in voting for the bill. “I have always supported a vaccine mandate for federal employees and the military because maintaining essential services and military readiness the federal government provides is a matter of national importance,” Manchin said in a statement following the vote. “However, I do not support any government vaccine mandate for private businesses. It is not the place of the federal government to tell private business owners how to protect their employees from Covid-19 and operate their businesses,” he said. A quick update from South Korea following recent figures released by the ministry of health. An additional 7,102 confirmed cases were reported over the past 24 hours and 57 deaths. About 83.4 % of the eligible population has received one Covid vaccine dose and 80.8 % has received at least two doses. China has reported 83 new confirmed coronavirus cases for Wednesday, 8 December, up from 74 a day earlier, its health authority said on Thursday. Of the new infections, 60 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission as seen by Reuters, compared with 44 a day earlier. The new local cases were reported by authorities in Inner Mongolia, Zhejiang, Heilongjiang, Jiangsu, and Yunnan. China reported 33 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, compared with 23 a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the total death toll at 4,636. France may introduce a fourth Covid vaccine booster shot, the government’s top Covid-19 adviser Jean-Francois Delfraissy has said. “The peak is clearly not behind us, the pandemic continues to gain ground,” government spokesman Gabriel Attal said during a press briefing on Wednesday, Reuters reports. France, whose adult population is more than 90% fully vaccinated, is hoping a national campaign inviting everyone over age 18 to get a third vaccine - or booster shot - as fast as possible will avoid the need for tougher curbs on daily life. Jean-Francois Delfraissy said: For now, there’s a call for one booster shot. Will that be enough? I don’t know. Maybe we’ll need a fourth shot.” The latest seven-day average of new confirmed new infections set a new 2021 high of more than 44,500 on Tuesday. South Africa has reported nearly 20,000 new Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, a record since the Omicron variant was detected, and 36 new Covid-related deaths. A total of 19,842 new cases was reported by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, a daily change of 50%. Brazil has reported 10,055 new cases of the coronavirus in the past 24 hours, and 233 deaths from Covid-19, the health ministry said on Wednesday. The South American country has now registered 22,167,781 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 616,251, according to ministry data. It is the world’s second-deadliest outbreak outside the United States. With 85% of adults now fully vaccinated, the rolling 14-day average of Covid-19 deaths has fallen to 208 per day, compared to the toll of almost 3,000 a day at the peak of the pandemic in April. In light of British prime minister Boris Johnson’s plan B announcement, here is a quick snapshot of Covid-19 in the UK. Three doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine are likely to protect against infection with the Omicron variant but two doses may not, according to laboratory data. Tests using antibodies in blood samples have given some of the first insights into how far Omicron escapes immunity, showing a stark drop-off in the predicted protection against infection or any type of disease for people who have had two doses. The findings suggest that, for Omicron, Pfizer/BioNTech should now be viewed as a “three-dose vaccine”. The vaccine makers said they would continue “at full speed” with plans to develop an updated Omicron-based vaccine by March 2022 if needed – and their working presumption is that it will be. Read the full story here. Hello I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking you through all the Covid developments this Thursday. We start with the news that England will be implementing a raft of plan B measures to combat a surge in Covid cases in the lead-up to Christmas. British prime minister Boris Johnson made the announcement at a Downing Street press conference on Wednesday night amid fears of an exponential rise in the Omicron variant. Johnson said people must work from home where possible from Monday and that face masks would be a legal requirement in most public indoor areas such as theatres and cinemas from Friday, with exemptions for eating and drinking in hospitality venues. The move comes as government experts warned Omicron infections could rise to 1m by the end of the month with up to 2,000 hospital admissions a day. In more promising news, three doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine are likely to protect against infection from the Omicron variant but two doses may not, according to laboratory data. Tests using antibodies in blood samples have given some of the first insights into how far Omicron escapes immunity, showing a stark drop-off in the predicted protection against infection or any type of disease for people who have had two doses. The findings suggest that, for Omicron, Pfizer/BioNTech should now be viewed as a “three-dose vaccine”. Here’s a snapshot of the latest coronavirus stories from around the world: The WHO said early data indicates the Omicron Covid variant may more easily reinfect people who have already had the virus or been vaccinated than previous variants, but could also cause milder disease. In the UK, Boris Johnson rushed forward new Covid restrictions amid fears of an exponential rise in the Omicron variant. “It’s now the proportionate and the responsible thing to move to plan B.” From Monday people must work from home. Omicron cases in the UK could exceed 1 million by the end of this month on the current trajectory, Sajid Javid has told MPs. Denmark will again impose restrictions aimed at curbing the rapid spread of Covid including the new Omicron variant, the country’s prime minister said on Wednesday. France has reported 93,071 coronavirus deaths in hospital, up by 129. It reported that 2,426 people were in intensive care units for Covid, up by 75 on the previous day’s figures. Slovakia will on Friday reopen non-essential shops and some services for those vaccinated against Covid-19 while at the same time extending a lockdown for others and closing some schools, health minister Vladimir Lengvarsky said. South Africa has approved Pfizer’s coronavirus booster shots for over-18s, as the Omicron variant dominates rising new infections.The South African Health Products Authority said in a statement that it was authorising a third vaccine dose “in individuals aged 18 years and older, to be administered at least six months after the second dose”. Italy has reported 17,959 Coronavirus cases, up from 15,756 on Tuesday.Elsewhere, Bolivia, Peru and Colombia continue to see an increase in cases, while Ecuador, Chile and Argentina saw a drop. UK figures show 51,342 new people had a confirmed positive test result reported on 8 December 2021.Between 2 and 8 December, 339,861 people had a confirmed positive test result, an increase of 11.3% compared to the previous week. BioNTech and Pfizer said on Wednesday a three-shot course of their Covid-19 vaccine was able to neutralise the new Omicron variant in a laboratory test and they could deliver an Omicron-based vaccine in March 2022 if needed.Today, citizens are unwitting participants in a covert policy experiment. It embraces the idea of higher government spending without the necessity of increased taxes. While modern monetary theory (MMT), the doctrine, has obvious appeal for politicians, irrespective of economic religion, the long-term consequences may prove problematic. A state, MMT argues, finances its spending by creating money, not from taxes or borrowing. As nations cannot go bankrupt when they can print their own currency, deficits and debt don’t matter. Accordingly, governments should spend to ensure full employment, guaranteeing a job for everyone willing to work. Alternatively, though not formally part of MMT, governments can fund universal basic income (UBI) schemes, providing every individual an unconditional flat-rate payment irrespective of circumstances. While no government or central bank overtly advocates MMT, since the 2008 global financial crisis and, more recently, the pandemic, policymakers have adopted many of its tenets by stealth. Popular one-off payments and increased welfare entitlements, which could become permanent, increasingly support economic activity. As the graph below highlights, central banks now buy a high percentage of new government debt, effectively financing this additional spending by money creation. Source: Nick Baker, Marcus Miller and Ewan Rankin (2021 September) Government Bond Markets in Advanced Economies During the Pandemic; Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin MMT is actually a melange of old ideas: Keynesian deficit spending; the post gold standard ability of nations to create money at will; and quantitative easing (central bank financed government spending) pioneered by Japan. However, there are several concerns about MMT. First, the source of useful, well-compensated work is unclear. While MMT suggests taxes can be used to direct production, government influence over businesses that create jobs is limited. The impact of labour-reducing technology and competitive global supply chains is glossed over. Getting one person to dig a hole and another to fill it in creates employment, but it is of doubtful economic and social value. The woeful record of postwar centrally planned economies, where people pretended to work and the government pretended to pay them, highlights the issues. Second, excess government spending and large deficits financed by money creation risk creating inflation. MMT argues that this is a risk only where the economy is at full employment or there is no excess capacity, and can be managed by fine-tuning intervention. Third, MMT may weaken the currency. Roughly half of Australia’s government and significant amounts of state, bank and business debt is held by foreigners. Devaluation and loss of investor confidence in the stability of the exchange rate would affect the ability to and cost of borrowing overseas and importing goods. The expense of servicing foreign currency debt would rise. Fourth, while available to nation states able to issue their own fiat currencies, it is unavailable to state governments, private businesses or households who are major borrowers in Australia. Fifth, who decides the target employment rate or UBI payment level? Unemployment, inflation and output gaps are difficult to accurately measure in practice. Effects on employment incentives, workforce participation and productivity are untested. How will policymakers control the process or what would happen if MMT failed? The theory delegates management of MMT operations to politicians, rather than unelected economic mandarins. But financially challenged elected representatives may be poorly equipped for the task. Political considerations and cronyism may influence decisions. Sixth, there are implications for financial stability. Lower rates, the result of central bank debt purchases, and inflation fears might drive a switch to real assets, increasing the price of property and shares representing claims on underlying cashflows. It may encourage hoarding of commodities. This exacerbates inequality and increases the cost of essentials such as food, fuel and shelter. Fear of debasement of the value of paper money, in part, is behind unproductive speculation in gold and cryptocurrencies. Seventh, MMT might undermine trust in the currency. Instead of spending the payments, citizens may question a world where governments print money and throw it out of helicopters. Finally, Japan’s use of persistent deficits to boost short-term economic activity and incur government debt (currently more than 260% of GDP, compared with a global average of about 100%) does not prove the effectiveness of MMT. The country’s circumstances are unique and it has been mired in stagnation for three decades with its GDP largely unchanged. MMT’s allure is the irresistible promise of freebies; full employment, unlimited higher education, healthcare and government services, state-of-the-art infrastructure, green energy and “the colonisation of Mars”. But monetary manipulation cannot change the supply of real goods and services or overcome resource constraints, otherwise prosperity and utopia would be guaranteed. While the current game can and will continue for a time, the bill will eventually arrive. The borrowings will have to be paid for out of disposable income, higher taxes or through inflation, which reduces purchasing power, especially of the most vulnerable, and destroys savings. Other than nature’s free bounty, everything has a cost. • Satyajit Das is a financier and author whose latest books include A Banquet of Consequences – Reloaded (March 2021) and Fortune’s Fool: Australia’s Choices (forthcoming March 2022)Jagged Little Pill, the third album from the Canadian singer-songwriter Alanis Morissette, unlocked us. Certified 14 times platinum in Australia and topping the Aria album charts in 1996, it’s packed with anthemic, intelligently introspective and sometimes playful rock tracks. The album gives voice to Morissette’s inner life with such keen emotional insight that her audience – particularly women and people in conflict with polite society – found a soundtrack for their struggle. Nowhere was that clearer than in You Oughta Know, the album’s alt-rock masterpiece that hurls long-repressed rage at its subject with glorious, full-bodied commitment. It demands a reckoning. More than 20 years later, songs (mostly) from that album, some in full and others in fragments – have been given new life in a musical penned by Diablo Cody (who wrote the film Juno) and directed by Diane Paulus (though Leah Howard is the resident director in Australia). Now they are the music of the Healys, an upper middle-class US family. Mary Jane (Natalie Bassingthwaighte), a perfect-seeming mother with an opiate addiction and long-avoided trauma, is struggling to keep it together. Her husband, Steve (Tim Draxl), is a workaholic with a porn addiction. Son Nick (Liam Head) is a golden child who lacks emotional maturity. And then there’s Frankie (Emily Nkomo), the activist daughter. Frankie, who is black and queer (she and her “best friend” Jo, played by Maggie McKenna, make out while Mary Jane rhapsodises elsewhere about platonic girlfriends) is resentful of her mother’s refusal to engage: insisting that she doesn’t see colour; dismissing Frankie’s activism as a fad; and refusing to call Jo, who is non-binary, by the name that makes them most comfortable. When Nick’s classmate Bella (Grace Miell) is assaulted at a party, both Healy children attend, and the gulf between Frankie’s quest for justice and Mary Jane’s preferred method of ignoring a problem becomes a chasm. There’s nothing to do but sing. Jagged Little Pill desperately wants to be meaningful, tackling more social issues than it can fairly balance (misogyny, racism, transracial adoption, transphobia, classism, disability rights) while also needing to play all the hits you expect to hear in a jukebox musical. It’s an exploration of trauma that tries to touch so many hearts it ultimately risks reaching none. A plethora of protest signs held aloft in the first act feel like cynical set-dressing for sociopolitical relevance. The Broadway production, of which this is a replica, has failed to act upon those values behind the scenes. It also doesn’t seem to trust its own soul – that is, the catalogue of Morissette hits. Tom Kitt’s orchestrations tend to work against the material, cutting into songs and spreading them thin while layering in more conventionality than necessary. Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui’s choreography transforms the ensemble into a witnessing chorus of young people unafraid to take up space and dance with their whole hearts, but they also crash intimate moments, as though the songs themselves aren’t enough to make us feel. This is already theatrical music with a point of view, but the show rarely lets anyone hold and own that view, especially solo. (It also veers into silliness whenever the Healy men are handed their own lyrics; it’s hard to believe the music belongs to them.) Still, there are moments that transcend. When Jo discovers that Frankie has been seeing someone else – a white, cis conventionally attractive guy – we watch them collapse and then rebuild with the only possible song, the jewel of the musical, perhaps its whole point: You Oughta Know. McKenna crafts a journey with it, the most clarifying of the show, and the song rips out of their throat and lands in our guts. In that moment, it doesn’t matter that Jo is backgrounded too often in the story, or that Frankie doesn’t reckon with the harm she’s caused. All that matters is that song in the right hands, setting us all alight. McKenna received a rightful mid-show standing ovation on opening night; later, at curtain call, it was their bow that compelled the majority of the Theatre Royal audience to their feet. Nothing else can touch that moment but there are instances where it comes close: Bassingthwaighte’s performance is a bold one, her choices smart and compelling. Nkomo is charismatic and rounds out Frankie’s youthful spirit with the promise of a roar. Miell refuses to betray Bella’s story with easy dramatics, delivering a gorgeously judged, too often backgrounded performance. In the band, it’s Emma Ford’s drums that propel us into new feelings. Jagged Little Pill means so well. It works so hard. Its cast is a treat. If only it weren’t so frustratingly gestural. We shouldn’t be able to see right through it. • Jagged Little Pill plays at Sydney’s Theatre Royal until 19 December. It opens at Melbourne’s Comedy Theatre on 2 January and Perth’s Crown Theatre on 14 May before returning to the Theatre Royal in Sydney from 9 JulyNew York City could soon become the largest city in the US to give noncitizens the right to vote in local elections, a historic move that would open the ballot box to 800,000 green card holders and Dreamers. The city council approved the measure on Thursday. Only a potential veto from mayor Bill de Blasio stands in the way of the measure becoming law, but the Democrat has said he would not veto it. The council’s vote was a breakthrough moment for an effort that had long languished. Councilman Francisco Moya, whose family hails from Ecuador, choked up as he spoke in support of the bill. “This is for my beautiful mother who will be able to vote for her son,” said Moya, while joining the session by video with his immigrant mother at his side. Legally documented, voting-age noncitizens comprise nearly one in nine of the city’s 7 million voting-age inhabitants. The measure would allow noncitizens who have been lawful permanent residents of the city for at least 30 days, as well as those authorized to work in the US, including Dreamers, the children of undocumented immigrants, to help select the city’s mayor, city council members, borough presidents, comptroller and public advocate. “It is no secret, we are making history today. Fifty years down the line when our children look back at this moment they will see a diverse coalition of advocates who came together to write a new chapter in New York City’s history by giving immigrant New Yorkers the power of the ballot,” said councilmember Ydanis Rodriguez, a main sponsor of the bill, after Thursday’s vote. More than a dozen communities across the United States already allow noncitizens to cast ballots in local elections, including 11 towns in Maryland and two in Vermont. But New York City is the largest place by far to give voting rights to noncitizens. Noncitizens still wouldn’t be able to vote for president or members of Congress in federal races, or in the state elections that pick the governor, judges and legislators. The city’s move is likely to enflame an already contentious debate over voting rights. Last year, Alabama, Colorado and Florida adopted rules that would preempt any attempts to pass laws like the one in New York City. Arizona and North Dakota already had prohibitions on the books. “The bill we’re doing today will have national repercussions,” said the council’s majority leader, Laurie Cumbo, a Democrat who opposed the bill. She expressed concern that the measure could diminish the influence of African American voters. Noncitizens wouldn’t be allowed to vote until elections in 2023. It’s unclear whether the bill might face legal challenges. City councilman Joseph Borelli, the Republican leader, said such a challenge is likely. Opponents say the council lacks the authority on its own to grant voting rights to noncitizens and should have first sought action by state lawmakers.Think opera is old-fashioned? Think opera is boring? Think opera has nothing to offer the TikTok generation? Think again. “Opera, at its best, reflects both the timelessness of great art and the trials, joys, and loves of modern life,” says West Australian Opera (WAO) artistic director, Chris van Tuinen. “This connection between the old and the new feels more relevant as we look back across the last couple of years and remember old freedoms and cherished connections. “We also think about new ways of gathering and sharing with the understanding that nothing can replace the feeling of being in the same room with powerful music, stories and voices.” When van Tuinen talks about new ways, he means it. Since joining WAO in 2019, he’s been responsible for some of the company’s most blue-sky ideas, including an operatic retelling of Mendelssohn’s Elijah and commissioning the writing of Koolbardi wer Wardong: a children’s opera based on the Nyittiny (time of creation) story of the magpie (Koolbardi) and crow (Wardong), written and sung in Noongar. With the release of WAO’s ambitious 2022 program, van Tuinen has confirmed that same-old-same-old isn’t part of his vocabulary. Among the highlights of the new program: staging Carmen at the WACA Ground in an arena spectacular; an intimate dinner and a show at the Government House Ballroom, pitting Italian and German opera styles against one another; and bringing Koolbardi wer Wardong to regional Western Australia. Executing these big ideas requires an equally big community of collaborators. Some of the talent working on next year’s program is based overseas; some have worked in the arts their entire adult lives, while others are opera first-timers. Everyone is Australian: a decision, van Tuinen says, that supports local creatives after a tough few years and better represents modern-day Australia. “For the last 400 years, opera has reflected the society in which it lives,” van Tuinen says. “If it’s going to keep doing that, then it has to engage with all the different, diverse communities that surround it.” Tackling gender politics Another of the program’s highlights will be a joint production of La Traviata (20-29 October) involving WAO, Opera Queensland and State Opera South Australia. Written by Giuseppe Verdi, La Traviata tells the taboo love story of courtesan Violetta Valéry and Alfredo Germont, who has long admired Valéry from afar. Melbourne-based Sarah Giles, an award-winning theatre and opera director, is a longtime fan of Verdi’s complex heroine. When she gets her crack at one of the world’s most performed operas next year she will pay particular attention to the gender politics of the 170-year-old tragedy. “I don’t think anyone has put the word feminism and La Traviata in the same sentence,” Giles says. “I’m really intrigued to explore the story from a feminist perspective and ask, what does it mean to show this story now? What does it show us about where feminism has come from, where it’s going and where it is currently? “I don’t believe that for La Traviata to feel contemporary and politically relevant, you have to put them [the characters] in jeans and Converse. Sometimes looking at the now through the prism of the past is a far more illuminating experience.” Challenging perceptions about disability On face value, Tchaikovsky’s Iolanta (6-9 April) is about a beautiful woman who falls in love. But beyond the romance are observations on how people with disabilities – Iolanta, the story’s heroine, is blind – are treated by the people around them. It’s a story that resonated with Zel Iscel, the founder of disability consultancy Inclusive World. In a world first, WAO engaged Iscel to readapt the opera and shift its focus from that of Iolanta’s protective, overbearing father to that of the opera’s namesake. “I saw a lot of myself in that story, even in its classic form,” says Iscel, who, like Iolanta, was born blind. “Perhaps not to the same extent, but within the confines that were relevant to me. There were parts that were really emotional, but it was also very exciting to have this opportunity to be able to make some change, hopefully, to the way people think about disability and people with disabilities.” Opera’s next generation Retelling the classics is just one part of WAO’s 2022 game plan. Equally vital to this mission is inspiring a new generation through new stories – such as children’s opera Our Little Inventor (1-2 October) – and through the artists taking part in the program. One such artist is Rebecca Lang, an Australian-born conductor who is the director of music at Leuphana University in the northern German city of Lüneburg. In winter, Lang heads to Western Australia to conduct Tosca (14-23 July), Giacomo Puccini’s story of love and betrayal. Central to Puccini’s story is opera singer Floria Tosca, a gutsy protagonist with pluck, guile and conviction: traits that Lang believes are crucial for women in the industry. “I can’t believe it’s 2021 and we’re still having a conversation about female conductors,” says Lang, an anomaly in a field traditionally dominated by men. “But that’s the sad truth of the matter. I’m forever telling my female students to take up space and not let themselves be spoken over. “For younger audiences, maybe seeing a woman on the podium who isn’t 50 and a grey-haired white man makes them feel it’s more accessible. Often when you see yourself in the arts, you feel understood.” Discover season 2022 at WAO.That’s all, folks! I am logging off for the night, here are some of the top stories to make note of from today: An appeals court ruled against Donald Trump on withholding documents related to 6 January – the former president is expected to file an appeal of that decision with the supreme court. Jussie Smollett found guilty of faking hate crime – a jury convicted him on five charges of disorderly conduct but acquitted him on a sixth count of lying to a detective. House votes to block products made by forced Uyghur labor – but corporations are expected to fight against its Senate passage New York becomes largest US city to allow non-citizens to vote – Republicans are pushing back against the law, which could spark similar legislation elsewhere Congress moves to avert federal default with debt ceiling vote – Nearly a dozen Republicans voted with Democrats to temporarily change the voting structure for raising the debt ceiling, which would avert a massive crisis in coming weeks Biden to appear on Jimmy Fallon The president will video in virtually to make an appearance on the late night comedy show. Congress moves to avert federal default with debt ceiling vote The Senate has voted to pass a one-time measure allowing Congress to quickly raise the debt limit and avoid a first-ever federal default. A number of Republicans broke with their party on Thursday to pass the measure in a 59-35 vote. Joe Biden is expected to sign the bill into law quickly, after which Senate Democrats will be allowed to raise the US debt ceiling in a simple-majority vote, bypassing the usual requirement of 60 votes to move legislation forward. Congress has been battling over the measure for months, with Republicans refusing long-term debt ceiling increases and filibustering Democrat efforts to do so. Without the legislation, the US would have defaulted on more than $29tn in loans as soon as next week. It has yet to be determined by how much the debt ceiling will be raised, but reports have indicated it could be increased by as $2.5tn. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer called the vote “a crucial” step in “avoiding the prospect of a catastrophic, calamitous default on our sovereign debt”. “This is the responsible path forward,” he said. “We still have a few more steps to take before we completely resolve this matter, but I’m optimistic that after today’s vote, we’ll be on a glide path to avoid a catastrophic default.” New York becomes largest US city to allow non-citizens to vote The city council in New York City approved a measure on Thursday allowing non-citizens to vote in local elections, including in races for mayor and other municipal positions. The historic move has sparked backlash from Republicans, who fear new immigrant voting blocks could sway elections in favor of Democrats. Under the new law, non-citizens who have lived in the city for at least 30 days and have a work permit will be allowed to vote. Approximately 1m non-citizens live in New York City, the equivalent of approximately 20% of currently registered voters. Other relatively small cities have passed measures allowing non-citizens to vote including towns in Maryland and Vermont. Meanwhile Los Angeles, Washington, and Portland, Maine have proposed the idea. Republicans have vowed to fight the expansion of voting rights in “all 50 states”, Republican National Committee chairwoman Ronna McDaniel said in a recent statement. The committee filed a lawsuit to block a similar measure in Vermont and will likely do the same in New York. House votes to block products made by forced Uyghur labor On Wednesday the House voted overwhelmingly to pass a bill cracking down on companies that benefit from forced labor by persecuted Muslim minorities. The Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act would ban products made in China’s Xinjiang region unless they are proven to be produced ethically. Under the legislation a company has to prove with “clear and convincing evidence” their supply chains are free of forced labour to sell products. The massive popularity of the bill – which passed 428 to 1 – reflects increasing concern at alleged human rights abuses in China, where the Muslim ethnic minority group Uyghurs face persecution, including internment camps and prisons. Businesses are lobbying heavily against such legislation, saying its requirements are too onerous and would disrupt global supply chains. It will now go for a vote in the Senate, where its fate is uncertain. A jury has found actor Jussie Smollett guilty of faking his own hate crime in an effort at raising his own profile. The Empire star, who is Black and gay, sparked new controversy at the intersection of culture, racism, politics and celebrity when he said he was attacked. From our full report: Many fellow stars initially rushed to support Smollett when he first made the accusations in January 2019 that he had been attacked by people that had shouted “This is Maga country,” a reference to Donald Trump’s trademark political slogan “Make American Great Again”. Smollett told police that he had been assaulted on a darkened street by two masked men. According to Smollett, his assailants put a noose around his neck and poured chemicals on him while yelling racist and homophobic slurs and expressing their support for Trump. But a month later police arrested Smollett himself, accusing the actor of paying two brothers $3,500 to stage the assault in a ploy to get public sympathy and boost his show-business profile. Hello, Kari Paul here in Oakland, California taking over the blog for the next few hours. Stand by for updates. That’s it from me! Here’s a summary of what’s happened today: Just in – an appeals court ruled against Trump on withholding documents related to 6 January. Trump is expected to file an appeal of that decision with the supreme court. Biden and Ukrainian president Zelenskiy talked today, with the White House saying that Biden conveyed to Ukraine that the US supports its sovereignty and “aspiration” to join NATO. New York state attorney general Letitia James announced on Twitter that she will be dropping out of the Democratic gubernatorial race and will be running for reelection. James is also seeking former Donald Trump’s deposition as part of the ongoing civil fraud investigation into his business, according to reports from Reuters and the Washington Post. An appeals court ruled against efforts by Donald Trump to withhold documents from 6 January investigating committee. The DC circuit court of appeals did pause its ruling for two weeks so that Trump could file an appeal with the supreme court. More details soon. New York governor Kathy Hochul said that “this is a very bad day for Donald Trump and the NRA” when discussing New York AG Letitia James’ decision to run for reelection and drop out of the democratic gubernatorial race. In a press conference on James’ decision to run for reelection and drop out of the democratic gubernatorial election, Hochul made the remark, seemingly confirming that James will be looking to hold the former president accountable. A report from Reuters, which was first reported by the Washington Post, said that James, along with Manhattan’s district attorney, Cyrus Vance, are jointly investigating the Trump Organization’s business practices. New York governor Kathy Hochul also said that James called her this morning to let Hochul know that she would drop out. “All I can say is I respect her tremendously... and I look forward to having her on the ticket as we head into the November election together,” said Hochul of the call between the two. In more news about New York attorney general Letitia James dropping out of the democratic gubernatorial race to run for reelection, current New York governor Kathy Hochul has released a statement on James’ decision. Releasing her statement on Twitter, Hochul said the following: I respect @TishJames tremendously and admire her commitment to continuing the critically important work she has undertaken in the Attorney General’s office. I fully support her re-election and look forward to continuing our work together to deliver results for all New Yorkers. James announced earlier that she will be ending her gubernatorial campaign and instead seek reelection. “I have come to the conclusion that I must continue my work as attorney general,” James said on Twitter. During today’s White House press briefing, press secretary Jen Psaki said that Biden is planning on conveying to the president of Ukraine that the US supports Ukraine sovereignty. Psaki also said that the president supports Ukraine’s “aspiration” to become a member of NATO, the intergovernmental military alliance. Psaki also cited different requirements that would face the country if they tried to join the alliance. Psaki also said that aggression is on the side of Russia, referring to ongoing escalations between the two countries. Today, the Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy is holding talks with Biden, according to an advisor from Zelenskiy’s office, Reuters reported earlier. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy is holding talks with Joe Biden today, according to an advisor from Zelenskiy’s office, reported Reuters. The two men spoke as Russia continued a barrage of hostile rhetoric towards Ukraine and compared the crisis there to the most dangerous moment of the Cold War. Details of the talk are still emerging. Letitia James’s announcement that she is quitting the race for the governorship of New York having barely begun is eye-catching for most because of her involvement in high-profile investigations involving the Trump Organization and former governor Andrew Cuomo. But the attorney general has also played a pivotal role in going after opioid manufacturers and distributors in the battle to win some sliver of justice for the hundreds of thousands of Americans who’ve died of opioid overdoses in the last 25 years. Most prominently, she sued leading members of the billionaire Sackler family behind Purdue Pharma and its prescription painkiller OxyContin, in 2019, joining a growing list of state, county and city governments then alleging the drugmaker Purdue and its owners sparked the nation’s opioids crisis by putting profits over patient safety. A New York bankruptcy judge in September approved a settlement by Purdue Pharma, including about $4.5bn from the company’s billionaire Sackler family owners, even though the decision is still being challenged in court and provoked outrage from many critics and campaigners. But James has done her bit against this and other opioid players. As she tweets: And further: Demand for coronavirus shots for children is slowing, prompting concern. After a quick surge in demand, children’s vaccinations in the US have tapered off sooner than expected. The US has now reached the milestone of 200 million people fully vaccinated, with 75% of Americans aged five and older receiving at least one dose. Five million children between the ages of five and 11 have received at least their first dose, but this is out of the 28 million children in this age group, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). That means only 17.8% of the newly-eligible kids have begun vaccination, with only 4.3% fully vaccinated, as the Christmas holiday approaches and a winter surge continues ticking upward. After a short period of high demand, kids’ vaccinations began declining around Thanksgiving and continued downward. “This happened faster than expected - about 2 weeks in.” Jen Kates, coauthor of a new report from the Kaiser Family Foundation, said on Twitter. There are “significant” geographic differences with kids’ vaccinations, Kates said. In Vermont, 45.6% children in this age group have begun vaccination, versus 3.6% in West Virginia. Parents are more likely to get their children vaccinated if their schools encourage them to, both because of the comfortable environment of school clinics and the trust families have in principals and other school leaders, Kates said. Some parents and caregivers have expressed reluctance over vaccinating their kids, with only one-third saying in September that they would do so as soon as the vaccine was authorized for the younger age group, five to 11. Some families may also face access barriers, an issue that is hard to determine at this point because of the limited data on race or ethnicity and other factors among vaccinated children. “All this points to a long, tougher road ahead to getting Covid-19 vaccine rates up among kids, a concerning finding in advance of the holiday season, and as Omicron transmission increases,” Kates said. Here’s where the day stands so far: New York attorney general Letitia James is seeking the deposition of Donald Trump, according to reports. James’ office is investigating potential fraud at the former president’s company, and the requested deposition may be the first step toward issuing a subpoena. James announced she is ending her gubernatorial bid to instead seek reelection as the state’s attorney general. “There are a number of important investigations and cases that are underway, and I intend to finish the job,” the Democratic official said on Twitter. “I am running for re-election to complete the work New Yorkers elected me to do.” Joe Biden paid tribute to Bob Dole at a Capitol Hill ceremony for the former Republican senator, who died on Sunday at the age of 98. “Bob Dole loved this Capitol. It’s where he served this nation, shaped by the figures that surround us,” Biden said of his former Senate colleague. “In a sentence, Bob belongs here. He, too, was a giant of our history.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Tom Suozzi, another Democratic gubernatorial candidate in New York, offered his “best wishes” to Letitia James after she announced she was dropping out of the race. “She has tremendous responsibilities as the sitting AG &amp; I understand her desire to devote her energies to seeing through &amp; continuing the important matters before her,” Suozzi, who currently represents a Long Island district in the House, said on Twitter. James’ decision to seek reelection as attorney general will likely solidify Governor Kathy Hochul’s frontrunner status in the race for the Democratic nomination. Hochul took over the governorship in August, after Andrew Cuomo resigned over sexual harassment allegations. Letitia James announced in late October that she would enter the Democratic gubernatorial primary, after Governor Andrew Cuomo was forced to resign over sexual harassment allegations. James’ office conducted an investigation into the allegations and concluded the governor had engaged in a “pattern” of inappropriate behavior toward state government employees. “I’ve spent my career guided by a simple principle: stand up to the powerful on behalf of the vulnerable, to be a force for change,” James said as she announced her gubernatorial bid. “We can do this if we stand up and speak out together.” James’ withdrawal from the gubernatorial race will likely come as a relief to sitting Governor Kathy Hochul, who took over the job following Cuomo’s resignation. New York attorney general Letitia James has just announced she is ending her gubernatorial campaign to instead seek reelection. “I have come to the conclusion that I must continue my work as attorney general,” James said on Twitter. “There are a number of important investigations and cases that are underway, and I intend to finish the job,” the Democratic official added. “I am running for re-election to complete the work New Yorkers elected me to do.” The news comes just hours after the Washington Post reported that James’ office is seeking a deposition of Donald Trump as part of its investigation into potential fraud at the former president’s company. Meanwhile, former Trump administration official Kash Patel arrived on Capitol Hill to speak to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, per CBS News. Patel served as chief of staff to acting defense secretary Christopher Miller, after Donald Trump abruptly fired Miller’s predecessor, Mark Esper. The select committee subpoenaed Patel in late September, saying the official was heavily involved in discussions between the Pentagon and the White House as the insurrection unfolded on January 6. “According to documents provided by the Defense Department and published accounts, Mr. Patel was involved with discussions among senior Pentagon officials prior to and on January 6th, 2021, regarding security at the Capitol, and told a reporter that he was talking to Mr. Meadows ‘nonstop that day,’” the committee said in its September statement announcing the subpoena. New York attorney general Letitia James’ request for a deposition of Donald Trump may be the first step toward subpoenaing the former president. The AP notes: Requesting Trump’s testimony is a first step in a process that could eventually lead to issuing a subpoena and going to a judge to order him to cooperate if he were to refuse. James’ investigators last year interviewed one of Trump’s sons, Trump Organization executive Eric Trump, as part of the probe. James’ office went to court to enforce a subpoena on the younger Trump and a judge forced him to testify after his lawyers abruptly canceled a previously scheduled deposition. The New York state attorney general, Letitia James, is seeking former Donald Trump’s deposition as part of the ongoing civil fraud investigation into his business, according to a new report. James has asked the former US president to come to her New York office to give testimony on 7 January 2022, the Washington Post reported moments ago, with the Reuters news agency noting the article. The DC publication points out that James’s request is: Part of a civil investigation into whether Trump’s company committed financial fraud in the valuations of properties to different entities, according to the people who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the inquiry is ongoing. One of the people familiar with the investigation said James is examining whether widespread fraud “permeated the Trump Organization.” Fabien Levy, a spokesman for James, declined to comment. Representatives for Trump did not immediately respond to messages from The Washington Post. Ronald Fischetti, an attorney who has been representing Trump in investigations into his New York financial practices, also did not respond. The deposition marks an escalation in the probe of the former president’s company and a critical moment for James, who is running for governor next year...James has said she is considering filing a lawsuit over the matter and Manhattan prosecutors have convened a new grand jury to consider potential criminal charges related to the company’s financial practices, according to the people familiar with the investigations. Reuters adds that: James, along with Manhattan’s district attorney, Cyrus Vance, are jointly investigating the Trump Organization’s business practices. The Trump Organization and its chief financial officer, Allen Weisselberg, were indicted earlier this year. Trump has not personally been accused of any crimes in relation to this investigation. Joe Biden reflected upon the loss of Bob Dole, with whom the president served in the US Senate for 25 years. Speaking in the Capitol Rotunda, Biden said, “Bob Dole loved this Capitol. It’s where he served this nation, shaped by the figures that surround us.” The president said it was fitting for Dole to lie in state in the Capitol, which he described as a “temple of liberty”. “In a sentence, Bob belongs here,” Biden said. “He, too, was a giant of our history.” The president closed by quoting Dole’s own words, repeating the longtime lawmaker’s message about the importance of prioritizing country over party. “I’ve always served my country best when I did it first and foremost as an American,” Dole once said. House speaker Nancy Pelosi said she considered it to be a point of pride that Bob Dole started his career in the lower chamber before being elected to the Senate. Praising the former Republican senator’s “legendary service” and “inspiring resilience,” Pelosi said it was hard to think of another American more worthy of having a flag draped over his casket. The Democratic leader urged lawmakers to follow Dole’s advice to “act worthy of our ideals”. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer praised Bob Dole’s long life of public service, noting that he was seriously wounded while serving in the Army during the second world war. The Democratic leader said millions of Americans – including veterans and those with disabilities – are now “better off because of Bob Dole”. “He never forgot the reason why he entered public service,” Schumer said. Schumer also joked that he could be the victim of Dole’s sharp wit. Dole once said of the Democratic senator, “The most dangerous place is between him and a camera.” Speaking at the tribute ceremony for Bob Dole, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell remembered the former Republican senator for his sense of humor and many legislative accomplishments. McConnell noted that, after Republicans gained control of the Senate in 1969, Dole lamented that the party would have run better candidates if its leaders knew they were going to be in the majority. “I swear, Bob could have made it as a stand-up comic,” McConnell said. Joe and Jill Biden have now arrived in the Capitol Rotunda, where the president will soon deliver remarks to honor the legacy of former Republican senator Bob Dole, who died on Sunday. The hearse carrying the casket of former Republican senator Bob Dole has now arrived at the Capitol for this morning’s tribute ceremony. Lawmakers of both parties will soon gather in the Capitol Rotunda to honor Dole, who will lie in state. Joe Biden is scheduled to deliver remarks at the tribute ceremony in about 15 minutes, so stay tuned. Meanwhile, the Capitol is preparing for its tribute ceremony to Bob Dole, the former Republican senator and presidential nominee who died Sunday at the age of 98. Dole will lie in state in the Capitol Rotunda today, and Joe Biden is scheduled to deliver remarks honoring the longtime lawmaker, with whom the president served in the Senate. A C-SPAN producer shared a photo of the scene inside the Capitol this morning: This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over for Joanna Walters. While Joe Biden addressed the Summit for Democracy this morning, there was a brief moment of alarm over on Capitol Hill. The US Capitol Police said its officers spotted a handgun in a bag on the X-ray screen in the Longworth House Office Building at approximately 7.40am. “The man was tracked down four minutes later and arrested,” the USCP said in a statement. “The owner of the bag was identified as 57-year-old Jeffrey Allsbrooks (02-20-1964), a staffer with the House Chief Administrative Office. Allbrooks told our officers he forgot the gun was in the bag.” Allsbrooks was charged with carrying a pistol without a license, and the USCP is continuing to investigate the incident. Biden also said in his remarks at the virtual summit that half of all democracies have experienced a decline in at least one aspect of democracy over the last 10 years. The International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (Idea) has concluded in an analysis that the total number of democracies in the world has declined from 104 to 98, just since 2015, which is what the White House and Biden are referring to as a “global democratic recession”. Joe Biden has told the world leaders invited to the White House summit for democracy that preserving democracy is “the challenge of our time”. The US president pledged that the US is going to “lead by example”. This is a logical and worthy point but also somewhat ironic because democracy as America knows it is gravely under threat. As the Republican party shifts further rightwards, in Congress and at state level in some places, many fear that the circumstances that lead to the insurrection at the US Capitol on 6 January by extremist supporters of Donald Trump, as they attempted to prevent the certification of Joe Biden’s presidential victory, could happen again. Reuters reported this example: Americans face unprecedented barriers to having their voices heard in the upcoming 2022 and 2024 elections, Colorado Secretary of State Jena Griswold said on Wednesday. In a panel at the Reuters Next conference, Griswold warned of multiple dangers to democracy in the United States, including bills designed to suppress voting, death threats against election officials and mistruths perpetuated by politicians both nationally and on a state level. Democrats and Republicans are battling for control of the U.S. Congress next year and the presidency in 2024. Democrats hold a slim majority in the House of Representatives now and control in the divided Senate through Vice President Kamala Harris’ tie-breaking vote. “Warning lights are blinking red. We are seeing January 6, the attempted stealing of an American presidency, just in slow motion right now,” Griswold, a Democrat, said. “What we’re seeing right now is no longer about 2020. It’s about 2022 and 2024, making what was attempted on January 6 more feasible the next time around. So I believe we are at an incredibly urgent time in terms of things that we have to do, that we must do,” she said. Former President Donald Trump has claimed, falsely, that the result of the 2020 presidential election was fraudulent, and urged a group of loyalists to march on the U.S. Capitol after a rally on Jan. 6. His supporters did so, invading the Capitol, leading to five deaths. And the Guardian’s Ed Pilkington has reported several specials, including this one warning: Republicans are vying for critical positions in many states – from which they could launch a far more effective power-grab than Trump’s 2020 effort. Read it here. Good morning, US politics live blog readers, we’re getting underway a little earlier than usual today because Joe Biden is speaking now at the top of the two-day, US-organized inaugural White House Summit for Democracy. Here’s what’s coming up today: The US president is opening the virtual summit by warning that the world needs to reverse an ongoing “recession” of democracy that is playing out at a time of rising authoritarianism around the globe and extraordinary strains on foundational institutions in the US (as the Associated Press puts it). After opening remarks, Biden will host what they’re calling a leaders’ plenary session. More than 100 countries are participating but there’s been controversy over who has and has not been invited, and why. China and Russia are not invited and are being very critical. The summit comes as the US has failed to pass any legislation under Biden to protect voting rights, which are under attack in many Republican-led states across the US. Kamala Harris, the US vice-president, will make closing remarks at the summit, expected at 1.25pm ET. It’s a busy day for Potus and Veep. This morning they will attend a congressional tribute ceremony for Bob Dole. There are calls with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy and some eastern Nato allies about the threat from Russia’s troop build up on the border with Ukraine. Biden and Harris will meet with the White House coronavirus team amid the spread of Omicron. Here’s the Guardian’s diplomatic editor in London, Patrick Wintour, on the democracy summit.Annabel Crabb stuck her head above the parapet to defend Liberal MP Nicolle Flint this week, a particularly noble act when you consider the member for Boothby in South Australia criticised Crabb’s ABC program Ms Represented as unfair to conservative women. “There are very few reasons left to watch the ABC,” Flint wrote in the Australian newspaper in July. “However, Annabel Crabb’s new ABC TV program, Ms Represented, provides an excellent excuse to turn on the television, then turn it off again, and formally complain.” Harsh. But Crabb was acting on the principle not the personality when she responded to an article in the Australian by David Penberthy about a Friendlyjordies video, Enemy to Women? Curiously, the South Australian correspondent for the Oz referred to the video variously as an “abusive episode of his podcast” and a “profanity-laden post”. Penberthy reported that Friendlyjordies, whose real name is Jordan Shanks, “repeatedly tells Ms Flint to ‘f..k off’ from politics and also refers to her as ‘Dick-hole Flint’” and a “whiny little bitch”. The report prompted both Crabb and the Labor MP Tanya Plibersek – who is one of the ALP figures to have been in interviewed by the YouTube star – to condemn Shanks. Weekly Beast listened closely to the video and couldn’t hear the words “Dick-Hole Flint” but we are happy to be corrected. On Friday, Penberthy reported in a follow-up article that Shanks denied saying the phrase, after the comedian sent him a statement about the “multiple falsehoods” in the article. We’ve asked Penberthy to clarify whether he still believes the phrase is in the 15-minute video. As for the “whiny little bitch” insult, the phrase originated in a video last year in which Shanks compares the public figures who complain about insults with those who accept that sledging goes with the territory. “Everyone in public life cops it,” Shanks said. “It’s only the whiny little bitches like Nicolle Flint, Clive Palmer and John Barilaro who have a sook.” Equal opportunity insults perhaps? False flagging Staying on Adelaide media, InDaily journalist Tom Richardson revealed the cosy relationship between News Corp’s Advertiser and the South Australian government this week, and how occasionally it blows up in their face. Richardson says “a key plank of the Government’s COVID messaging has long been to use the daily paper as a community noticeboard to flag its intentions” and non-News Corp editors have written to the government to warn of the damage to the public health messages. One danger may be that the Advertiser is so confident it has the inside track that it publishes information before final decisions have been made within government. The ‘Tiser had a drop last Friday which said an “emergency lockout” was coming “within days”. “It is understood the crackdown will ban all but essential travel to SA while fully vaccinated returning SA residents would be required to quarantine for seven days,” the article stated. Understandably South Australians were devastated. But on Saturday, authorities said there was no lockdown. It may have been proposed, but in the end the recommendation was not accepted. “This was extraordinarily detailed information, confidently presented as insider knowledge,” Richardson said. “This was, rather, a briefing – of the kind that has occurred week in, week out throughout this pandemic as the central strategy in the government’s health messaging.” ‘No big deal’ The Australian’s former economics editor, now Washington correspondent, Adam Creighton has drawn attention to himself during the pandemic by criticising public health responses to Covid-19. Creighton has characterised strict lockdowns as an affront to personal liberty and called them “health fascism”. He recently wrote that it was “shocking how this OMICRON ‘variant’, which appears not to have killed a single person in the world, has prompted such massive disruption to millions of people, all implicitly cheered on by the media”. In April he tweeted: “Covid19 has killed free speech. Covid 19 will be the most formative event of my life. Virtue signalling dominates truth. The West is finished.” So an article by Creighton headed “I caught Covid and it was no big deal” attracted a great deal of attention online. Most of it was mocking. “I own a house so buying a house is no big deal,” was just one answer to Creighton. “Aren’t you the champion? I drove my car and didn’t die, I don’t know why we’re bothering with all of these road rules,” was another of the more than 800 largely negative responses. ABC accolades In 2018 the ABC TV drama Mystery Road became the most watched non-children’s program in history on ABC iview, and has won critical accolades across the board. But it had other benefits – series one also contributed to regional expenditure in remote Western Australia of more than $3.3m and 300 locals were hired as extras and in on-set support and intern roles, according to a report by Deloitte Access Economics published this week. The report details the ABC’s contribution to the national economy: screen commissions contributed $744m and supported more than 8,000 roles over three years, bringing financial, social and cultural benefits to the country. The role of the ABC in Australia’s production sector was also highlighted by Screen Australia’s drama report, which revealed the number of television shows produced for Australian children had halved since the Morrison government scrapped quotas for commercial broadcasters. Of the seven children’s shows produced in 2020-21, six were financed by the ABC. The report reveals that from 2017-18 to 2019-20, the ABC commissioned 433 screen productions that delivered more than 2,500 hours of Australian content to viewers. Murdoch merriment The release of the Senate report backing a call by Kevin Rudd for an inquiry into the Murdoch media empire could not have come on a more appropriate day. It was tabled in parliament hours before Lachlan and Sarah Murdoch hosted their annual Christmas bash in Sydney’s Bellevue Hill for politicians, media personalities and the business elite. The Labor and Greens senators on the committee recommended a judicial inquiry with the powers of a royal commission into media diversity, ownership and regulation – although Labor’s media spokeswoman, Michelle Rowland, immediately ruled it out as ALP policy. Committee chair Sarah Hanson-Young: “The evidence that the Murdoch media empire is indeed a dangerous monopoly was heard loud and clear.” The rhetoric didn’t seem to bother the Liberal MP Dave Sharma or the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, who were guests at the soiree alongside Qantas boss Alan Joyce, Atlassian founder and billionaire Scott Farquhar, the former NRL and FFA boss David Gallop and racing and rugby league administrator Peter V’landys. Everyone from Murdoch’s Australasian chief, Michael Miller, and Sky News Australia boss Paul Whittaker were invited, and presenters Peter Stefanovic, Chris Kenny, Paul Murray and Sharri Markson made the grade. For the record, the report defines media concentration by saying Australia now has only three national-scale commercial media voices. The biggest is News Corp, which controls about two-thirds of metropolitan daily newspaper circulation, Sky News and a free-to-air channel in regional areas. Next is Nine Entertainment, which owns the Nine television network, and the former Fairfax mastheads the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age and the Australian Financial Review, as well as digital properties. The third player is Kerry Stokes in Western Australia, who holds a controlling interest in Seven West Media Ltd, which controls the West Australian, Perth’s Sunday Times and the Community Newspaper Group, which owns 23 local newspapers across Perth, as well as the Seven TV network.Tribal fighting has killed dozens of people over the past three weeks in three separate areas of Sudan’s West Darfur region and thousands of people have fled the violence, local medics have said. The West Darfur Doctors Committee said in statements on Wednesday and Thursday that attacks in the Kreinik area killed 88 and wounded 84, while renewed violence in the Jebel Moon area killed 25 and wounded four. Meanwhile, violence in the Sarba locality killed eight and wounded six. “They have created a wave of displacement from the outskirts into the town, with a humanitarian situation that can be described at the very least as catastrophic,” the committee said in a statement late on Wednesday, referring to Kreinik. One resident said a camp of displaced people had been flattened and thousands of people had sought refuge in government buildings. “The area is completely destroyed,” the resident said. In the rugged Jebel Moon mountains of West Darfur, violence first broke out on 17 November between armed Arab camel herders. Separate clashes erupted on Saturday in the Krink region of West Darfur between rival groups using automatic weapons. “Many of the wounded died because they could not reach medical facilities, and community clinics in rural areas are not equipped,” the doctors’ union in West Darfur said on Thursday. It said 106 people had been wounded. Analysts say a peace deal signed by some rebel groups in October 2020 was one cause of unrest as local groups jostled for power. A joint United Nations-African Union peacekeeping mission stopped patrolling in January. Humanitarian groups said there had been a rise in conflict across the wider Darfur region recently. The Coordinating Committee for Refugee and Displacement Camps, a local NGO, said on Wednesday there was renewed violence in the Jebel Moon area, where aid workers reported 43 people killed and 10,000 displaced in violence in November. The Zamzam refugee camp was being encircled by militias on Wednesday and the Donki Shata area of North Darfur was also attacked, the committee said on Wednesday. According to the United Nations, the fighting has displaced more than 22,000 people, with 2,000 fleeing across the border into Chad. Darfur has been ruled by emergency orders from Khartoum since 2003 when it was ravaged by civil war that erupted between ethnic minority rebels, who complained of discrimination, and the Arab-dominated government of then president Omar al-Bashir. Khartoum responded by unleashing the Janjaweed militias, blamed for atrocities including mass killings, rape, and the looting and burning of villages. The violence resulted in one of the world’s worst humanitarian catastrophes. The UN estimates more than 350,000 people have been killed and at least 2 million displaced by conflict in the region. Aid groups and Darfur residents complain that the militias continue to carry out attacks on villages and camps. About 430,000 people have been displaced over the past year, a four-fold increase over 2020, aid groups say. “National authorities and the international community must urgently deal with the bloody reality of this spiralling violence,” Will Carter of the Norwegian Refugee Council said in a statement on Wednesday. With Reuters and AFPLarge numbers of stranded travellers have begun arriving at the Queensland border days ahead of its scheduled reopening, increasing concerns about long delays at police checkpoints. It remains unclear how the police border checkpoints will operate, though delays of up to four hours are expected and authorities have asked people to consider travelling at a later date and to “pack your patience”. With just days until the reopening at 1am on Monday, the build-up of people wanting to cross the border by car presents other potential problems. They include the ability for border area commuters – including Gold Coast hospital workers and others – to get to work on Monday morning. The New South Wales cross-border commissioner, James McTavish, told Guardian Australia there was also some concern that northern NSW may not have the Covid testing capacity to meet demand over the weekend. “There have been large numbers of people moving from all parts of NSW and Victoria into northern NSW in advance of the opening on Monday,” McTavish said. “People need to get that PCR test done within 72 hours [of crossing], and there’s limited capacity on the north coast. I’m conscious that people may think they can waltz into a testing clinic and get it done.” The border has been closed to most people, including returning Queenslanders, for almost five months. In that time, people unable to return have been stranded in the NSW northern rivers, with many living in caravan parks and showgrounds. For those attempting to cross the border as soon as possible, there remains significant uncertainty about how the process will work. People will require a border pass, but on Friday morning the state had not yet made passes available. Rod Webb, from Ocean Grove in Victoria, is planning to drive north over a couple of days to reach the border on Monday. He phoned Queensland Health on Friday seeking basic information and was told that details about the pass were still not known. “It’s unbelievable given the time they’ve had to get this in place,” Webb said. Authorities are urging people to delay their travel if possible. “We’re anticipating on Monday there will be extensive delays, particularly on the M1,” McTavish said. “The advice we’re giving to people is that despite the best efforts of Queensland police [and other officials] people should expect extensive delays. “Every time there’s been a change it’s been pretty rough for a few days, as Queensland police get their systems in order; it’s pretty messy up front but it normally evens out pretty quickly. “We are concerned about people getting to work on Monday, we’ve got a lot of medical staff in northern NSW who need to get across the border to go to work. But they should expect it to be disrupted on Monday and also the first few days.” After the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced on Monday the border would fully reopen nearly a week ahead of schedule, Queensland released a public health direction on Thursday night that gives some clarity to how the border controls and pass system will operate. The state has come in for heavy criticism for the length of time between the premier’s announcements and the detail – via a direction – that allows for authorities, businesses and travellers to plan with a degree of certainty. The Tweed shire council says dedicated border crossings are needed for locals, in order to prevent the border opening heaping more impost onto commuters and businesses. “It’s certainly going to be a challenge,” the council’s general manager, Troy Green, said. “Cross-border residents need to be able to upload their vaccination record or have number plate recognition that lets us through. “There’s multiple access points from Tweed to Coolangatta or Tweed into Queensland that have been permanently closed. We need access points solely for cross-border residents and a simplified way of crossing.” Green said the closure had been tough for border communities and that he expected difficulties to continue after the re-opening. “We are one community on two sides of the street,” he said. “A lot of businesses, in the Tweed and Coolangatta, have lost confidence. “From the Queensland government’s perspective, they’ll say we’ve dodged some impacts [of Covid]. I think it’s going to be a long time for Queensland to recover. “Some of those businesses won’t recover. They’ve been the pawns in this. It’s been somewhat frustrating to see the slow uptake of vaccines in Queensland. Those on the border have paid the penalty for that.” Police are unlikely to telegraph some aspects of their efforts to enforce rules at border crossings, which include that people arriving from NSW and Victoria must be double-vaccinated. Gold Coast acting chief superintendent Rhys Wildman told reporters on Friday that five existing police border checkpoints would remain in place. He said police would attempt to keep traffic flowing at those checkpoints. “We will be using our risk-based approach, we’ll be bringing that into effect as of 1am on Monday,” Wildman said. “We’ll be managing the traffic flows and at quiet times we’ll be completing up to 100% compliance.” Wildman said that border bubble residents could download an “XV pass” – once the system goes live – to assist officers to identify which vehicles should be intercepted. “(There will be) greater compliance (devoted to) vehicles that aren’t using the XV pass. But even with an XV pass you can still be stopped. “The first two days on the border will be quite challenging.”You may have never heard of urea, but the worldwide shortage of the chemical compound could bring Australia’s supply chain to its knees in a matter of weeks. The world is facing a major shortage of the compound, a key ingredient found in the diesel exhaust fluid AdBlue and a large component in fertiliser. The main reason for the shortage is that China, which previously supplied 80% of Australia’s urea supplies, has banned export of the product. That’s because the cost of fertiliser has skyrocketed and China wants to slow that price growth. But this could inadvertently force many of Australia’s trucks off the road, as urea is injected into the exhaust systems of modern diesel vehicles to reduce emissions, which is a requirement for trucks, private vehicles and tractors. The shortage could also lead to higher food prices at the register. So what is urea and how badly could the shortage impact Australia’s supply chain? What is it? Urea is a handy, naturally occurring chemical compound – CO(NH2)2, also known as carbamide – that is found in mammalian urine, among other places. Since 1828, when the German chemist Friedrich Wohler developed a process to synthesise the compound, urea has also been produced in bulk for human uses. These include as an agricultural fertiliser, but also to reduce nitrous oxides produced in combustion engines. What is it made from? The main feedstock for the world’s urea production is gas, which is first converted to ammonia under high temperatures and pressure, and then into liquid urea. Global urea production is about 220m tonnes a year. According to Volker Hessel, a professor at the University of Adelaide, Australia’s largest producer, Incitec Pivot, has a capacity of about 290,000 tonnes a year, or one-800th of the total. That company told the stock exchange last month it plans to close its main urea plant in Brisbane’s Gibson Island by the end of next year. The facility had been unable to secure “an economically viable long-term gas supply”. Instead, it will rely on its international supply chains to replace the manufactured product, at least until it can determine the viability of making so-called green ammonia using hydrogen at scale as the substitute feedstock for fossil gas. What’s the problem? Demand and supply shifts have contrived to push up fertiliser prices by about threefold in a year, according to the World Bank. “High fertiliser prices could exert inflationary pressures on food prices, compounding food security concerns at a time when the Covid pandemic and climate change are making access to food more difficult,” the bank said in a post. Wes Lefroy, a senior agriculture analyst at RaboResearch, says if anything the fertiliser prices were responding at first to a surge in demand for wheat, soya beans and corn. Farmers eyeing high prices for those crops see it as a good bet to toss on more fertiliser to glean higher returns. Economies juiced up for Covid also pushed up demand for gas, while Hurricane Ida – the second-strongest tropical storm on record to come ashore at Louisiana in the US – last August triggered the suspension of key refineries, adding to fertiliser shortages. Big fertiliser producers have also been responding by curbing trade. China, which accounts for about one-10th of urea and one-third of another important farm input of diammonium phosphate, closed off exports until next June to ensure local farmers have enough supply. And Russia has curbed fertiliser exports for six months. Road transport concerns It’s not just a worry on the farm. Urea supplies also disrupt the availability of a diesel exhaust fluid – AdBlue is its trade name – a refined additive caught up in the China trade block. The National Road Transport Association is among the groups trying to get action from the Morrison government to secure supplies. The association’s head, Warren Clark, has called for the creation of a taskforce of industry groups to obtain alternatives. While the use of the fluid is meant to reduce production of nitrous oxides, newer diesel engines don’t function well without it. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “In most of the modern diesels, there’s a chemical added to the system called AdBlue,” Clark told the ABC. “A lot of the AdBlue, or the chemical that goes into making it, is imported from China. “The supply of that chemical urea has dried up from China. And hence, there’s now a massive shortage of AdBlue In this country.” “Our industry isn’t the only one that will be affected, but we will be hit first and hardest,” Clark said. “These issues go beyond NatRoad and the trucking industry.” What happens next? RaboResearch’s Lefroy says Australia imports about 90% of its urea-based fertilisers, and of that about two-thirds comes in between March and July, before they are used on winter crops. “There’s very little urea being traded in Australia at the moment just because we’re in summer,” he said, adding that the pinch, if there is one, won’t be felt until next year. Depending on the soil health, farmers can also turn to other fertiliser if urea is not available or plant crops such as legumes that require less fertiliser to start with. Rabobank’s global research points to fertiliser shortages as just one of several factors pointing to high prices for many farm commodities into 2022. “The prices of grains and oilseeds like wheat and corn, food staples coffee and sugar, and key inputs such as palm oil, will all continue at high prices,” it said in a report last week. “The bank expects many food processors to support any significant drop in prices by extending commercial hedges to historical averages and by stockpiling more, enabling them to weather some of the broader global volatility.” Hessel from the University of Adelaide says the problem underscores the tight interconnections, with the shortage of just one key ingredient affecting the whole supply chain. Eventually, hydrogen offers an alternative to gas as the fuel stock, taking out a significant source of greenhouse gases in the process. “Those plants will take five, six, seven years until they are operational – those plants will be investments of billions [of dollars],” Hessel said. “That is not something you build overnight.”Children aged five to 11 can be vaccinated against Covid-19 from 10 January, making about 2.3 million additional Australians eligible for the jabs. An independent group of medical, scientific and consumer experts known as the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation recommended this age group receive the Pizer vaccine at one-third of the dosage given to those aged 12 years and over. The drug regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration, has also approved the jab for this age group after reviewing the available evidence. So what do we know about vaccinating young children, and what happens next? Vaccinating children protects others It is true that serious symptoms and complications from Covid-19 in unvaccinated children are extremely rare, and transmission between children in schools is low. But children are highly likely to spread the virus to members of their household if they do become infected, leading to transmission beyond the school. Data published by the National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance found most children diagnosed with the Delta variant experienced mild or no symptoms, with only 2% requiring hospitalisation. Not all of that 2% were seriously unwell, the report found. Many children were admitted because their parents were seriously ill and in hospital and the children had nowhere to go, with special family wards established in some hospitals to accommodate this. But as older age groups increasingly become vaccinated, school-age children now account for an increasing proportion of cases and hospitalisations overseas, compared with earlier in the pandemic. School outbreaks are becoming more common, and children can spread the virus to those who are vulnerable, including those with weak immune systems who aren’t as strongly protected by vaccination. It is also highly disruptive having to close schools each time an outbreak occurs. According to Unesco, when schools close “the disadvantages are disproportionate for under-privileged learners who tend to have fewer educational opportunities beyond school”. Finally, the higher the proportion of the overall population that is vaccinated, the more rare outbreaks and spread will become and the more vulnerable people will be protected, easing pressure on the health system. Vaccinated people can still catch and spread Covid-19 but their chances of doing so are reduced, particularly after a third booster dose, evidence is showing. Importantly, vaccinated people overwhelmingly experience no, or much less severe, symptoms, with the key goal of vaccination being to prevent hospitalisation and death. Atagi and the TGA require strong evidence Data reviewed by the experts included findings from Pfizer’s clinical trials of the vaccine in children aged five to 11. The trials found a 10 microgram dose (one-third of the standard dose) administered 21 days apart was safe, and led to a strong immune response which was more than 90% effective – similar to the response seen in older people. The Australian regulators and experts also reviewed data from the real world, beyond the pharmaceutical company trials. This is because any very rare side-effects only emerge once millions of people are vaccinated. The experts reviewed data from overseas, including from the US where about 5 million children have received at least one dose. There were concerns after it emerged that some adolescents and young adults, especially males in the 12-to-30 age group, were experiencing myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) or pericarditis (inflammation of the outer lining of the heart). But these conditions after vaccinations are rare, and most cases have been mild, with patients recovering quickly. No cases have yet been reported in the five-to-11 age group. Atagi also reviewed clinical data from Canada, prompting the recommendation of an eight-week interval between the two doses for five- to 11-year-olds. This can be shortened to three weeks in special circumstances such as outbreaks, Atagi advised. This is because data shows increasing the interval may increase efficacy, while reducing the already rare myocarditis and pericarditis risk even further. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning More common side-effects for children are similar to those experienced by adults, including a sore arm, fatigue and/or headache. Atagi and the TGA will continue to monitor data and can update recommendations if required. Where and when can I book a jab for my child? Parents, carers and guardians will be able to book January appointments from late December. Vaccines will be made available through general practices, Aboriginal health services, community pharmacies, and state and territory clinics. Individual clinics will determine if they will provide vaccines for children of five to 11, and states and territories will be responsible for any school-based programs. Healthcare providers will be able to order vaccines over the coming weeks. The needle used to administer the vaccine will be smaller than the one for those age 12 and up, and the cap on the vial the vaccine comes in is orange instead of purple and grey to avoid mix-ups. Booster doses are not now recommended for those aged under 18 because the vaccines generate a strong immune response in this group, so the benefit from additional doses of vaccine is likely to be small. There is also only limited data on the safety of additional vaccine doses in this age group.More than 2,000 people in 60 villages in Papua New Guinea’s north – where the country’s largest gold, copper and silver mine is slated to be built – have filed a human rights complaint with the Australian government against developer PanAust. The landowners of the proposed Frieda River mine, on a tributary to the Sepik in the north of New Guinea island, allege that PanAust failed to obtain their consent. The coordinator of Project Sepik, Emmanuel Peni, said: “The failure by PanAust and its subsidiary Frieda River Limited to obtain consent from the Sepik River communities violates their right as Indigenous peoples to give their free, prior and informed consent to developments that affect them.” PanAust, 80% shareholder in the project, is an Australian-registered miner ultimately owned by the Chinese government and part of state-owned Guangdong Rising Assets Management. The complaint also alleges that “the proposed mine poses a serious risk for communities living on the Sepik River”. It was filed – on behalf of the affected community members by local organisation Project Sepik Inc and the Australian NGO Jubilee Australia Research Centre – with the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Australian National Contact Point. While the complaint does not stop development, Jubilee Australia’s executive director, Dr Luke Fletcher, said he hoped the National Contact Point would assess the validity of the complaint, perhaps looking at PanAust’s environmental impact statement – which the complainants allege does not adequately assess the impact of the project on water catchments – and organising meetings for the company, the NGOs and the Australian and PNG governments to “find a negotiated settlement”. Fletcher said: “Those communities have the right to have their voices heard and to decide what happens on their land. The Sepik River communities have clearly voiced their concerns about this mine, but so far, those concerns have fallen on deaf ears. “PanAust and its subsidiaries must pause all further mine development as all affected communities do not currently consent to the mine.” The proposed 16,000-hectaure mine would be built in one of the most seismically active regions in the world, with an accompanying dam to store 1,500 megatonnes of waste. Government officials, environmental advocacy groups and villagers living along the river have warned that the proposed dam is a potential environmental disaster that could wipe out entire villages if there was a natural disaster. Similar concerns have been raised by 10 UN special rapporteurs, who wrote to the governments of Papua New Guinea, Australia, China, and Canada, as well as the Chinese state-owned developers of the mine, warning that the plan for the largest mine in Papua New Guinea’s history carries a risk of catastrophic loss of life and environmental destruction and “appears to disregard the human rights of those affected”. PanAust says it has conducted “dam break analysis” which ensured “appropriate factors of safety have been incorporated into the design” of the dam. “The probability of a failure is very unlikely,” said the company’s environmental impact statement. “However, the extreme consequences of complete failure leading to the uncontrolled release of large quantities of water and solids (from waste rock and tailings placement) would likely result in extreme downstream environmental and social impacts.” The proposed mine is forecast to yield gold, silver and copper worth an estimated US$1.5bn a year for more than 30 years. In response to detailed questions from the Guardian, a representative for PanAust said the company “politely declines the opportunity to provide comment”. PanAust said in its environmental impact statement that the “nation-building project … presents broad commercial and socioeconomic development opportunities for Papua New Guinea”. The mine plan also includes a hydroelectric plant, power grid, and road, airport and seaport upgrades. PanAust said it had engaged in “extensive and ongoing engagement … over several decades” with those affected by the mine, running information sessions in nearly 140 villages attended by more than 18,000 people. “Local opinions and issues have been sought through engagement campaigns … formal and informal meetings with village leaders, and through socioeconomic surveys conducted in villages between 2010 and 2018.”A mass recall of brown sugar in New Zealand, prompted by fears of lead contamination, has left home bakers scrambling for alternatives in the lead up to the festive season, while global supply chain disruptions have caused gaps on the supermarket shelves. The country’s only sugar refinery, NZ Sugar Limited, was forced to make four recalls of its sugar products after low levels of lead were detected in some of its batches. Food Safety New Zealand is investigating the handling of the recall, after three incidents where recalled products ended up back on supermarket shelves. The company expects it will have sugar back in supply by Christmas, but until then home bakers are having to ditch some of their favourite recipes. Morven Walker describes herself as a passionate baker. She has been a regular volunteer for the not-for-profit Good Bitches Baking for three years. Finding brown sugar for her usual recipes is proving a problem. “It’s impossible, it’s just not there,” she said. “It makes a lot of what I’m usually known for – my go-to recipes – difficult.” That includes her Lazy Daisy cake, topped with a grilled icing made with butter and “lots of brown sugar”. Home-bakers are not the only ones affected. Some small bakeries and food-stall operators have informed their customers via social media they will halt production, until the sugar hits the shelves. Meanwhile, large bakeries are offering to portion out their bulk bags and sell small packs to those desperate for a sugar-fix. Brown sugar is not the only item shoppers are struggling to get, with reports of cocoa, prunes and, in another blow to Christmas baking, dried fruit being hard to find. New Zealand’s biggest supermarket chain, Countdown, said: “Global freight challenges have been going on for over eighteen months now, which has caused increased wait times and costs to get products to New Zealand. “We’ve done a lot of forward planning, and have brought in early shipments of most of our seasonal Christmas products, which are now ready in stores.” The only item it says it is having ongoing problems getting is cat food. Tava Olsen, the director of supply chain management at the University of Auckland, said trade was “congested and lumpy” at the moment, leading to random shortages of products and making it very hard to predict what shortages will arise. “There have been changes in supply. For example, China shutting down because of Covid outbreaks, LA being congested because of a shortage of truck drivers meaning they can’t unload the cargo. And then there’s the demand side issues, because people’s shopping habits have changed.” New Zealand’s location is also a disadvantage. “We are sort of at the end of it and we’re very small from a global volume perspective. So we’re often not high priority, and our own exporters can sometimes struggle to get products on ships going out,” Olsen said. New Zealanders could expect to see some easing of the supply chain disruption in the next six months, Olsen said, but also an increase in prices. “In terms of the customers experience, it will get better … because stores have been working hard to build their supply chains and ordering things in. Any importer in New Zealand has worked out these lead times are long and unpredictable. But it does add costs.”For Seoul-based graduate Lee Su-bin, the transition to a new lifestyle during the pandemic was no big deal. “At the university library, I would reserve my books online, which would then be sanitised in a book steriliser before being delivered to a locker for pick up,” the 25-year-old says. “Untact has made many aspects of life so convenient.” Introduced in 2020, “Untact” is a South Korean government policy that aims to spur economic growth by removing layers of human interaction from society. It gathered pace during the pandemic and is expanding rapidly across sectors from healthcare, to business and entertainment. The push to create contactless services is designed increase productivity and cut bureaucracy but has also fuelled concerns over the potential social consequences. Choi‬ Jong-ryul, a sociology professor at Keimyung University, says while there are advantages to developing an untact society, it also threatens social solidarity and may end up isolating individuals. “If more people lose the ‘feeling of contact’ due to lack of face-to-face interaction, society will encounter a fundamental crisis,” Choi says. From robots to the metaverse In everyday life, small changes brought about by untact are becoming increasingly noticeable. Robots brew coffee and bring beverages to tables in cafes. A robotic arm batters fries and chicken to perfection. At Yongin Severance Hospital, Keemi – a 5G-powered disinfection robot – sprays hand sanitiser, checks body temperature, polices social distancing, and even tells people off for not wearing masks. Unmanned or hybrid shops are flourishing. Mobile carrier LG Uplus recently opened several untact phone shops, where customers can compare models, sign contracts and receive the latest smartphones without ever having to deal with a real person. Civil services too are getting untact facelifts. Seoul City plans to build a “metaverse” – a virtual space where users can interact with digital representations of people and objects – and avatars of public officials will resolve complaints. Several local governments have launched AI call bots to monitor the health of those self-isolating. For Covid-19 patients receiving home treatment, a government app also monitors health and gives video access to a doctor. The world of K-pop has also stepped into the metaverse. Fans create avatars where they can “meet” their favourites like Blackpink in a virtual space and receive virtual autographs. Economic boost Untact in South Korea is more than a buzzword: it represents a potential economic engine for the country. “Untact companies have shown greater growth effects than face-to-face companies in attracting investment and creating jobs,” South Korea’s small business and startups minister Kwon Chil-seung told the Guardian, noting that 12 out of 15 Korean unicorn companies - private firms valued at US$1bn (£750m) or more - use non-face-to-face methods in their primary business. “South Korea has a very strong (communications) infrastructure in the country and many industries based on that infrastructure,” he says, adding that untact is part of a growing global trend that has accelerated in light of the pandemic. His ministry is so serious about the policy that it is pumping 9tn won ($7.6bn) into an “untact growth fund” to find and support 1,200 untact startups by 2025. Many have welcomed the shift. The Seoul Institute found that 80% of residents in the capital who had engaged in non-face-to-face activities said they would continue doing so after the pandemic subsided. Sociologist Choi‬ Jong-ryul says untact provided some advantages - including allowing anonymity through electronic devices, freeing people from the pressures of formality and reducing emotional labour associated with the service industry. The latter problem is particularly acute in South Korea, where customer service is highly valued, hierarchical structures persist, and abusive behaviour by those in positions of power, known as ‘gapjil’, is commonplace. But concerns over feelings of loneliness and social fragmentation remain. The country recently announced plans to invest almost 30bn won ($25.4m) to research a digital treatment platform for depression, a project kickstarted as a result of not having human contact due to the pandemic. Loneliness among elderly people – an existing problem in South Korea only exacerbated by the pandemic - is also receiving the untact treatment. SK Telecom’s AI Care service is among several being deployed across the country that allows seniors living alone to interact with an AI speaker by asking it to play music, have a simple conversation, perform quizzes, or even call for help in an emergency. The system has reportedly reduced loneliness among users, and even been credited with saving lives by the country’s president. “These technologies are not replacing humans. It’s about coexisting with humans,” says SK Telecom spokesperson Irene Kim. ‘Social solidarity’ Lee Su-bin says while she was comfortable using untact technologies such as unmanned shops, she had concern for others who may “have trouble using them”. “I had to help a grandfather at an automatic kiosk the other day to order his meal,” she says. Kwon acknowledges challenges exist regarding those who might be left behind by the sudden digital transformation brought about by untact, and that his government needs to implement policies and regulations to “strike a balance.” The long-term impact of untact on society remains unclear, but Prof Choi believes an untact future is inevitable to increase economic efficiency. “The key is understanding the social and ethical implications of an untact society and finding ways to maintain social solidarity.”An editorial in a Chinese state-run news website has suggested Communist party members are obliged to have three children for the good of the country, as Beijing seeks to address plummeting birthrates. The editorial, which was first published last month, went viral this week and drew sharp reaction from Chinese internet users, with millions of shares, views and comments. As the wave of reaction grew, the original article disappeared from the website. The piece, published by a state media outlet called China Reports Network, said every member of the ruling party – of which there are about 95 million – “should shoulder the responsibility and obligation of the country’s population growth and act on the three-child policy”. “No party member should use any excuse, objective or personal, to not marry or have children, nor can they use any excuse to have only one or two children,” it said. The post appears to have been deleted but screenshots have been widely shared, and associated hashtags reportedly viewed millions of times. China is facing a demographic crisis with an ageing population and declining birthrates. More than 18% of the population is aged over 60, according to the 2020 census. Figures released by the country’s national bureau of statistics in November showed there were 8.5 births per 1,000 people in 2020, the first time in decades that the figure has fallen below 10. In 1978, the figure was more than 18 per 1,000. The CCP has implemented a range of measures in response, including relaxing long-held limits on having children, easing the costs associated with education and child rearing, subsidies for second and third children, and introducing mandatory “cooling off” periods for divorces, but they have had limited impact. The one-child policy was formally ended in 2016, and replaced by a two-child limit on most Chinese couples, until this year when it was lifted again to three. However young Chinese people continue to say the high cost of living and pressures of long working hours are obstacles to having children. “Although the three-child policy has come out, many people don’t have the conditions, ability, money, or time to take care of children, especially for women, who have to go home early, and this will make more companies not want to hire women!” said one commenter on Weibo, China’s Twitter-like platform. “Shouldn’t society be balanced in development? When does it become a mandatory rule to have three children?” Another said: “I‘m just an ordinary person. My time, energy and money only allow me to raise a child in the future. Most party members are also ordinary people.” Some warned that the editorial’s message could harm people’s faith in the party. “‘Party members take the lead’ has always been our party’s fine tradition, which has withstood many tests of history,” said one commenter. “The impact of this bad public opinion, like other public opinions, could easily change from accusations against the China Reports Network to resistance to the three-child policy and shaken trust in the government.”Peter Dutton says buying up to 40 Black Hawk helicopters from the US sends “a very clear message to our partners and to our adversaries” that the Australian Defence Force “can make a significant contribution when we’re called on”. The Australian defence minister explicitly referenced the “growing threat” posed by China as he announced an intention to dump the trouble-plagued MRH90 Taipan helicopters, which were originally due to be withdrawn in 2037. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Labor reacted to the decision by branding the Morrison government as “the worst national security government in our country’s history” and defence procurement as “an absolute mess”. Australia bought 47 of the Taipans as a replacement for the Black Hawk and Sea King helicopter fleets, but the multi-billion-dollar Howard government-era acquisition has been listed as a “project of concern” since 2011. The entire fleet was grounded in 2019 amid serious concerns about the tail rotor blades and 27 aircraft were grounded last year to fix cabin sliding door rails. Friday’s announcement marks the second major project scrapping on Dutton’s watch, after plans for French-designed conventional submarines were axed in September, although a major difference is that these helicopters are already in service. The helicopters are used by the army – including to provide support to special operations – while the navy also relies on them for maritime support. The Australian government has now formally requested advice from the US on the acquisition of up to 40 UH-60 Black Hawk helicopters for the Australian army “as an alternative platform to the MRH90 Taipan”. Dutton said the Taipans had been found to be “unreliable” and the government would buy up to 40 Black Hawk helicopters. He hoped the new ones would be in service “over the next couple of years”, adding they would not be built or designed in Australia because it was important to “achieve capability sooner than later”. Dutton – who was recently accused of ramping up national security rhetoric for political purposes as a federal election looms – said Australia could only deter “catastrophic outcomes” from “a position of strength”. “I’ve been very clear about what I see as a growing threat within the Indo-Pacific, and I want the Australian Defence Force to have at its disposal the most effective equipment and the most highly trained people to deal with that reality,” Dutton said. Dutton said Japan, India, European countries and Nato were also “worried about the military buildup by the Chinese government”. The defence minister said last month it would be “inconceivable” that Australia wouldn’t come to Taiwan’s aid if the US joined a military effort to defend the democratically governed island against an invasion by China. That prompted a top Chinese diplomat to warn Australian politicians against “doing anything that’s destructive to our relationship”. China has sought to portray the Aukus deal – in which the US and the UK plan to help Australia acquire at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines to be operational from about 2040 – as an “Anglo-Saxon clique”. In another sign of Australia drawing closer to the US, Dutton acknowledged the Black Hawk was “interoperable with our counterparts and with our allies” and was “the favoured platform in the United States”. Dutton, a significant conservative figure in government ranks who has signalled interest in leading the Liberal party when Scott Morrison retires, foreshadowed that the government would announce “many other” defence-related decisions “in the coming months”. Morrison noted the helicopter decision was made by the cabinet’s entire national security committee, of which Dutton is a member. “The Taipans weren’t meeting their marks – simple as that,” the prime minister said at a media conference in Sydney. “That’s a decision that we’ve taken together as a national security committee to ensure that we’re keeping Australians safe.” Labor’s deputy leader, Richard Marles, told reporters: “Defence procurement is an absolute mess and they have been in power now for eight years – it is on them.” In a statement, Labor frontbenchers Brendan O’Connor and Pat Conroy said: “Under the Morrison-Joyce government, 25 major defence projects are running cumulatively 68 years late, meaning ADF personnel are not getting the equipment and platforms they need to do their jobs.” Dutton played down the costs of abandoning the Taipans early, saying, “we will see savings of about two and a half billion dollars” between now and 2037 “because the Black Hawk is so much cheaper on a per hour basis to run”. The defence department has previously estimated the total cost of the MRH90 Taipan program would be $15bn by the time the helicopters were due to be withdrawn from service in 2037, including $3.7bn for the purchase and $11.3bn to sustain them. In October last year, defence officials conceded the door was not wide enough to enable the safe exit of personnel from the helicopter while it was firing. The Australian National Audit Office previously found “significant implications” from the Howard government’s decision in 2004 to approve the acquisition of the MRH90 aircraft, instead of the initial defence department recommendation for Black Hawks.A man attacked by a pack of otters in a Singapore park has said that he thought he was going to die during the ordeal. Graham George Spencer, a British citizen living in Singapore, said he was chased, pinned down and bitten “26 times in 10 seconds” by a family of otters while out for an early morning walk in the botanic gardens. Spencer told The Straits Times he was approaching the gardens’ entrance on 30 November when he spotted about 20 otters crossing a path in front of him. The animals were moving quietly but “went crazy” after another man ran towards them, Spencer told the paper. The runner was able to avoid the animals but Spencer was not as lucky. He said they lunged at him, biting his ankles, legs and buttocks and causing him to fall over. “I actually thought I was going to die – they were going to kill me,” he added. Spencer’s friend, who was about “15 paces” away from him, ran up screaming in a bid to scare away the otters. “I was bitten 26 times in 10 seconds. If it wasn’t for my friend, I don’t think I’d still be here. I’d be dead,” he told local outlet Today. The pair said they ran towards a visitor centre, still pursued by the otters. After staff at the centre treated some of the wounds, Spencer took himself to nearby Gleneagles hospital where he was given tetanus shots and oral antibiotics. He said he has returned to the hospital three times to treat his wounds. The attack has cost about $1,200 in medical bills. After speaking with a representative from the Singapore Botanic Gardens, Spencer said he was told authorities were investigating the incident. The island is believed to be home to 10 families of otters, or about 90 in total. Driven away by pollution in the 1970s, they have returned as the country’s waterways have been cleaned up in recent years. The Washington Post reports the animals are common sights in hospital lobbies and condominium pools, and have even been seen drinking from public fountains. Although river otters appears benign, the animals have been known to attack people in the past. In May, a 77-year-old man reportedly was bitten on the leg by an otter while exercising near Kallang River in Singapore. Residents of Anchorage, Alaska, were confronted by a pack of aggressive otters in September. A spate of reported incidents saw the group attack dogs, children and adults near creeks, rivers and lakes in the area. Bernard Seah, a member of OtterWatch and the Otter Working Group that track otters in the area surrounding the Singapore Botanic Gardens, said that the family of otters, named the “Zouk family”, were regular visitors to the Gardens and may have bitten Spencer fearing danger. “Given that it was early morning, it may have been dark and confusing for the otters and (Spencer) may have just been a victim of circumstance,” he told the Straits Times. Singapore’s national parks board has issued an advisory on what to do during an encounter with an otter. “DO NOT touch, chase or corner the otters. Observe them from a distance. Going too close to the otters may frighten them,” it says.Khurram Parvez was a teenager when his grandfather, a civilian, was gunned down by the Indian army. Growing up in Kashmir in the 1990s, he became wearily familiar with such violence but it was an incident he would never forget. Over the next three decades, Parvez defended human rights and documented the alleged violence, torture and enforced disappearances of Kashmiris by Indian armed forces. After he lost a leg in a landmine explosion in 2004, he was instrumental in getting rebel groups to agree to a landmine ban. It was work that won him international accolades. But last month, in the early hours, the 44-year-old was arrested at his home by India’s National Investigation Agency (NIA), the central bureau which investigates terrorism cases, and taken to jail accused of “terror-funding”. It is the latest case to trigger accusations that dissent is being stifled under the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), led by the prime minister, Narendra Modi. But under the shadow of Parvez’s arrest, Modi is one of the world leaders taking part in US president Joe Biden’s Summit for Democracy, which began on Thursday. The Indian prime minister is expected to take a “prominent role”, including giving an address about “democracy commitments”. The law under which Parvez was detained, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA), stands accused of being unconstitutional and undemocratic. UAPA, ostensibly a terrorism prevention law, has instead routinely been used by the Modi government to detain those deemed critical of the government, from lawyers and activists to journalists, priests, poets, academics, civil society members, and Kashmiri civilians. The use of the law before Modi’s government came to power in 2014 was negligible. But between 2014 and 2020, 10,552 people were arrested under UAPA. For those held under the law, it is notoriously difficult to be granted bail, meaning those accused can be left in pre-trial detention for years. In one of the most stark cases, Father Stan Swamy, an 84-year-old Jesuit priest with Parkinson’s disease who was detained for allegedly supporting anti-national activity, died in jail this year after being repeatedly refused bail even on health grounds. In another case, a journalist, Siddique Kappan, has been held under the law for more than a year without bail after being arrested while reporting. Last weekend, Parvez was denied bail and sent to Tihar prison in Delhi after 12 days of custody. Use of the law has risen steeply since 2019 when the government gave authorities the power to designate an individual as a “terrorist”. Last month, when communal violence erupted in the Indian state of Tripura, it was used against lawyers who tried to investigate the attacks, journalists who reported on the destruction of mosques and more than 150 journalists and civilians who tweeted about the incidents. In November, a case was taken to the supreme court challenging the constitutional validity of the law, pointing out that only 2% of UAPA arrests end in conviction, and arguing that “prosecution under the UAPA is either initiated in bad faith, or the quality of the evidence is not sufficient”. “The entire problem with UAPA is the vague definition of unlawful activity,” said Salih Pirzada, a Kashmir-based lawyer. “Anything you do by your actions, words, spoken or otherwise – or even if you only intend or think of doing something – the authorities can bring that under the definition of Unlawful Activities.” The deployment of UAPA has been particularly apparent in Kashmir, a region that has been disputed between India and Pakistan since Indian independence. Kashmir has been home to a long-running violent insurgency fighting Indian rule and as a result has become the world’s most heavily militarised zone. But in August 2019, the BJP government revoked the autonomy that Kashmir previously had for 70 years, and brought it fully under control of the central government. A severe military crackdown on the region followed, which has sharply escalated in recent months. A father who demanded the body of his son who was killed by Indian forces, the players of a cricket match which was organised in memory of a slain militant, and Kashmiris who supported Pakistan in an India-Pakistan cricket match have all had police cases filed against them under UAPA. The arrest of Parvez drew international condemnation. Mary Lawlor, the UN special rapporteur on human rights defenders, tweeted: “He’s not a terrorist, he is a human rights defender.” It also led to calls for UAPA to be amended and brought in line with international human rights law. Human Rights Watch said authorities were “increasingly using the counter-terrorism law against activists, journalists, peaceful protesters and critics to silence dissent”. The UN Office of the High Commissioner (OHCHR) said the law raised “serious concerns relating to the right of presumption of innocence along with other due process and fair trial rights”. India’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Arindam Bagchi, accused the OHCHR of making “baseless and unfounded allegations” and stating that Parvez’s arrest “was done entirely as per provisions of law”. “National security legislations, like the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA), were enacted by the parliament to protect the sovereignty of India and ensure security of its citizens,” Bagchi said. It is not the first time Parvez has been targeted. His organisation, Jammu Kashmir Coalition of Civil Society (JKCCS), has investigated systematic torture, allegations of rape of civilians by Indian officers, staged gunfights and mass graves, and fought legal battles for victims in Kashmir, making him a thorn in the side of the Indian forces for decades, and in 2016 he was arrested and held for 76 days, until a judge declared his detention illegal and arbitrary. Parvez Imroz, a colleague of Khurram Parvez at JKCCS, said the aim of the arrest was to intimidate. Imroz is now the only member left running the organisation. Their office was first raided by authorities in October 2020, which Imroz believes was the first attempt to harass them. “The purpose was to stop us from doing our work,” he said. “No volunteers are coming here to work due to fear. We used to receive the victims here. But everyone is afraid.”Sir Anthony van Dyck’s Portrait of a Woman, JMW Turner’s Walton Bridge and LS Lowry’s painting of David Lloyd George’s birthplace in Manchester are among the dozens of items of cultural importance saved for the nation this year. Thanks to Art Council England’s cultural gifts and acceptance in lieu schemes, the paintings, archives and other items worth £52m have been accepted for the nation and allocated to museums across the UK. Turner’s watercolour (1825-8), part of one the artist’s most ambitious projects documenting the landscapes of England and Wales, has been permanently allocated to the Ashmolean Museum. It features a shepherd taking his flock of sheep down into the River Thames, a girl carrying pails of water under a yoke and a boy fishing. Flemish baroque artist Van Dyck’s oil painting Portrait of a Woman (1621-27), which was the product of his trips to Italy, and which had a strong impact on Scottish painting of the period, has been allocated to Kelvingrove Art Gallery. The lady, possibly Marchesa Lomellini, is seated in a gold embroidered black dress. Lowry’s painting of Lloyd George’s birthplace, meanwhile, strikes a contrast with the crowded industrial scenes for which the artist is better known. The painting of a solitary house, with half-drawn curtains revealing a vase of dead flowers, is interpreted as conveying the loneliness and isolation the artist felt during his life time. It has been permanently allocated to the Lowry in Salford. Now in its eighth year, the cultural gifts scheme (CGS) enables UK taxpayers to donate important cultural objects to the nation in return for a percentage reduction in tax based on the value of the item donated. This year, this included the sketchbooks of the Mary Fedden, which have been permanently allocated to the Tate, a fine bronze inkstand by Peter Vischer the Younger, which now resides at the Ashmolean Museum, and two intricate collages by the artist John Bingley Garland, known as the Blood Collages, at the Fitzwilliam Museum. A large sculpture by British contemporary artist Phyllida Barlow has also been allocated to Leeds Art Gallery and the Hepworth Wakefield. The acceptance in lieu scheme (AIL) allows those who have an inheritance tax bill to pay it by transferring important cultural, scientific or historic objects to the nation. The scheme was created in Lloyd George’s people’s budget of 1910 and is now administered by Arts Council England, dispersing gifts to galleries across the UK. Highlights include the late Stephen Hawking’s archive and office, which have been allocated to Cambridge University library and the Science Museum respectively, James Tissot’s Quiet, a striking portrait of his lover and muse Kathleen Newton, now housed at National Museums NI Ulster Museum, and a watercolour, Girl with Butterflies, by Frances MacDonald Macnair, an important member of the Glasgow School, which is now at the Hunterian Museum and Gallery. The archive of award-winning illustrator and children’s book author Pat Hutchins now resides at Seven Stories, an exceptional collection of British pop and figurative art formed by celebrated architects MJ Long and Colin “Sandy” St John Wilson is at Pallant House Gallery, and a group portrait of Catherine de’ Medici with her children by the workshop of Francois Clouet has been allocated to Strawberry Hill Collection Trust. Sir Nicholas Serota, chair of Arts Council England, said the schemes played a vital role in ensuring that communities across the nation can enjoy cultural treasures close to where they live. “During these years, a diverse array of unusual and exceptional items have entered public collections throughout the UK, offering lasting inspiration to all for years to come.” Of the items allocated, 70% were acquired by institutions outside London, and more than 80% of the total tax settled was accounted for by objects that have been allocated outside London. Arts minister Lord Parkinson of Whitley Bay said it was “wonderful that so many fascinating works have been acquired through the scheme and I’m delighted that the vast majority have gone to institutions outside of London, benefiting museums, galleries and people across the country”.A woman has died after being swept away in flood waters in the Snowy Monaro region in New South Wales, as severe thunderstorms hit Sydney. Police said the 37-year-old woman’s body was found on Friday morning, after emergency services were called to Tuross following reports two vehicle occupants, a man and a woman, were trapped by flood waters. Authorities were told the woman disembarked from the car before being swept away, just after 2.20am on Friday morning. A body was recovered downstream by NSW State Emergency Services. She is yet to be formally identified, although police believe it to be that of the 37-year-old woman. The man was found a short distance from the car, and did not require medical treatment. NSW Police say inquiries into the incident are ongoing. The Bureau of Meteorology issued severe thunderstorm warnings for the Sydney metropolitan area and for parts of the Illawarra on Friday morning, with heavy rainfall triggering flash flooding. Although the Bureau said the storms had somewhat eased by midday, they warned they could redevelop in the afternoon. The Macarthur region has been heavily hit, with Kentlyn recording 48mm of rain in one hour on Friday morning. In the 24 hours to 9am on Friday, Moruya recorded 209mm, Lake Conjola 204mm and Fisherman’s Repeater 156mm. The Bureau is reporting that Audley, part of the Royal national park in Sydney’s south, recorded 30mm of rain in 30 minutes on Friday morning. Agata Imielska, manager of the ACT and NSW Bureau of Meteorology said the region can expect some relief. “The good news is this low pressure system will continue to move offshore, and as it keeps moving, it will mean we’ll see an easing trend, and a clearing one as well.” “Broadly, moving into the weekend, we’ll see much drier conditions across the state.” The Bureau is not forecasting any rain for NSW up to Thursday next week, a welcome respite after weeks of storms and heavy rainfall. But flood warnings remain in place as rivers could rise “along the Queanbeyan and St Georges Basin and some adjacent catchments.” The Bureau also warns of potential flooding in the Illawarra, Bega and Moruya catchments. Queensland facing more severe storms Northern and eastern Queensland are forecast to face severe storms bringing heavy rain and flash flooding, after 70mm of rain was dumped across Brisbane on Thursday. The Bureau expects similar storms in the Sunshine coast, Capricornia, Wide Bay and Burnett districts, with a trough through the region helping the thunderstorms develop. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It comes after major flooding hit the south of the state, at the Dawson, Weir, Condamine and Balonne Rivers and Wallam Creek, with the flooding forecast to continue. A woman died in flood waters on Thursday night, after her car was swept from a Brisbane Hungry Jack’s drive-through. Police and emergency services located the car at about 11.15pm on Thursday night, with a 52-year-old man able to be pulled from the vehicle, but his female passenger was unable to escape. She was found deceased in the car. “As they were exiting the drive-through to go back on to Gympie Road, that part of that road was underwater so they’ve driven into the flood water and the force of the flood water has swept them into the creek,” Queensland Police Sergeant Mark Jones said. The incident came after a 75-year-old woman died after her car was washed away in Brisbane’s west, amid extensive flooding across the city’s west and north. Emergency services recovered the woman’s body from the car about 4.40pm on Thursday afternoon. She was the only occupant of the vehicle. Isolated thunderstorms are expected to continue into the weekend, eventually contracting around the north, with rain expected to ease in the states south.Australia’s competition and consumer watchdog has taken Booktopia to court over alleged false or misleading claims made to customers over their rights to refunds for damaged and digital products. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) launched proceedings in the federal court against the country’s largest online book retailer over claims allegedly made on the Booktopia website between 10 January 2020 and 2 November 2021 that customers had to notify Booktopia within two days of delivery of a faulty, damaged or incorrect product in order to be able to get a refund or other replacement options. The company also allegedly told customers there were no refund rights on products such as digital content and ebooks in any circumstances. The ACCC has alleged the company also told 19 customers it was not obliged to provide a refund or remedy because the company was not notified about a fault with the delivery within two days of the delivery. The ACCC says those claims are false and misleading because Australian consumer law gives customers a right to obtain a refund or remedy if they don’t meet consumer guarantees, and there is no two-day expiration date. “Consumers who buy digital products or buy products online have the same rights as those who shop in physical stores,” the ACCC chair, Rod Sims, said in a statement. “Australian consumers have a right to refund, repair or replacement for goods that do not meet their consumer guarantee rights, which apply for a reasonable period, and no business can exclude, limit or modify those rights.” Sims said the ACCC was acting on the complaints made from Booktopia customers who claim they were denied a refund because they contacted Booktopia more than two days after delivery. “Consumers are not limited to a two-day period in which to notify a seller of problems with the product they have purchased,” he said. “Booktopia’s conduct may have caused consumers not to seek a refund, replacement or repair for faulty digital products, books and other goods in circumstances where the Australian consumer law gave them a right to do so.” The ACCC will be seeking a ruling from the court on penalties, declarations and costs. A spokesperson for Booktopia said the company was still reviewing the ACCC’s statements and filings. In a statement to the Australian Stock Exchange earlier this week, Booktopia said the statements were “to ensure that we could confidently provide replacements, refunds and other remedies to customers” and it wasn’t intended to limit Booktopia’s obligations under consumer law. The company’s website now states that for returns on damaged or faulty items, customers should contact Booktopia “as soon as possible” from the time delivery was made. It is not the first court action the competition regulator has launched against companies over consumer rights when it comes to digital products. The federal court ordered Sony Interactive Entertainment to pay $3.5m in penalties over claiming it did not have to provide refunds for games once downloaded, or if 14 days had passed. The full federal court also ordered Valve to pay $3m in 2018 over claims that users were not entitled to refunds on games bought on its Steam games platform.He stumbles badly, right down on to one knee, lurching me forward on to his shoulder. Will we fall? A tangled mess of limbs and hooves? He rights himself just in time. We’re OK. It was just a trip. The early winter air is in our lungs, and soon his stiff joints will loosen. He has various ailments that come with being an elderly horse, and ours has been a long partnership of more than 23 years. I know that each ride could be the last. We amble. Ears pricked forward, mane scruffy. The sky belongs to birds today. A small murmuration of starlings scuds by, then a flock of wood pigeons, surprisingly fast and agile. The noisiest of all are the jackdaws. They are everywhere. The trees are full of them, chack, chack, chacking that hard, pinging call. Hopping from branch to branch or swooping in and out of the oak’s boughs, but always chatting and disagreeing. They live up to their collective noun: a clattering of jackdaws. On the pastures, they strut in pairs, turning over horse droppings in search of invertebrates. Jackdaws pair for life and normally stay close by each other, so it’s easy to identify the couples. One bird bounces along comically, every jump taking it inches clear of the ground. The low sunshine highlights the iridescence of its feathers, the silvery nape, and the piercing Paul Hollywood eyes. Over Chestnut Wood, a mixed flock of jackdaws and rooks flies high, taking on a different character. No longer chatty and cheeky, but mysterious and mesmerising, the group performs a rising and falling corkscrew movement. A loose vortex of birds. Occasionally, an individual breaks free of the group and plummets into a sudden dive. It’s possibly part of courtship for young jackdaws pairing up during their first autumn, or maybe just exuberance. Two decades have vanished from my horse, shaken off like cobwebs, and he is not stumbling but jogging and prancing. Sweat rises from his neck and I take my attention away from the skies and the birds, back to the art and science of not falling off. It does us both good to get out, and as the challenges of winter approach, I plan our next ride. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNicaragua has switched diplomatic allegiance to China, leaving Taiwan with just 14 governments around the world that formally recognise it as a country. The announcement by the Central American country’s foreign ministry also recognised Beijing’s claim over Taiwan as a Chinese province, a dispute that is at the heart of escalating tensions in the region. “The government of the Republic of Nicaragua today breaks diplomatic relations with Taiwan and ceases to have any contact or official relationship,” said the statement issued in Spanish and English. “The People’s Republic of China is the only legitimate government that represents all of China, and Taiwan is an inalienable part of the Chinese territory.” The announcement came after a meeting in Tianjin between China’s deputy foreign minister Ma Zhaoxu and a Nicaraguan delegation led by President Daniel Ortega’s son Laureano Ortega Murillo, who is the presidential adviser for investments, trade and international cooperation. The Taiwan government expressed “heartfelt pain and regret” over Nicaragua’s decision and accused the Ortega-led government of disregarding a “longstanding and close friendship” between the two peoples. “Taiwan has always been a sincere and reliable friend to Nicaragua and has long worked with Nicaragua to improve the livelihoods of its people and assist with its national development,” it said, adding that it would immediately terminate relations from its side and recall all diplomatic staff “to safeguard national sovereignty and dignity”. President Tsai Ing-wen dismissed Nicaragua’s rebuff, saying: “The more international support we have, there will be more pressure from the authoritarian camp.” The Kuomintang opposition condemned Nicaragua’s move, and expressed “regret” that Beijing “continuously sought to suppress our country’s international presence”. Zhang Jun, China’s ambassador to the UN, welcomed Nicaragua’s move, saying it was “in line with the prevailing trend of the time and people’s aspiration”. China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, said those still recognising Taiwan were doing so because of dollar diplomacy and pressure from the US. “The US has adopted outside standards on this issue,” Wang said. “The US itself established diplomatic relations with China some 40 years ago. What right do they have in preventing other sovereign countries from making their own choices?” After Taiwan (formally the Republic of China) was expelled from the United Nations in 1971 and the seat was transferred to the People’s Republic of China, most governments switched their bilateral ties, many under intensive lobbying by Beijing, which is hypersensitive to any alluded or actual recognition of Taiwan. Taiwan and China have often traded accusations of using financial incentives such as loans and infrastructure investment in seeking to retain or gain formal allies. The most recent transfers of recognition from Taipei to Beijing were by Solomon Islands and Kiribati, in September 2019. That decision has at least in part driven recent unrest in Solomon Islands. El Salvador and the Dominican Republic switched in 2018, and Panama in 2017, after which it received waves of Chinese investment. This year Beijing was accused of offering Paraguay Covid-19 vaccines in return for switching recognition, which Beijing denied. Nicaragua had previously cut its 55-year-long ties with Taiwan in 1985 before re-recognising it in 1990. Now just 14 governments, primarily in the Pacific and Latin American regions, maintain formal ties with Taiwan. After Nicaragua, many eyes are now on Honduras and its newly elected president, Xiomara Castro. Not all those who recognise Beijing also recognise its claim over Taiwan. The Chinese Communist party says Taiwan is a Chinese province that will be taken by force if necessary, and that its leaders are separatists. Taiwan’s democratically elected government says it is already a sovereign nation with no need to declare independence. Nicaragua’s switch comes at a time of deteriorating relations with the US, which is one of Taiwan’s strongest allies despite not formally recognising it. Ned Price, a US state department spokesperson, criticised the decision by the Ortega government, which he said had no mandate after a “sham election” in November. “Without the mandate that comes with a free and fair election, Ortega’s actions cannot reflect the will of the Nicaraguan people, who continue to struggle for democracy and the ability to exercise their human rights and fundamental freedoms,” he said. He urged democratic countries around the world to “expand engagement with Taiwan”. China recently took diplomatic and trade action against Lithuania after its government agreed to open mutual diplomatic stations with Taiwan, which included “Taiwan” in the office name. This week the US invited Taiwan delegates, but none from China, to a democracy-themed summit, prompting days of Chinese state media outrage and government propaganda declaring China was a superior democracy. Additional research by Xiaoqian ZhuThe US is determined to walk Bosnia “back from the cliff” amid secessionist threats from Serb nationalists and is exploring sanctions among other options, a senior state department official has said. Derek Chollet, a senior adviser to secretary of state Antony Blinken, was speaking ahead of a meeting on Friday of the Bosnian Serb assembly, which is expected to vote on whether to begin the process of opting out of the Bosnian army, judiciary and tax system. Such steps, called for by the nationalist leader Milorad Dodik, would represent a substantial step towards secession. There is likely to be a six-month delay before the assembly’s decisions take effect, but a vote could start a clock ticking towards a possible return to conflict. Chollet, whose formal title is state department counsellor, visited Bosnia last month as part of a diplomatic offensive by the Biden administration to address long festering problems and threats by Dodik to reconstitute a Serb armed force. “We have really tried to accelerate some of our diplomatic efforts to try to walk this back from the cliff,” Chollet told the Guardian. “It’s notable that we are 26 years almost to the day since the Dayton peace accords were signed and there’s talk of potential return to conflict or a major crisis with Bosnia-Herzegovina, which is deeply concerning to us.” During the war, the Bosnian Serb army carried out widespread ethnic cleansing, a nearly four-year siege of Sarajevo, and the destruction of the UN “safe haven” of Srebrenica. About 100,000 people were killed in the conflict. Chollet said he had handed over a letter from Blinken to Bosnia’s leaders, stressing that peace in Bosnia was a priority for the administration. “This is an issue that many people in this administration from President Biden on down have a long association with and feel very strongly about personally,” he said. As a senator, Biden supported US military assistance to Bosnia’s Muslim-led government, Blinken was on the national security council staff when the US intervened militarily, and Samantha Power, now the head of the US Agency for International Development, was a journalist in Sarajevo during the war. Chollet was an aide to the US envoy, Richard Holbrooke, and wrote a book on the Dayton negotiations. The second theme of Blinken’s letter was the threat of sanctions against political leaders who threaten the post-Dayton peace. Dodik, the main target of that threat, has declared he does not “give a shit” about sanctions, but Chollet believes they can have an impact. “I think we’ve seen some evidence that the leverage we have, that includes policies like sanctions, can be effective and trying to shape behaviour,” he said. As for the possibility of reinforcing the international military presence in Bosnia, now just a few hundred EU troops, Chollet said he did not want “to get ahead of our discussions” but added “we are exploring all options”. Diplomats who have recently visited Banja Luka, the largest town in the Republika Srpska (Serb Republic), said there was uneasiness among the business interests around Dodik about the impact of US punitive measures. Jelena Subotić, a political science professor at Georgia State University, said Dodik also had to contend with war weariness among Serb voters. “I think we should take Dodik’s secessionist threat very seriously. He has been signalling his objectives for a number of years so this did not come out of thin air,” Subotić said. “A much bigger question is if the people of Republika Srpska will follow. It is one thing to engage in nationalist rhetoric, it is another to actually pick up arms.” During the Trump administration, both the US and the EU floated the idea of ethnically based land swaps involving territory in Bosnia and Kosovo as a means of resolving regional grievances, but Chollet insisted “that’s not where we’ve been focusing on at all”.Masses of ocean plastic are providing artificial habitat for otherwise coastal species, according to a new study published in the peer-reviewed journal, Nature Communications. The study’s authors observed floating water bottles, old toothbrushes and matted fishing nets. The possibility exists that species may be evolving to better adapt to life on plastic. A decade ago, marine researchers believed coastal organisms, which evolved to live along sheltered shorelines, could not survive a trip across the inhospitable open ocean. Yet Japan’s 2011 tsunami, which sent some 300 species of Asian marine life riding durable and buoyant plastic garbage onto North American shores, disproved that assumption. Now, researchers have a term for these drifters: “neopelagic communities”, seafaring colonies of anemones, brittle stars, shrimp, barnacles and more, which are thriving on plastic in the Great Pacific Garbage Patch and washing up wherever the currents take them. Ocean plastic is “creating opportunities for coastal species’ biogeography to greatly expand beyond what we previously thought was possible”, Linsey Haram, a research associate at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center and coauthor of the study, said in a release. The concept of organism-encrusted plastic may sound like the story of ocean species triumphing in spite of human folly. But that’s not quite the case, explains Juan José Alava, PhD, an expert in marine ecotoxicology and conservation at the University of British Columbia. In addition to transporting non-native species to delicate habitats where they may become invasive and destructive, neopelagic communities are “basically an ecological trap” says Alava. That’s because the sheer density of plastic in the ocean (researchers expect 600m metric tons of garbage will collect in the ocean by 2040) leads to the creation of permanent floating structures, covered in small species that attract creatures higher up the food chain, such as fish, turtles and mammals. When these creatures enter garbage gyres seeking shelter and food, they run a high risk of eating and/or becoming caught in plastic and dying. “For example, often the calves of whales, they are very curious – but that curiosity could lead them to get entangled and die,” says Alava. While scientists have found some types of bacteria are able to break down hydrocarbons in plastic, thereby cleaning up garbage, it’s unlikely that the types of filter-feeding invertebrates thriving in neopelagic communities will have any such effect. “The 2021 UN report after Cop26 was clear that the scale of rapidly increasing plastic pollution is putting the health of all the world’s oceans and seas at risk,” says Alava.The fate of one of the UK’s oldest and largest mutual insurers will be decided on Friday as LV= members cast their ballots on a controversial takeover by US private equity firm Bain Capital. The deal has played into a larger debate about the takeover of British companies by private equity and raised concerns among campaigners about the dwindling number of member-owned businesses in the UK. We take a look at the controversy surrounding the sale of the 178-year-old insurer formerly known as Liverpool Victoria, which was founded to cover burial costs for Liverpool’s poor. Why is LV=’s leadership recommending the Bain deal? LV=’s leadership insists that the £530m deal is in its members’ best interests and will secure much-need capital meant to help invest in technology and avoid being squeezed out by larger insurers. The firm said it was struggling to raise money due to restrictions on fundraising imposed on mutuals, linked to a cap on their debts. Why is the Bain takeover controversial? Members, campaigners and politicians are concerned that transferring power to an American private equity firm will put an emphasis on short-term profits, at the expense of customer service and returns for members. They are also concerned that private equity firms like Bain often insist on job losses or cost-cutting to achieve higher returns. The Association of Financial Mutuals has also alleged that there is a conflict of interest for the chief executive and chair of LV=, who have a duty to look after members’ interests but have an interest in continuing to work for the business after the Bain takeover. However, Bain has not published any details of its plans for executive pay, and LV= has said there are no contract discussions between leaders and the private equity house. What does it mean for the future of mutuals? If members vote in favour of the deal, it will mean losing one of the oldest and largest member-owned businesses in Britain. Few mutual giants remain in the UK, aside from supermarkets-to-funeral service Co-op Group and Nationwide Building Society. What were the other options? LV= said it had considered 12 offers in total after it put itself up for sale in summer 2020, including from Bain and from rival mutual Royal London. Royal London offered a higher bid of £540m, but LV= said the deal would not cover liabilities linked to the with-profits fund, and included “less certain” administration and investment costs. LV=’s board said it concluded that Bain’s bid offered greater value to members and would result in “greater and more certain pay-outs to members, on a more accelerated basis”. However, politicians and campaigners have claimed that the Royal London deal would have helped maintain LV=’s mutual status and allow it to remain British-owned. The Financial Conduct Authority said in October that it did not intend to block the takeover or plans to demutualise the firm, and refused to change its mind even when approached by lawyers working on behalf of two members on Thursday as part of an 11th-hour bid to put the brakes on the deal. What does the Bain deal mean for members? Bain Capital has insisted that LV= customers would “receive significant financial benefits” from the takeover and said last month that it was “committed to the long-term growth and success” of the business. However, the immediate financial benefits have been criticised. LV=’s 1.1 million members have been offered £100 each if they vote in favour of the deal, which some members have branded an “insult” and a meagre return for the loss of mutual status and the prospect of ownership by a private equity firm. Meanwhile, a further 271,000 “with-profits” members, who legally own LV=, will also share a further £101m between themselves. What will happen on Friday when members get to vote? LV=’s 1.1 million members will be asked to cast two ballots related to the takeover on Friday afternoon, following a special general meeting at 2pm that is closed to the public and reporters. The first vote will cover whether to approve the deal and will only require approval from 75% of members who show up to vote, with no quorum – meaning there is not a minimum threshold of members who are required to cast their ballot to ensure it is valid. The second – which will only take place if the first vote passes – will ask members to agree to scrap a rule requiring at least 50% of all its 1.1 million members to take part in any vote that could result in demutualising the business, and take power out of the hands of its members.Britain’s inactivity crisis requires a new minister for sport, health and wellbeing, a House of Lords committee has argued, with the Department of Culture, Media and Sport having presided over an “uncoordinated and fragmented” strategy that failed to deliver change. A new report by the Lords’ sport and recreation committee says that powers should be removed from the DCMS and transferred to the Department of Health and Social Care to combat growing levels of inactivity in England. It comes as Sport England’s Active Lives Children and Young People survey reports 94,000 fewer children were active in the academic year 2020-21 than before the Covid-19 pandemic. The committee says a new “national plan” for sport and physical activity should join up plans across government but that the importance of physical activity should also be put on a new footing. Among the recommendations are an obligation for councils to maintain leisure facilities and for PE to be made a core subject on the national curriculum. Schools should also be required to work with grassroots sports clubs and enable their facilities to be used across the week and outside school hours, the report says, while any reorganisation must come with greater funding from the Treasury. The authoritative Active Lives study for adults was released in October and recorded a headline decline of 700,000 fewer active people in 2020-21. A separate report into children and young people, published on Thursday, found numbers steady on the year before but with no bounce-back in activity from the initial impacts of the pandemic. Both reports found the greatest declines in activity to be among the most socially disadvantaged. “The pandemic has made abundantly clear the pressing need to get the country fitter and more active,” said Lord Willis, chair of the sport and recreation Committee. “However, participation in sport and recreation is flatlining. The Olympic legacy did not deliver the more active population we were promised, and the latest figures show activity levels have declined since the pandemic. Something needs to change and now is the time to do it. “To make the changes we need it is time for a new national plan for sport, health and wellbeing. That plan needs to be ambitious and coordinated, and carry the weight of the government and prime minister behind it. That cannot be delivered if it is led by DCMS, a small department with an increasing focus on its digital portfolio. That is why we are calling for responsibility for sport policy to move to the Department of Health and be driven by a new minister for sport, health and wellbeing.” The committee said that its members would now seek to make amendments to the government’s Health and Social Care act as it passed through the Lords, with the aim of facilitating their proposals. The government says it intends to act on a number of these concerns in an new strategy for sport which is set to be published in the next few months. In response to the committee’s report, a government spokesperson said: We know that the pandemic has had a significant impact on participation rates in grassroots sport, which is why we are working hard on how we can best increase activity levels through a new sport strategy and School Sport and Activity Action Plan. “We continue to urge everyone across the nation, particularly children and young people, to enjoy the benefits of getting active and aim for the Chief Medical Officer’s target of 60 mins a day for children and 150 minutes a week for adults.”Robert De Niro is the greatest actor of his generation. So claimed the headline in a popular magazine last year, and it’s not a controversial claim. The evidence offered for this opinion was the same that’s always wheeled out when discussing De Niro’s acting: “[He] took method acting to previously uncharted levels. He got a New York cab licence for Taxi Driver, learned Italian and lived in Sicily to prepare for The Godfather Part II, put on 60lbs to play Jake LaMotta in Raging Bull, learned Latin for True Confessions and the sax for New York, New York. He was the hardest-working man in Hollywood,” wrote the journalist. For decades, this has been the general feeling about actors: the more method, the better. After all, if they don’t eat raw bison and sleep in an animal carcass (Leonardo DiCaprio in The Revenant), stay in a wheelchair and be spoonfed by the crew (Daniel Day-Lewis in My Left Foot) or lose so much weight that they start to go blind (Matthew McConaughey in Dallas Buyers Club), they’re just playing make-believe. And why should they get all that fame, adoration and money just for that? All of the above actors were rewarded for their efforts with an Oscar, and actors talking about their method efforts has become as much a part of the run-up to the Oscars as shops playing Do They Know It’s Christmas in the run-up to the holidays. That’s the thing about going method: if you don’t talk about, no one off the film set knows you’ve done it, and what would be the point of that? Last month, Lady Gaga told Vogue that she stayed in character for a year and a half, and spoke with an Italian accent for nine months, all in service of playing her character, Patrizia Gucci, in the camp-fest House of Gucci. “It’s not an imitation, it’s a becoming,” she solemnly told the magazine. Unfortunately, all that “becoming” didn’t seem to leave her time to coordinate with the other actors about what an Italian accent is, as in the film they sound as if they come from entirely different countries. Yet talking about method acting has become a great exercise in marketing on the film circuit and Gaga is seen as a possible shoo-in for an Oscar nominations. So Jeremy Strong, who plays Kendall in HBO’s Succession, must be wondering where he went wrong. Fans of the show, which is now in its third season, have known for a while that Strong is an intense actor, one who goes “all-in” on his performances, as he has said in interviews; and the other cast members have hinted as much. Brian Cox references it in his new memoir, Putting the Rabbit in the Hat, with audibly gritted teeth. And until this week, that has worked in his favour: he won an Emmy last year and, given that his character on the show is such an intense outcast, the fact that Strong himself is so intense and so different from his co-stars made sense to the public. Until this week, when the worm turned. The New Yorker is no slouch when it comes to taking creativity seriously, so Strong must have assumed he was in safe hands when its staff writer Michael Schulman, whom he has known since 2003, turned up to profile him for the magazine. By the eighth paragraph of the article, he would have been firmly disabused of that notion. “Preening intensity” and “self-indulgent” are two descriptions that appear early on, followed by less than positive comments from his former and current co-stars: Cox describes Strong’s intensity as “a particularly American disease”, while Robert Downey Jr, not known for underplaying performances himself, says Strong “crosses the Rubicon”. The strongest comments come from his co-star Kieran Culkin, who told the journalist about Strong’s methods: “That might be something that helps him. I can tell you that it doesn’t help me.” The profile quickly went viral. Some people have defended Strong, including Jessica Chastain, who worked with him on Zero Dark Thirty and Molly’s Game, who described him as “lovely … Very inspiring and passionate about his work. The profile that came out was incredibly one-sided. Don’t believe everything you read, folks. Snark sells, but maybe it’s time we moved beyond it.” But in the main, there has been much cackling glee over the profile, a sense that the emperor’s method nudity has finally been exposed for what it is: pretentious, performative, narcissistic nonsense. “Going method” is now the catch-all term for an actor going to absurd lengths to embody a role, from Pacino pretending to be blind while making Scent of a Woman (at the end of the shoot, he allegedly wrote a note to his co-star, Chris O’Donnell: “Although I didn’t see you, I know you were great”), to Johnny Depp sleeping in Hunter S Thompson’s basement next to several barrels of gunpowder as preparation for playing Thompson in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. The original techniques were coined at the beginning of the 20th century by the Russian director and actor Konstantin Stanislavski, and refined in the US by the acting coaches Lee Strasberg, Stella Adler and Sanford Meisner at the Actors Studio, which stressed that actors should emotionally identify with their characters. It is the rare celebrated mid-century American actor who didn’t emerge from the Actors Studio, and so Cox is right to describe it as “a particularly American disease”. This led to what is probably the most famous anecdote about method acting. When making Marathon Man, Dustin Hoffman allegedly went without sleep in order to look and feel as exhausted as his character. “My dear boy,” his exasperated co-star, Laurence Olivier, said to him, “why don’t you just try acting?” Yet despite Olivier’s scorn, method-ish acting has held an especial fascination for actors, journalists and the public for decades and has become the, if not easiest, then at least the surest way for an actor to accrue respect. Forest Whitaker learned Swahili for Last King of Scotland; Nicolas Cage had four of his teeth pulled out for Birdy. (It is, by and very large, men who have been lauded for going method, partly, I suspect, because going method often involves weight gain and loss, which is a more complicated prospect for a female actor. But mainly, I suspect more strongly, because such extreme behaviours are much less tolerated from women in Hollywood than they are from men.) So where did Strong go wrong? He has never described himself as a method actor, and he doesn’t stay in character during a shoot. But he has said that he has “to believe in what he’s doing”, in other words, believe in the reality of his character. The anecdotes in the profile about depths of his commitment to a role are funny: asking Aaron Sorkin to spray him with teargas during the making of The Trial of the Chicago 7 (Sorkin declined); refusing to be in the makeup trailer with his Succession co-stars so as to better embody his character’s alienation from his family. But they’re no more silly than De Niro shaving down his teeth for Cape Fear, or Adrien Brody selling his apartment and car in order to get closer to his character, the Holocaust survivor Władysław Szpilman, in The Pianist. The profile implies that Strong is a “networker” who likes to “attach himself like a remora to famous actors”, although another way of looking at that is he’s an actor who works with other actors who sometimes like him, as in the case of Chastain. Extreme efforts at acting are only really funny when the results are bad, which is why the idea of Gaga shouting “bravo!” for nine months is so hilarious. But even Strong’s critics admit that he is very good at his job. So what’s the problem? I’m going to defend Strong here. I have even less time for pretentious actor bullshit than most, because a big part of my job is interviewing actors and, after more than 20 years of this, I have a zero-tolerance approach to actors talking about their job as though it’s a mystical artform demanding athletic levels of endurance. And seriously, what is the deal with “method acting”? Why not “method writing”, or “method interior designing”? If a novelist lived like his characters while writing a book, people would think he was insane – why laud it in actors? So when I interviewed Strong in September, my bullshit-o-meter was braced. But here’s the thing about Strong: he’s the real deal. I don’t mean he’s such a great actor, although I do think he is incredibly good, I mean he really believes this stuff. I had always assumed that method-y acting was either a performative show in an attempt to prove an actor’s depth or commitment, or frantic compensation for the actor’s inability to actually act. There is an implication in the New Yorker piece, I think, that Strong is overegging his process in order to be seen in the same lineage as his heroes, Pacino, Hoffman and, most of all, Day-Lewis. I’m not sure how you would prove someone is faking method-ish acting, any more than you could prove someone is thinking bad thoughts, but it’s impossible to spend time with Strong and not think he’s genuine. His intensity isn’t, it seemed to me, about ego; it’s about trying to be a better actor, and proof of that is that is – unlike every other method-y actor – he rarely talks about the lengths he goes to; all of those anecdotes come from those he worked with. His biggest mistake was probably being so intense on what is an ensemble show, and therefore impinging on the other actors. But De Niro surely wasn’t much fun to work with on The Godfather Part II, never mind Marlon Brando on The Godfather, and no one laughed at them. I’m not an actor, and I’ve never worked with Strong. But I can tell you, as someone who has interviewed a lot of actors, I’ve met much sillier and self-absorbed ones than him, all of whom were far worse at their job than him. Another mistake, perhaps, was agreeing to be profiled during the time of what can be roughly described as All This. It’s hard not to laugh at an actor who says, during a global pandemic, when it comes to acting, “the stakes are life and death. I take [Kendall] as seriously as I take my own life.” Actors who take themselves too seriously have never looked more absurd, especially since the start of the first lockdown, when a dozen or so of them earnestly sang Imagine to cheer up the little people. But only last month, Nicole Kidman said, as part of her publicity campaign, that she stayed in character for the whole shoot of the TV series Nine Perfect Strangers, which Strong has never said he does. So I’m not sure why what’s impressive in Kidman is laughable in Strong. Maybe there’s a feeling that Strong – unlike De Niro and Kidman – isn’t famous enough to get away with this nonsense. Maybe it’s the suggestion that – unlike Day-Lewis and Depp – he’s not handsome enough (“The hangdog face of someone who wasn’t destined for stardom,” as the New Yorker put it). Maybe it just seems too self-conscious from him, as though Day-Lewis training for three years as a professional fighter for The Boxer didn’t involve some forethought. It may just be that we still don’t know how to talk about actors. Are they great artistes or meat puppets who merely say sentences someone else has written? Do we want them to be acting or reflecting their own reality? The mockery of Strong and simultaneous veneration of other method-y actors suggests it’s an uneasy combination of the two. Fans thrilled to the suggestion – heavily played up by Bradley Cooper and Gaga – that the two of them had feelings for one another during the shoot for A Star Is Born, but were more weirded out by Oscar Isaac kissing Chastain’s arm on the Venice red carpet while promoting Scenes from a Marriage. The media and public are fascinated by famous actors’ personal lives, and that also includes how they do their incredibly well-paid jobs. So it feels a little unfair to then knock someone who answers that question in such an intense – yes – but also heartfelt way. The late critic AA Gill once wrote that to review a TV show you have to judge it by whether it succeeded in its intention, so even if you hate reality TV, if a programme is good reality TV, you give it a good review. Pretentious actors are truly unbearable. But for those of us who just have to watch them as opposed to work with them, the end result should matter more than the method.Following a small hiccup in launch preparation a few weeks ago, the James Webb space telescope is again making progress. Now scheduled to lift off from Europe’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana, on 22 December, technicians there have finished fuelling the telescope. This is a delicate operation, which took 10 days, because the hydrazine fuel is highly toxic – the whole thing had to be supervised by a skeleton staff of experts who each wear a self-contained atmospheric protective ensemble, or “scape” suit. The Webb now holds 159 litres of hydrazine and 79.5 litres of dinitrogen tetroxide oxidiser, which improves the efficiency of the fuel when burnt. Webb will use the fuel to help guide it to its operational orbit, about a million miles (1.5m km) away from Earth, to maintain this orbit and to repoint the telescope. Now the telescope must be secured to the Ariane 5 rocket and then fastened inside the payload fairing that will protect it during its ascent through the atmosphere. Once in space, Webb, a collaboration between Nasa, the ESA and the Canadian Space Agency, will be the largest space telescope ever launched.Thinking of throwing a boozy office party, a potential super-spreader event in the teeth of a Covid storm? Then knock yourself out, is the official advice from a government accused of being only too willing to open a celebratory bottle itself. Just don’t, whatever you do, enter the office to actually do some work. The Omicron variant has finally prodded Boris Johnson into adopting his fallback Covid Plan B, and what a classically Johnsonian plan it is; contradictory, rushed and shrouded in murky allegations. From Monday, everyone who can should work from home, but the prime minister wants office bashes and school nativity plays to go ahead. There will be vaccine passports for entering big venues, but no masks in pubs and restaurants. If these compromises were meant to placate freedom-loving Tories, they failed; backbenchers threatening to rebel en masse were only further incensed when Johnson hinted he was considering making vaccination compulsory. That his own health secretary, Sajid Javid, promptly said this would be unethical indicates how carefully that idea had been debated inside cabinet before being tossed out, seemingly on the hoof. The kindest explanation for the chaos is that Johnson was distracted by his wife, Carrie, going into labour, as he careered from parliamentary showdown to Covid press conference on Wednesday. But even some of his own backbenchers are no longer willing to be so charitable, publicly accusing him of playing games with public health to distract attention from the now notorious Christmas party allegedly held in Downing Street during last year’s lockdown – just one of around half a dozen assorted leaving dos and other soirees alleged to have taken place when socialising was banned last year. Downing Street has repeatedly denied any rules were broken on its premises but only 9% of voters believe them, according to a poll for Sky News; meanwhile, genuinely necessary public health measures are unfortunately tarnished by association with the prime minister. Most people will rightly still obey the new rules, as they always have, for fear of infecting loved ones. But the corrosive suspicion lingers that, as Michael Kill, the dismayed chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association suggested, hospitality might have been thrown under a bus “for the prime minister to save his own skin”. Just as his magic rubbed off on Conservatives in the good times, now the muck splatters across everything he touches. Watching a distraught Allegra Stratton gulp her way through her resignation statement this week, you could see this effect unfolding in plain sight. A little over a year ago, she was best known as the aide responsible for artfully polishing the halo of the squeaky-clean chancellor Rishi Sunak. Then she was poached by Downing Street to do something similar for Johnson, hosting the televised briefings he briefly considered holding but ditched shortly after she arrived. It was while rehearsing for this job which she never did that Stratton was filmed giggling through questions about a party she says she never attended. On Wednesday, she looked genuinely broken, as if realising for the first time what had become of her. Whether he knew about the parties or not, the charge against Boris Johnson is that he’s responsible for creating a louche and reckless culture in which anything seemingly goes but all too often those who follow his lead get burned. The former Treasury permanent secretary Nick Macpherson this week tweeted the same lines from The Great Gatsby that have been echoing in my mind all week, about a gilded set who “smashed up things and creatures and then retreated back into their money or their vast carelessness”, leaving others to pick up the pieces. The question is whether Johnson’s apparent willingness to throw his own team under the bus, by suggesting he had been misled about what happened inside his own building, finally encourages some of those helpful others to cut their losses. Why do Tories keep metaphorically jumping into bed with him, knowing how it invariably ends? Some assume they can control him, as Dominic Cummings seemingly did, calculating that he would get Brexit done and could then be ousted. A few imagine that they can change him. Others are under no illusions but consider the trade-offs worth it, for now: a briskly transactional category covering many MPs who voted for him as leader. And it’s on their constantly shifting calculations that much depends. If Downing Street had given straight answers from the start, Christmas parties might be ancient history by now. But the focus would have merely shifted to the Electoral Commission fining the Conservative party over its role in trying to get donors to fund a makeover of the Johnsons’ private flat, and a curious discrepancy between details in that report and what Johnson previously told Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministerial interests, about the renovations. If not that, it would have been fresh allegations that during the chaotic British evacuation of Afghanistan either Boris or Carrie Johnson controversially intervened to help get the animal rescuer Pen Farthing and his menagerie out of Kabul, which Downing Street has also previously denied. It’s no longer just about whether voters care, but whether MPs sent out publicly to defend the line can look themselves in the mirror. The Conservative party must ask itself whether it is content to keep being humiliated like this by its own leader or whether, like a long-suffering mistress tired of spending weekends alone, it can finally summon the self-respect to break free. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistThe palmyra palm tree with its wide fan leaves is a distinctive and common sight across Jaffna, northern Sri Lanka, thriving in the arid conditions. Kutty, who goes by only one name, is a “toddy tapper”. Climbing the palms with his clay pot, he collects sap from the flower heads at the top of the great trees, which can grow to more than 30 metres (90ft). The sap is fermented to make toddy, an alcoholic drink also known as palm wine. He shaves the tips off the flowers, tying the pot’s rope handle in place to collect the fluid. It’s meticulous and risky work. Afterwards, he takes the precious juice to the collection centre, just like thousands of other toddy tappers. There are about 11 million palmyra or borassus trees dotting the landscape across the country, but despite its many uses, from making brooms to ice-cream, very few were being utilised – until recently. With such a small market for toddy, co-operatives would cap the amount they bought and the traditional skills of the tappers were being lost, as the sap brought in little profit. These skills were especially neglected in the Jaffna peninsula during the long civil war, which raged between 1983 and 2009. It didn’t help that toddy was seen as a poor man’s drink. The clay pots used to collect the sap were unhygienic, bottles in which the drink was sold were dirty, and the manufacturing equipment in factories was outdated. Suganthan Shanmuganathan had fled his native Jaffna for Canada during the civil war but returned 25 years later in 2014 with his family. He had established a successful drinks business when he heard the Varany Palmyrah Arrack Co-operative was in danger of collapse, and he began to see the potential in a dying industry. “I realised the difficulties faced by societies and tappers. I wished to positively change the living standards of toddy tappers, their families, especially young children, while uplifting this marginalised society,” says Shanmuganathan. “I looked at the existent process and gave my suggestions based on my expertise of the manufacturing process I had learned in Canada to boost and uplift the palmyra industry.” Within a few years, the industry has transformed. Today, about 4,000 people work as toddy tappers. Quality has drastically improved and manufacturing equipment has been upgraded. “Our industry was going nowhere. We were only allowed to bring 30 litres a day by the co-operative,” says Kutty. “This meant my monthly income was around 18,000 Sri Lankan rupees (£70). Shanmuganathan removed the limit on quantity but he insisted on quality. This ensured that only the best was brought in by the tappers. Our income increased to around 190,000 Sri Lankan rupees. “Toddy tappers who were living a hand-to-mouth existence now have a comfortable life. This has changed many lives, not just for us and our children, but our extended families and our villages.” Palm tree products are now exported to the UK, US, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Dubai. “I started with toddy, and within the last three years have expanded to about 80 different products. These include arrack [an alcoholic spirit], jaggery [unrefined sugar], palmyra root crisps, root powder, syrup, and flour,” says Shanmuganathan. In the pandemic, the Palmyrah Research Institute and Alerics, a Sri Lankan ice-cream company, launched ice-cream made from the fruit pulp. “I have over 40 years experience in the palmyra industry and was very sad to see it decline over the years. No one seemed to understand the value of the palmyra tree and its benefits. I was also saddened since all the research and knowledge I had acquired in my lifetime was going to waste,” says Thiyagarajah Panneerchelvam, head technician at the state-backed Palmyrah Development Board. He credits Shanmuganathan with reviving the industry and “also making sure that local knowledge and expertise does not disappear with my generation”. Jekhan Aruliah, co-founder of a Jaffna management consultancy that works with Shanmuganathan, agrees. “This has not been easy for him. He has had to change the work culture of the palmyra co-operatives, which have been stubbornly stagnant for decades. Palmyra is the iconic tree of the north, he is turning it into a pillar of northern economic success,” he says. “While uplifting the lives of thousands of families, we are creating an industry which is environmentally friendly and aims for zero waste. We envisage that the growth in the palmyra industry will lead to growth in many other industries […] The ripple effect is huge.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Picks of the week Michael Caine: Heroes “Nobody said being a hero was easy,” says the host in the most Michael Caine way ever, before he launches into his slick new podcast full of powerful true stories. Sally Becker and Erin Brockovich get their moments of glory, but the series opens with the heroes of the Piper Alpha oil rig explosions, who give terrifying eyewitness accounts of how the disaster unfolded. Hannah Verdier Abuse of Power “Corruption, feuding cartels and billions in laundered money.” A sober six-part crime podcast from David Rudolf – lawyer for the accused in the baffling murder docuseries The Staircase – and his wife, fellow lawyer Sonya Pfeiffer. Did British businessman Krishna Maharaj execute a father and son in Miami in 1986? If not, why has he spent so long on death row? The story involves police corruption and Pablo Escobar. Hannah J Davies Media Storm Journalists Helena Wadia and Mathilda Mallinson host this smart series – released under the Guilty Feminist umbrella – about groups of people maligned by the media. Vice UK editor Zing Tsjeng is particularly thoughtful on anti-Asian hate in the Covid era, and toxic stereotypes. HJD Ghostwriter Kate Mara and Adam Scott star in this movie-length podcast about an ex-journalist who’s tempted back to ghostwrite a murder mystery novel for an eccentric billionaire. She lives alone with her cats and a complicated back story, while he’s got a fatal tale that may or may not be true. What could possibly go wrong? HV Dear Daughter Do you have a daughter? Namulanta Kombo – winner of the BBC’s International Podcast Competition – says this series is for you. In fact, she wants you to help her keep creating it. The show hears letters written to daughters from around the world, from the inspiring and poignant to the funny, celebrating the most important relationship a woman can have in life. Hollie Richardson Producer pick: Storytime With Seth Rogen Chosen by Max Sanderson During the last couple of years, I’ve found myself increasingly drawn to comedy podcasts and have spent mindless hours listening to funny people talk about all sorts. There’s a ton out there (some of which I’ve written about before) and they usually follow the same format; two (or three) funny people freewheeling for hours on end about their lives and experiences. It’s not particularly enlightening from a production point of view, but it does the job. Storytime with Seth Rogen is nothing like those podcasts. It takes the usual ‘funny people telling stories’ format and gives it the full audio storytelling treatment with scripting, music and a healthy dose of kitsch sound design. And to great effect. My favourite so far was their opener Glorious Basterds, which tells the story of how Quinta Brunson, a former Jehovah’s Witness, was forced to rethink her personal and romantic life after a chance encounter with actor Paul Rudd. It may not sound appealing, but the key to this series — like all good standup comedy — is that it’s all in the delivery. Talking points Who says the monarchy doesn’t move with the times? In an Apple podcasting collab, Prince William has guested on the Time to Walk podcast to talk about cutting-edge topics like Tina Turner and spending Christmas in an ancient church. Why not try: Eclipsed | Proper Mental | Life Sentence Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureThe rent university students pay for halls of residence has risen by 60% over the past decade to reach an average of £7,347, surpassing the reach of the average student maintenance loan, a survey shows. A survey of nearly 500,000 beds in student halls shows that rents have been steadily creeping up, with prices 4.4% higher than last year, and 16% higher than before the pandemic. As a result, many students are forced to work part-time alongside their studies, live at home or seek help from family to make ends meet, since average maintenance loans, which are also intended to cover living expenses, are £6,900. The report from the National Union of Students and housing charity Unipol warns that the cost of rent for student rooms is rising far more rapidly than inflation, that there is a growing scarcity of genuinely affordable rooms and that choice is narrowing as private halls providers, which now operate the majority of student housing, focus on offering luxury studio apartments, often aimed at international students, rather than cheaper alternatives. London is especially unaffordable for students, with average rents totalling £10,857, 61% more than the average for the rest of the UK. Hillary Gyebi-Ababio, the vice-president for higher education at the National Union of Students (NUS), said: “The affordability of student accommodation affects students’ educational experience, and also has a major impact on access and widening participation. It’s disgraceful that so many young people are priced out, either deterred or unable to apply to university, or have their options severely limited by where they can afford to live.” The report also highlighted universities’ growing reliance on profit-seeking private providers, which operated 70% of the beds surveyed. The number of beds offered by these providers has more than doubled from 142,439 beds in 2012-13 to 361,717 in 2021-22, and the report predicted this would continue since yields “continue to outperform rival opportunities in the property sector”. The report stated that bed spaces run by private operators are nearly a quarter (24%) more expensive than those run by universities, and the gap is growing as private providers tend to price themselves on the basis of what competitors are charging rather than what students can afford. For example, rent for a self-catered room in private halls costs an average of £5,157 for university-owned accommodation, £5,985 for private housing contracted by the university, and £7,264 for completely private halls. The NUS is calling for universities to keep a tighter rein on rents charged by the private halls they work with; to offer more cheaper rooms, since the most affordable accommodation – standard shared bathroom rooms – are in decline; and to support disadvantaged students with housing bursaries.In the penultimate episode of Rose Matafeo’s bite-size but thoroughly brilliant comedy, Starstruck, her character Jessie is asked: “Why are you here?” She has, she says, “no idea”, and begins to reel off a list of things she hates about London: the air is “literally poison”, the relationship she moved over from New Zealand for didn’t work out, she has no family around her and her highly strung best friend Kate is her emergency contact. “I’ve not done anything and I’m so old. I’m 28. I thought I’d at least be divorced by now. At least be with someone … I don’t have a person.” She buries her head in her hands, defeated. But it turns out the question wasn’t quite what she thought. Her cinema colleague Dan wasn’t asking for a precis of her 20s but rather enquiring why she had come in on her day off. Although Jessie was having a terrible time of her “overseas experience”, what made Starstruck so memorable was not that it was a tear-soaked sadcom but something altogether more fantastical. Indeed, the title referred to Jessie’s biggest problem: not her low-paid jobs, her tiny east London flatshare or the fact that even the charity shop didn’t rate her clothes, but that she had slept with – and frequently found herself bumping into – a film star named Tom Kapoor (Nikesh Patel). She didn’t recognise him at first, beginning their initial booze-fuelled encounter with “do you work at the Shepherd’s Bush Superdrug?” It was basically the 2021 version of Notting Hill, and – gladly – like the 90s, all the meet-cutes happened in real life rather than in the ninth circle of dating app hell. At just over 20 minutes an episode, it was a sweet, gentle, moreish confection that could have easily stretched to more than its six episodes. While the central premise of Starstruck was fictional, there were parallels with Matafeo’s life. She is an overachiever who started performing standup comedy as a teen and scooped an Edinburgh comedy award in 2018 with a show about her adolescent lust for Franz Ferdinand singer Alex Kapranos. She too left New Zealand for London and has connections with Shepherd’s Bush (she lived there in the mid 2010s with her then-boyfriend James Acaster). At some point, you imagine, she has probably had her own Jessie moment as she stood almost 12,000 miles away from home. Even if she hasn’t, Matafeo beautifully conveyed the sentiment of being far from everything and everyone you love and feeling like you might have made a terrible mistake, or a few. Naturally, Jessie decides to move back home, although she – and the viewer – know that this will solve none of her problems (and really, being a film buff, she should know that, as per Breakfast at Tiffany’s, “no matter where you run, you just end up running into yourself”). As in Matafeo’s standup sets, Jessie is supremely confident and a total troublemaker with a glint in her eye. Her confidence is part of what makes the series such a delight to watch, such as when she turns up for her nannying job in last night’s multicoloured sequin dress and demands that her young charges let her watch Goodfellas. She is young, spontaneous and looking for love, even if the thought of a one-night stand with a celebrity initially fills her with dread, and leads her to jump to several wrong conclusions based on Daily Mail headlines. Indeed, Matafeo and Alice Snedden’s script is loaded with the kinds of misunderstandings and awkward moments that deftly extend the “will they, won’t they?” conundrum through all the episodes. The script is also just the right side of heartbreaking, not least when Jessie describes her situation with Tom as like “[seeing] a labrador and a hedgehog who are friends”, him being the labrador in the analogy (his icy agent, played by Minnie Driver, has of course already warned him against dating “civilians”). Gladly, a second series is on the cards, a relief for those who hadn’t quite had their fill of Jessie and Tom. And for everyone who hasn’t watched it yet – whether you have an emergency contact, or you’re still waiting for your own meet-cute – it is sure to bring you nothing but joy.Dune reminds us what a Hollywood blockbuster can be. Implicitly, the message of Denis Villeneuve’s fantasy epic, written again and again in the sand, is that big-budget spectaculars don’t have to be dumb or hyperactive, that it’s possible to allow the odd quiet passage. Adapted from Frank Herbert’s 60s opus, Dune is dense, moody and quite often sublime – the missing link between the multiplex and the arthouse. Encountering it was like stumbling across some fabulous lost tribe, or a breakaway branch of America’s founding fathers who laid out the template for a different and better new world. Timothée Chalamet plays Paul Atreides, your archetypal hero, unsure of his powers and questioning the merits of the mountainous task before him. His father, the Duke (Oscar Isaac), has been handed stewardship of the desert planet Arrakis, source of a magical substance called “spice” that extends life and fuels space travel – all the good stuff. But Arrakis, though sandy, is not entirely deserted. It is home to vast worms that can rise up with little warning, and an oppressed people – the Fremen – who see the spice harvesters as exploiters. The drama is played out with relish by an ensemble cast (Stellan Skarsgård, Josh Brolin, Rebecca Ferguson, Charlotte Rampling, Jason Momoa), and Villeneuve is confident enough to let the temperature slowly build before the big, operatic set-pieces eventually break cover. He has constructed an entire world for us here, thick with myth and mystery, stripped of narrative signposts or even much in the way of handy exposition. He has handed us a movie to map out at our leisure and figure out on the run: apparently spitting on someone is a gesture of respect on Arrakis, while walking sideways like a crab is the safest way to proceed. After that we’re on our own, wandering in the desert, wonderfully immersed. It’s a film of discovery; an invitation to get lost.Nine – the fifth album in two years from the very prolific, technically anonymous and stunningly talented collective Sault – begins with a laugh. Unsurprisingly, for a record about fear, pain and trauma on the streets of London, it is a hollow one: a chorus of schoolchildren paying lip service to the concept of joy, their laboured, mechanical chuckling cut loose from a specific source. The effect is evocatively sad and bitterly satirical – especially after Nine’s primary theme, the way young people’s lives are marred by gang violence in the capital, becomes clear. But the sound is also hypnotic and strangely soothing. Or perhaps there’s nothing strange about it. “Laughter heals all that’s torn,” went the opening track of Sault’s last album, the Mercury-nominated Untitled (Rise). Social injustice, structural inequality and headline-dominating racist violence: these are the subjects recent Sault albums have revolved around (the 2020 killing of George Floyd by a white police officer was repeatedly referenced on their third, Untitled (Black Is)). Much of the group’s lyrical content seems intended to disturb, a way to jolt white listeners out of complacency. But it’s not just condemnation – songs provide consolation too; they are also rallying cries for change. On Nine, spoken word interludes baldly state the reality of the situation – on Mike’s Story, a man called Michael Ofo recounts hearing the news of his father’s murder as a child; on Light’s in Your Hands, an unnamed speaker remembers fearing gang violence would suddenly break out on his way to school – while lyrics tell impressionistic stories that teem with loss and hurt, knives and guns. The hope and the transcendence comes mainly from the music itself, which is as beautiful and as right as the world Nine depicts is frightening and wrong. Tightly melodic, luxuriously layered, instantly memorable without being cheaply infectious, it’s also gratifyingly hard to categorise – more so than on the outfit’s previous funkier outings. Genre-blending-and-bending is de rigueur these days, but not the way this lot do it: songs are puzzles, addictive in their unsolvability, a perfect balance of mismatched elements. London Gangs alone nods to the Chemical Brothers, grainily retro R&amp;B, X-Ray Spex, hushed nu-folk and Auld Lang Syne. Bitter Streets is soulful 60s lounge music with a tricksy beat. You From London pitches Little Simz’s psychogeographical bars up into chipmunk mode over a track crafted from seconds of melody from the beautifully maudlin Bugsy Malone song Ordinary Fool. The exquisite title track is pared-back psychedelic soul, proggy folk, cosmic Beatles softened around the edges, and also none of those things. It is unclear how many people it takes to make a Sault album, but in this specific case the major players seem to be north London producer Inflo and his partner, west London singer Cleo Sol (the American voices of previous records are largely absent here, except to laugh uproariously at English teeth and weather in the brilliantly droll You From London). The briefest of glances at Inflo’s CV explains the group’s multi-stylistic mastery. He started out working with the Kooks, and still mixes indie (Belle &amp; Sebastian, the Snuts) with pop (Tom Odell, Adele’s 30) and rap (Little Simz, to whose work he brings a tactile, staunchly un-synthetic quality that is also present on Nine). He can make songs sound classic – he worked with Michael Kiwanuka on the timelessly beautiful Cold Little Heart (AKA the Big Little Lies theme) – or fizzingly new. If he doesn’t become one of this country’s most celebrated producer-songwriters very soon, it will only be because of his aversion to publicity. On that note: if you like the sound of Nine, apologies. Sault only made the album available to stream and download for 99 days after its initial June release (now, the only way to legitimately listen is to buy it on vinyl). Quite why the band decided to remove this historically great album from the internet isn’t clear. It doesn’t seem like a way to generate hype via scarcity-principle gimmicks – especially seeing as you can still hear it unofficially on YouTube. Perhaps it’s a protest against streaming platform dominance, a way to get people to comprehend the value of an artist’s toil. What the record’s disappearance does, however, is act as a reminder that Nine is not in fact public property. In a now-deleted Instagram caption about the album, the group said some of their members were from “the heart of London’s council estates”, where the majority “get trapped in a systematic loop where a lot of resources &amp; options are limited”. The unexplained erasure of Nine feels like a kickback against the lack of agency foisted on those who grew up in such circumstances. It is an act of defiance – proof that if Inflo and Sol (and any other interested parties) want to tightly control the distribution of their work, that’s their prerogative. This precious, deeply personal and lovingly crafted album hasn’t gone away. It’s with those it really belongs to: the musicians who made it.Checks on the private rented sector are in “chaos”, the chair of the Commons public accounts committee has said, after the government’s spending watchdog found squalid homes are costing the NHS £340m a year. Nearly 600,000 private rented homes in England, about 13%, have been classed as a serious threat to health and safety, according to the National Audit Office (NAO), while nearly a quarter are “non-decent”. The watchdog said the findings were “concerning” and added that Michael Gove’s Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities did “not yet have a detailed plan to address the problems that renters face” and lacked understanding on problems plaguing some private tenants, such as harassment and eviction. Evictions are returning to close to pre-pandemic levels and this week, the renters’ group Generation Rent estimated that at current rates, 83 households will be evicted in England and Wales every working day, including 28 renter households thrown out through the “no fault” eviction process that the government has said it would ban. It is calling for a “winter truce”, repeating the evictions ban during earlier waves of the Covid pandemic. Private tenants face a “postcode lottery” over the standard of their homes, said Meg Hillier, MP for Hackney South and Shoreditch and chair of the public accounts committee. “It’s often society’s most vulnerable who suffer the most,” she said. “The department’s approach to regulation has been piecemeal.” There are more than 4.4m privately renting households in England, and their homes are more likely to be classified as “non-decent” than social housing or owner-occupied homes. Separately, councils have said there has been an increase in landlords selling up or converting long-terms rentals into Airbnbs for short lets, causing housing waiting lists to lengthen, more people to lose their homes, and making it more difficult to find permanent accommodation for those in need. Hillier said the government needed “to bring some order to the chaos and set out a clear vision for the private rental market and ensure that the growing number of tenants whose only prospect of long-term housing is in the private rented sector are better supported”. The NAO found that some households faced discrimination, with an estimated 25% of landlords unwilling to let to non-UK passport holders and 52% unwilling to let to those on housing benefit. Krystalrose Shirley, 27, a private renter who lived with her three-year-old daughter for two-and-a-half years in a mould-ridden flat in north London, said: “Emotionally and physically it affected me and my daughter in every single way. There was a period when I was afraid to turn on my light in my bedroom because I was afraid of the mould. I would spend all my time in the kitchen to not breathe in the toxins. There were mushrooms growing under mine and my daughter’s beds.” The landlord did not fix the problem, instead supplying a de-humidifier. “This problem needs to get sorted out,” Shirley said. “So many people are suffering in silence.” Gareth Davies, head of the NAO, said: “The proportion of private renters living in properties that are unsafe or fail the standards for a decent home is concerning. The government relies on these tenants being able to enforce their own rights, but they face significant barriers to doing so.” Ben Beadle, chief executive of the National Residential Landlords Association, said regulation needed to focus better on “rooting out criminal and rogue landlords who bring the sector into disrepute”. He called for a more strategic approach and criticised “a proliferation of initiatives such as licensing, banning orders and a rogue landlord database with little evidence to show they are working”. Jack Wagstaffe, the Newcastle branch chair of Acorn, a nationwide community union, said: said: “What we see all the time is that properties aren’t in a liveable state, but nothing is being done through official channels, which is why we operate.” Polly Neate, chief executive of Shelter, said people calling the housing charity’s emergency helpline “feel powerless to challenge their landlord”. “In the worst cases they end up homeless,” she said. “We predicted the pandemic would trigger a rising tide of evictions and our services are starting to see the reality of this.” The government has delayed a white paper on private renting, that is expected to include the end to no-fault evictions, until next year. It was originally expected this autumn. A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “We welcome this report. Conditions in the private rented sector are not good enough and we need stronger regulation and reform to ensure everyone has a safe and decent place to live. “We are taking action to raise standards by driving out rogue landlords and strengthening councils’ enforcement powers but we must go further. Our forthcoming white paper will set out comprehensive reforms to create a fairer private rented sector for all.” • This article was amended on 16 December 2021. Acorn is not just based in Newcastle as an earlier version suggested; it is a nationwide community union.One of Australia’s largest beer manufacturers has been rationing its most popular canned beer in the lead-up to Christmas, amid supply chain issues due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Shortages of wooden pallets and aluminium respectively have hit Australia’s two beer giants, Lion and Carlton &amp; United Breweries (CUB). But people craving a cold one on Christmas Day shouldn’t panic, with the industry pouring cold water on talk of major shortages over summer. CUB says while it is not facing shortages of kegs or its Australian-brewed stubbies or cans, the company recently had to limit the sale of some items due to aluminium shortages. “To be clear, we are not facing shortages of VB, Carlton Draught, Great Northern, Carlton Dry, or Pure Blonde,” sales director Peter Bingeman said in a statement to Guardian Australia. “Recently we had limited the sale of our most popular canned beer for a short time due to aluminium shortages, but those shortages have been successfully managed.” Purchase limits introduced on various CUB products at alcohol retailer BWS are anticipated to be lifted by the middle of next week. Bingeman said there were international supply chain issues for the Mexican beer Corona, which is imported by CUB. “However, we expect supply will continue to arrive in Australia in the lead-up to Christmas and we are distributing it fairly to retailers across Australia to help limit shortages,” he said. BWS is not anticipating beer shortages over the busy Christmas and New Year period. Lion, which makes Tooheys, XXXX, Hahn, Furphy and James Squire, is among a number of businesses affected by a widespread shortage of wooden pallets. The situation, labelled “pallet-gate” by the Coles CEO, Steven Cain, in October, has forced Lion to prioritise its most popular products as the busy holiday season looms. Products less in demand have been left to dwindle out of stock, unlikely to be back in production before 2022. Sales director Warwick Parks confirmed Lion was being impacted by “a number of supply chain challenges, including an industry-wide shortage of hardwood pallets”. “We recognise this is a busy and important time of year for our trade customers and we are doing everything possible to minimise disruptions to supply and delivery,” he said. “We are working around the clock to source alternatives and secure additional pallets.” The shortages are anticipated to affect specific pack sizes as opposed to entire brands – for instance, the same beer may be unavailable in a 10-pack but available in a six-pack. A spokesperson for Lion said the company wanted to reassure the community there would be no issue getting beer for Christmas. “We have been prioritising production of our top-selling pack formats in response to the national shortage of hardwood pallets and other supply chain challenges. This means that while some pack formats for certain brands may go out of stock, the vast majority of our main pack formats will still be available right through the festive season.” Lion had been “working behind the scenes to secure additional pallets and source alternatives to keep the beer moving”. A spokesperson for BWS owner Endeavour Group, which also owns liquor chain Dan Murphy’s, said coolrooms were “filled with stock ahead of Christmas”. Alcohol Beverages Australia CEO, Andrew Wilsmore, also sought to reassure shoppers there “will still be plenty of drinks to choose from”. “Some products, however, may not be available due to global supply chain disruptions and local pallet availability which is hampering the delivery of beer, wine and spirits to retail and hospitality businesses. All parts of the industry’s supply chain are working closely together to resolve any delays.” The worries over beer supply come after reports of a champagne shortage and widespread supply chain issues in the lead-up to the Christmas period. “It’s a mess right now,” said associate professor Vinh Thai, who works in the department of supply chain and logistics at RMIT. In an interview with Guardian Australia, Thai said the pandemic has triggered a global shortage of empty containers, congestion at ports, and rising sea freight costs. As well, he said, the spike in Australia’s property market has led to a surge in timber importations for building, which has in turn created a shortage of timber to use for making wooden pallets. Disruptions at one point of the chain have a “multiplying effect” and hit consumer countries like Australia particularly hard, he said. “My prediction is, best-case scenario, things will ease out a little bit in the later half of next year,” Thai said. “In a conservative scenario, I would look into 2023.”Vienna Blood 9pm, BBC Two The Freudian double act – brilliant young psychoanalyst Max Liebermann and husky-toned investigating officer Oskar Rheinhardt – reunite to solve another bizarre murder mystery in 1900s Vienna. Eccentric in tone and humour, the second season focuses on a depressed countess who is found drowned in the bath of her lavish hotel suite, and happened to be one of Liebermann’s patients. In episode one of the three-parter, theydive straight into solving the head-scratching puzzle. Hollie Richardson Dispatches: Vaccine Wars – The Truth About Pfizer 7.30pm, Channel 4 The Pfizer vaccine has saved millions of lives, and has been chosen as the jab for the roll-out of boosters. But, as the pharmaceutical corporation declares billions in revenue from its Covid shot, and has raised its prices in the EU, US and UK, reporter Antony Barnett investigates the ethics of the vaccine makers. HR Gardeners’ World Winter Specials 8pm, BBC Two In the first of three specials, Adam Frost visits Cambridge University Botanic Garden; Joe Swift discovers a garden in north London that was inspired by a trip to the Grand Canyon; Nick Bailey champions evergreen planting; and Kate Bradbury has advice on how to care for the wildlife in our gardens during the winter months. Ali Catterall Grayson’s Art Club: An Exhibition for Britain 8pm, Channel 4 Let’s not dwell on the spine-chilling realisation that Perry’s first TV art club aired in the first lockdown – which is now nearly two years ago. Onwards with a celebration of the public’s pandemic artworks in this one-off exhibition, using some of the 17,000 submissions he received. As well as meeting the artists, he takes viewers on a behind-the-scenes tour of the collection at the Bristol Museum and Art Gallery, where it is on show. HR Nick Cave: Idiot Prayer 9pm, BBC Four Gravest hits: this feature-length concert film – originally streamed in 2020 – situates Cave and a Fazioli grand piano at the centre of a cavernously empty Alexandra Palace in London for a sombre, no-frills solo recital. Aside from a chuckle at an unexpected bum note, the tone is austere, hypnotic and often deeply moving. Graeme Virtue The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Tonight’s guests include Olivia Colman, shortly to appear in Maggie Gyllenhaal’s directorial debut, The Lost Daughter; Mahershala Ali, who takes the lead in futuristic drama Swan Song; Jack Whitehall; Jennifer Lawrence; and Keanu Reeves, star of Matrix reboot The Matrix Resurrections, in which Neo takes the blue pill and just sits around eating Wotsits all day. Ali Catterall Film choices Encounter (Michael Pearce, 2021) Amazon Prime Video What starts out as a potential cross between Invasion of the Body Snatchers and Phase IV evolves into a touching tale of family breakup and a soldier’s trauma in Michael Pearce’s drama. Riz Ahmed’s former Marine, Malik, turns up at ex-wife’s house and spirits away his two young sons to save them from parasitical “non-terrestrial micro-organisms” taking over humanity. But, as becomes clear during their road trip across arid lands, the roots of his paranoia are more prosaic. Ahmed’s skill at playing intense, off-kilter characters is to the fore, while Octavia Spencer gives steady support as his parole officer. Simon Wardell Mr Jones (Agnieszka Holland, 2019) Amazon Prime Video Gareth Jones was a foreign office adviser and journalist who exposed the deaths of millions in the Soviet famine of the early 1930s, but was belittled by the press and ignored by governments more concerned with international relations. Agnieszka Holland’s historical thriller brings his story to light, albeit with some fictional embellishments, using Jones’s supposed influence on George Orwell to frame it in Animal Farm references. James Norton portrays him as an engaging if naive character who slips into Ukraine to witness the deadly lie of communist progress. SWOne hundred and sixty-eight of Australia’s biggest companies have paid no tax since 2013 despite reaping profits totalling more than $9.85bn, a Guardian Australia analysis of new data reveals. They are among companies included in figures released by the Australian Taxation Office on Friday detailing the revenue, profit and tax paid by about 2,300 of the country’s biggest corporations in the 2019-20 financial year. Previous ATO data dumps cover the period between 2013-14 and 2017-18, making it possible for Guardian Australia to determine which companies contained in the figures have not paid tax over the seven years for which numbers are available. The companies that paid no tax over the period include household names such as property developer Lendlease and the Australian arms of multinationals including oil and gas major Chevron and German engineering and technology group Bosch. Reasons why the companies have paid no tax vary. Some, including Lendlease, are part of property trust groups, where paying tax is the responsibility of the investor rather than the company. Some companies that did not pay any tax, such as subsidiaries of BHP and Rio Tinto, are members of corporate groups where another entity paid their taxes for them. Others, including Australian Chevron subsidiary Chevron Australia Holdings, have hefty losses run up in previous years that they are able to draw upon to offset their tax payments. The data also illustrates the rollercoaster ride that Qantas has been on as it swung from a $2.8bn loss in 2013-14 and back into profit. It took until 2017-18 for the flag carrier to eat through its prior year losses and pay some tax – a relatively modest $11m. In 2018-19 the company paid significantly more, $259m, off the back of taxable income – the tax equivalent of profit – of $942m. But the coronavirus crisis, which grounded much of the fleet, drove the airline to a $1.9bn loss in 2019-20 and its tax bill back to zero. Qantas lost another $2.35bn in the year just gone, meaning it is unlikely to pay tax for several years to come even as air travel resumes after the pandemic and the company moves back into the black. Speaking ahead of the release of the most recent set of corporate tax transparency figures, ATO deputy commissioner Rebecca Saint said there were “legitimate reasons why a company may not pay tax”. “Just because an entity doesn’t pay tax doesn’t necessarily mean that there’s tax avoidance or similar activity occurring. There can be good commercial justification to that,” she said. “We have high levels of confidence around those entities that don’t pay tax and what I mean by that is we actually go and have looked into whether those losses are generated from commercial activities, as opposed to tax avoidance arrangements.” One-third, or 782, of the 2,370 companies captured in the 2019-20 data set paid no tax that year. The data is published under laws introduced when Labor was in power federally and includes the revenue, taxable income and tax paid by public and foreign-owned companies with a turnover of $100m or more and Australian private companies with a turnover of $200m or more.An album consisting entirely of birdsong has debuted towards the top of Australia’s Aria chart, beating Mariah Carey, Michael Buble and Abba to get to No 5 one week after its release. Songs of Disappearance, a collaboration between multimedia duo the Bowerbird Collective and David Stewart, who has been recording the sounds of Australian birds for over four decades, features the calls and songs of 53 threatened species. With all proceeds donated to BirdLife Australia, it has sold just over 2,000 units, around 1,500 of them in presale – a far cry from the number that used to be required to enter the charts, before the music streaming era. The project was the result of a conversation between the Bowerbird Collective’s Anthony Albrecht, a PhD student at Charles Darwin University, and his supervisor Stephen Garnett, the author of the recently updated Action Plan for Australian Birds, which found that one in six Australian birds are now threatened with extinction. “He asked whether the Bowerbird Collective could do anything to help promote [the Action Plan], and it was immediately obvious to me what we needed to do,” Albrecht said. “I’m really keen to understand whether environmental art such as this project can have an impact on attitudes and behaviour.” Albrecht’s collaborator and Bowerbird Collective co-founder, violinist Simone Slattery, arranged a musical collage of the 53 species for the opening track of Songs of Disappearance. The rest of the album’s tracks are of Stewart’s recordings in isolation. “I listened to the birds [as recorded by Stewart] one after the other and I found it incredibly moving,” Slattery said. “I kept listening until I could feel a structure coming to me, like a quirky dawn chorus. “Some of these sounds will shock listeners because they’re extremely percussive, they’re not melodious at all. They’re clicks, they’re rattles, they’re squawks and deep bass notes.” The collage ends with the morse code-like song of the night parrot, the enigmatic species whose call was entirely unknown to science until 2013. Another song featured is that of the regent honeyeater, which is now so rare that it is literally losing its own voice out of loneliness – a story that propelled it to its own top 10 placing in this year’s Guardian Australia Bird of the Year poll. “It’s a far more visceral way of processing this idea that these birds might disappear,” said Sean Dooley, national public affairs manager for BirdLife Australia. Dooley cheerfully invoked the catchphrase of Ian “Molly” Meldrum, suggesting Australian record buyers “do yourselves [and Australian birds] a favour”. Garnett said “it’s only appropriate that the album charts”. “There’s a sense of grief that we’re losing something deeply valuable, and bird calls are so evocative.” He said that “conserving threatened species is an emotional act. It’s much more than about biology. It’s about a much deeper attachment to our environment, and this is a way of reaching that in a way that words on paper don’t.” Garnett’s Action Plan has documented the increasing impact of fire and global heating on Australian birds. Stewart highlighted another issue: the catastrophic decline of insects, a view supported by the listing of the previously abundant bogong moth as endangered. “All our insectivores are in decline,” he said. “That’s where a big part of our problem lies. You’ve got climate change, plus the insecticides that are being pumped out everywhere.” Garnett said that may be a focus of the next Action Plan, which is updated each decade. “The last Action Plan didn’t have nearly as much stuff on climate change about it, because we didn’t have the evidence,” he said. “This one doesn’t have much on insect declines, because at this stage we don’t have the evidence. “In the wet tropics, we don’t really know yet how climate change is affecting the birds – is it affecting them directly; is it killing their food; is it enabling their competitors from the lowlands as they are able to go higher up the mountains, or a combination of those things. “It’s the same in the arid zone. When you get the silence that comes after a heatwave, is it because the insects have gone and therefore the birds starve, or is it because the birds themselves have been killed directly? We don’t know yet.”Top story: Labour opens up six-point poll lead Hello, Warren Murray bringing you the first tidings of Friday. Dozens of Tory backbenchers are threatening to rebel or abstain from the vote for “plan B” Covid restrictions because of their fury over the impact of the proposed rules and Boris Johnson’s handling of the Christmas party scandal. At least 30 Conservative MPs are expected to vote against regulations on masks, home working and vaccine passports, and many more are vowing to stay away from Tuesday’s vote – potentially leaving the prime minister relying on Labour support to win. Johnson is also accused of misleading his own ethics adviser, exposing the PM to a potential suspension from the House of Commons, over the source of funds for redecoration of his Downing Street flat. A Downing Street spokesperson has said “The prime minister has acted in accordance with the rules at all times. He has made any requisite declarations.” Recent reports have said that Jack Doyle, the then deputy director of communications, gave out awards to staff during the supposed No 10 party on 18 December and there was food, drinks and games. Doyle, now head of press for Downing Street, has been contacted for comment. An inquiry hastily called by Johnson into the matter has been expanded to examine other alleged events including another Downing Street party on 27 November last year – reportedly a leaving event at which Johnson spoke – and one at the Department for Education on 10 December. In a further blow for the prime minister, a Survation survey for the Daily Mirror has put Labour six percentage points ahead of the Conservatives, at 40% to 34%. A YouGov poll for the Times had Labour four points ahead on 37% to 33%. There is next week’s byelection in North Shropshire as well – the direct outcome of another Tory politician seeming to put himself above the rules. * * * ‘Mushrooms under the beds’ – Checks on the private rented sector are in “chaos”, the chair of the Commons public accounts committee has said, with the health effects of squalid rental homes costing the NHS £340m a year. Nearly 600,000 private rented homes in England, about 13%, have been classed as a serious threat to health and safety by the National Audit Office (NAO) while nearly a quarter are “non-decent”. Krystalrose Shirley, 27, who rented with her three-year-old daughter in north London, said: “There was a period when I was afraid to turn on my light in my bedroom because I was afraid of the mould … There were mushrooms growing under mine and my daughter’s beds.” Evictions are nearing pre-pandemic levels – Generation Rent estimates that at current rates, 83 households will be evicted in England and Wales every working day. The government has delayed until next year a white paper that would end to no-fault evictions. The Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities has been contacted for comment. * * * Smollett guilty over fake assault – A jury in Chicago has found the US actor Jussie Smollett guilty of faking a hate crime against himself to raise his celebrity profile. Many fellow stars initially rushed to support Smollett when claimed in January 2019 that he had been attacked by people that had shouted “This is Maga country,” a reference to Donald Trump’s trademark political slogan “Make American Great Again”. Smollett told police he had been assaulted on a darkened street by two masked men who put a noose around his neck and poured chemicals on him while yelling racist and homophobic slurs and expressing their support for Trump. A month later police arrested Smollett himself, accusing the actor of paying two brothers $3,500 to stage the assault in a ploy to get public sympathy and boost his profile. * * * ‘Flow before you go’ – Covid slogan of the week goes to Wales where the government says people should take a lateral flow test before going out Christmas shopping or to a festive party. The first minister, Mark Drakeford, is also asking people to “flow before you go”, and to wear face coverings in pubs and restaurants except when they are eating or drinking. There will be no new restrictions in Wales when Drakeford announces the results of its regular three-weekly review on Friday. Many of the “plan B” measures that are looming for England, such as wearing masks in indoor public places, are already in force in Wales. * * * ‘We’ll continue talking’ – Efforts in Vienna to revive the Iran nuclear deal have been hauled back from the brink of collapse after pressure on Tehran from Russia and China and clear warnings that the EU and the US were preparing to walk away. Joe Biden has still warned that the United States is preparing “additional measures” against Iran. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said the talks represented the last chance for Iran to come back into compliance. Israel has been preparing military strikes in the expectation that the talks will fail, which would leave the Iranian nuclear programme unconstrained by any major multilateral agreement. The Iranian chief negotiator, Ali Bagheri, said on Thursday: “I felt other parties have a more serious will to enter effective and result-oriented talks … We’ll continue talking.” * * * Short trip – A German court has ruled that a man who slipped and broke his back while walking downstairs from his bed to his home office can claim on workplace accident insurance as he was technically commuting. The court noted that the employee usually started working in his home office “immediately without having breakfast beforehand”. Statutory accident insurance was only afforded to this “first” journey to work, suggesting that a trip on the way to get breakfast after already being in the home office could be rejected. In many countries, firms have a duty of care to their employees, regardless of where they work. Today in Focus podcast: Plan Boris not working out A video showing Downing Street staffers joking about alleged lockdown breaches is only the latest scandal to rock Boris Johnson’s premiership, reports political correspondent Peter Walker. Next week, “plan B” Covid restrictions are due before parliament, in the days before the Tories attempt to defend their seat in North Shropshire from a newly hopeful Liberal Democrat challenge. Lunchtime read: Not sure about these methods The Succession star Jeremy Strong has been widely scorned after a magazine profile revealed his “preening” and “self-indulgent” acting process. But many actors have been lauded for their method – so what has changed? Sport After the loss of both openers, a partnership between Dawid Malan and England captain Joe Root managed to slow Australia’s charge towards victory on day three of the opening Ashes Test at the Gabba. Racing has been thrown into turmoil after the National Hunt jockey Robbie Dunne was banned from riding for 18 months, with three months suspended, for conducting a seven-month campaign of bullying and intimidation against his fellow rider Bryony Frost. Tensions between Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen have ratcheted up again before the Formula One season decider at this weekend’s Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. Leicester contributed embarrassingly to their own downfall against an under-strength Napoli side and, as a result of a 3-2 defeat, dropped out of the Europa League and into Europa Conference League. Meanwhile, Ange Postecoglou bemoaned the “ridiculous” fixture list as his Celtic side lost strikers Kyogo Furuhashi and Albian Ajeti to hamstring problems as they rounded off their Europa League campaign with a 3-2 victory over Real Betis. Unstoppable Barcelona barely stepped out of second gear as they humbled Arsenal to cruise into the quarter-finals of the Women’s Champions League. And weightlifting and boxing are the “two problem childs of the Olympic movement” and remain at risk of being removed from the 2028 LA Games programme, the International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, has warned. Business Borrowers could be spared a rate increase for the time being after expectations of rise at next week’s Bank of England monetary policy committee have begun to cool in the face of the rapid spread of Omicron Covid variant. The policymakers had been nailed on to hike rates to dampen inflation but the likelihood that economic activity will cool because of new health restrictions has changed the outlook in the City. The pound dipped yesterday as a result and is currently buying $1.322 and €1.171. The FTSE100 is also under a Covid cloud and is set to open down 0.3%. The papers The Guardian leads with the No 10 flat redecoration controversy – our front-page picture story is “Sienna Miller: tabloid ‘nearly ruined my life’”. The actor has said the Sun forced her to make decisions “about my own body that I have to live with every single day” after the newspaper found out she was in the early stages of pregnancy. Miller, who ultimately did not have the baby, has accepted a settlement from the Sun, which she believes illegally obtained her private medical information from a “blagger”. We have quoted the Mirror’s polling and the Times has done its own: the resulting story, “Poll blow for Tories as trust in Johnson falls”. It gives Labour a four-point lead. The i takes things even further: “Tory leader contenders circle a PM in peril” and goes to the extent of putting pictures on its front, of Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss. Even the Express is forced to concede “Boris under the cosh!” but tempers this with news that “Carrie gives birth to baby girl”. “Mum’s the word” says the Metro as the PM takes family time. The Telegraph gets in on the “Good news at last … a baby girl in Downing Street” though its lead is “Lord Geidt on brink of quitting over PM’s flat” in reference to the PM’s standards adviser. The Mirror packs plenty into its front-page furniture: “Downing Street flat scandal … Another day … another lie … after No 10 parties shame … it’s revealed PM DID know all about £112k refurb cash”. The Daily Mail’s headline is “Tories’ Plan B mutiny”. The Financial Times has “Treasury rebuffs business chiefs’ appeal for extra aid during curbs” – Boris Johnson’s misery is not far below the surface of that, with the second paragraph mentioning the “mounting rebellion” among MPs. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendPeople who travel to Ireland from Great Britain will be advised to undertake daily lateral flow tests for five consecutive days after arrival, the Irish government announced on Thursday night. The tests will be in addition to the recently announced requirement that travellers to the republic have a negative PCR or lateral flow test before boarding a ferry or plane. In a statement, the taoiseach’s office said that the first test should be taken on the day of arrival and, if any symptoms of Covid emerge or if a passenger has a positive result from a lateral flow test, they should seek a PCR test and self-isolate. The latest restriction has been put in place to mitigate the risk of a spread of the Omicron variant from Great Britain, where the number of cases has nearly doubled in one day after a further 249 cases were confirmed. Six cases of Omicron have been confirmed in Ireland. The Irish government said it was “taking account of relevant factors” following an “updated public health assessment in relation to the Omicron variant”. The restrictions will be a minor setback for the Irish diaspora in Britain where, unlike in Ireland, lateral flow tests are free and can be transported to the republic. They also highlight a different approach to the common travel area which normally allows the British and Irish to work, study, retire and holiday freely in either country without any restrictions or passport controls. Pre-departure and post-departure Covid tests required for international arrivals into Britain do not apply for travellers arriving from Ireland, Northern Ireland, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man. Ireland’s approach to Covid has differed sharply from the UK with one of the longest lockdowns in the EU. Nightclubs were only reopened on 22 October and were closed again on Tuesday until the second week in January while the threat of Covid is assessed. Other restrictions include a four-household limit on mixing in a private setting. • The headline, subheading and text of this article were amended on 10 December 2021 to make clear that people travelling from Great Britain to Ireland will be advised to undertake daily lateral flow tests for five consecutive days after arrival, not required to do so as an earlier version said.The holiday season is a time of year beloved by many New Yorkers, but it also brings an occasion many dread: SantaCon. An annual event that sees some 30,000 people descend on New York, at its best Saturday’s SantaCon is a gathering of young people who donate some money to charity while wearing Santa Claus costumes and getting drunk. At its worst, however – and SantaCon is frequently at its worst – the affair is an invitation for mass brawls, widespread street-vomiting, public fornication and loutishness. It wasn’t always this way. The modern-day SantaCon traces its origins to a less debauched, more purposed protest in Copenhagen in 1974. A group called Solvognen, which took its name from a Nordic Bronze Age sun chariot statue discovered in Denmark in 1902, held a four-day demonstration during which they entered a department store and began handing out books to confused shoppers. Solvognen was “an extraordinary Danish guerrilla theater troupe”, Mother Jones wrote three years later, with a longing for “a simpler Danish lifestyle, where American consumerism is not an envied standard”. Any children who happen to be on the streets this Saturday, when the modern-day SantaCon is occurring, are unlikely to receive this message – instead being presented with a chance to see their festive hero presented in an altogether unsavory light. Initially, the US adoption of Solvognen’s event stayed true to the anti-consumerism principles. That was implemented by the Cacophony Society, a San Francisco culture-jamming group, which held what was effectively the first US event in 1994. Inspired by the Solvognen action, a group of people took to the streets posing as Santas on strike. They bantered with locals and disrupted high society parties, aiming for “a little mocking of a bullshit holiday which was demonstrably based on an unholy alliance of religious hypocrisy and mercantile lust”, as Cacophony Society member John Law wrote in 2014. Later in the day Law, having checked no children were present, was ceremoniously hanged, in his Santa outfit, from a lamppost – “long after any tiny tots were tucked away in their warm beds”, he wrote. The group wanted to satirize the commercialization of Christmas, and, Law said: “With the SantaCon thing, it seemed to me that we had done just that. We took back the holiday from Macy’s, from Julius, from Jesus, from Coca-Cola.” According to the website for the New York SantaCon, the event has lost the angry, anti-commercialism meaning. “SantaCon is a charitable, non-political, nonsensical Santa Claus convention that happens once a year to spread absurdist joy,” the website says. In an email to the Guardian, SantaCon said it has raised $750,000 over the past 10 years. Attendees are alerted to the start point a couple of days before SantaCon, and tens of thousands of red-clad people usually appear. SantaCon isn’t unique to New York, with similar events taking place across the US and beyond, but it is the New York gathering that has garnered the worst reputation. Each year has been marked by vandalizing, public urination, vomiting and defecation, and some bar owners have boycotted the event, refusing entry to anyone wearing a Santa costume. In 2013, despite the New York police department launching a campaign against SantaCon, a group of half a dozen Santas, and apparently one elf, were filmed brawling in the street in Manhattan. The same year, footage of one of the attendees administering manual stimulation to a man in a Santa Claus outfit went viral. SantaCon was cancelled due to Covid-19 in 2020, but a year earlier the event featured a Santa urinating “in the middle of the McDonald’s in front of a child”, the New York Post reported, while Gothamist documented many less serious instances of Santas inspiring revulsion on public transport. In an email, SantaCon said the event has “has changed significantly for the better” in recent years. It added: “As with any event involving 30,000 people where alcohol is involved, there are always going to be individual situations of disruptive conduct.” “We agree that there is no excuse for inappropriate behavior including public drunkenness, urination, or rude behavior,” SantaCon said. “This is not only prohibited by the stated rules of the event, but actively discouraged by the crowds of Santas themselves, who are, for the most part, responsible, creative, community-minded New Yorkers. NYC Santa realizes that he has a responsibility to New York City and its citizens.” It is impossible to be certain what this year’s SantaCon holds, but given the weight of history, it is likely to be unpleasant for many, something hinted at in SantaCon’s own publicity. “Simple and effective way to have a merry SantaCon,” a SantaCon tweet read. “The 6 ‘F’s of SantaCon: Don’t F*** with… 1. Kids 2. Cops 3. Bar Staff 4. NYC 5. NYC Vax Requirements 6. Santa’s Charity Mission” Setting aside the suggestion implicit in the publication of such rules that SantaCon attendees are likely to interfere with any or all six of the above, the timid avoidance of using an actual expletive also indicates how far SantaCon has come from its anarchic roots. There will be no war waging against capitalism on Saturday. And unfortunately for many New Yorkers, it is the Santas who will be bad boys and girls this year.Start Churchill War Rooms, King Charles St, SW1 Distance 3.8 miles Time 2 hours Total ascent Negligible Difficulty Easy Google map of the route It is a mark of our almost religious obsession with the second world war that the drab underground offices of London’s Churchill War Rooms attract so many visitors. Devotees shuffle around the cramped corridors, squinting in the yellow light at blessed desks and blessed chairs, breathing deeply as if sensing some afterscent of cigar. They hold zealous conviction that £25 is worth it for entry, £7.95 necessary for butternut soup and a baguette, £20 essential for a T-shirt with Winston in pinstripes toting a tommy gun. For me the only lasting image was a photo of the cabinet secretariat, around a quarter of whom seemed to be children. The best bit was leaving. After an hour or so in dingy confinement, I was released to the grandeur of St James’ Park and turned right to Horse Guards Parade. The gravel square is the best of Whitehall’s architecture. Even the London Eye, which photobombs above Admiralty House from half a mile east, somehow works here, gently mocking all the pomp. The worst is the looming concrete menace of the Ministry of Justice, rearing up from behind the barracks on the south side of the park to spy on those below. As I crunched through the leaves, I found myself watching people, too. The park has refined pleasures. Standing on the bridge in the middle of the central lake, I looked east to see white pelicans fluffing and chatting on an island in front of the Treasury, and turned west for a hint of boxy Buckingham Palace. In the branches of the bright trees, pigeons chased parakeets in swooping arcs. But the joy was in the people here: grinning families clutching Union Jack tat, Victorian relics stretching their legs from their clubs on Piccadilly, handsome French couples in flowing coats. The experience called to mind Virginia Woolf’s essay Street Haunting. For her, walking among others allowed an illusion of putting on “briefly for a few minutes the bodies and minds of others”. In this state of empathy, “the shell-like covering which our souls have excreted for themselves ... is broken, and there is left of all these wrinkles and roughnesses a central oyster of perception, an enormous eye”. I could feel a little of that. Ignoring the crowds outside the palace, I continued along Constitution Hill, the southern border of Green Park. Here the copper beeches and field maples were clinging to the last of their leaves. But the London planes were the pick, lolloping around the grass, lanky and posh with papery skin, dressed up for Christmas with their jaunty pompom catkins. Plane trees feel as much part of the city as black cabs and red telephone boxes. But the tree only arrived here in the late 17th century – a blend of the oriental plane from south-east Europe and west Asia, and the American sycamore. Soon, I reached Hyde Park and criss-crossed westward. Many of the world’s great parks were designed as idylls for the rich: Cours-la-Reine in Paris and Central Park in New York were built mainly for carriages and displays of wealth. Hyde Park is different. It may have promenades and horse tracks and the gaudy Albert memorial in adjoining Kensington Gardens, but since it opened to the public in 1637, it has also always held ground for rebels. Speakers’ Corner in particular is an important emblem of the British devotion to public space, of sharing this land. Behind the Serpentine Gallery I spotted a man tottering in skyscraper heels, desperately trying to stuff pink balloons up his skirts while a friend took photos. Every time he bent down to tie a shoelace, a balloon popped out and he swore loudly. No one seemed to pay him much attention. As dark descended, I left the park and joined the bustle of Kensington High Street, where a woman was slumped across some railings. Her gathered friends bickered about what this meant for their night. That was enough Woolfian voyeurism. Time for the pub, I thought, cutting through the crowd as quickly as I could. The pub Every November, the Churchill Arms’ gardener, Ray Diaz, spends three weeks going up and down steepling ladders to take down the pub’s signature baskets and planters. In their place he fits two walls of spruce trees, with lights, from pavement to roof. Once this is complete, the pub hosts a party for the big switch-on; one year, Ray was given the honour, and dressed as mayor for the occasion, complete with three cornered hat and ceremonial chains. It’s Christmas, basically: silly but worth it. The pub looks glorious, a box of simple shining joy. Inside, the colour is just right, deep oak with flashes of red. The shape is perfect, too, a simple U around a broad central bar and plenty of seats. The crowd is as varied as in any part of London: people young and old, side by side, sipping bitter or prosecco. On one table near me was a group of absurdly attractive young Irish people, as if from the set of Normal People. On another was an old couple, silently playing cribbage. At the bar, a group of bald men in black suits clinked pints after a wake, relieved at being able to laugh again. I wondered if the deceased would be added to the brass plates on the bar that commemorate the locals lost. I asked the manager, James Keogh, for a little time to talk. He winced and said it would be hard to spare more than five minutes. Three-quarters of an hour later, I knew the history of this 271-year-old pub and James’s part in it. It began as the Bedford Arms and changed to its present name after the war in tribute. There is a link, apparently: Winston Churchill’s grandparents used to come to the pub in the 1800s. Keogh arrived from County Limerick as a 23-year-old in 1987 and soon started pulling pints. By then the place was already festooned in the maximalist way it is today: chamber pots and lamps on the ceiling, Churchill memorabilia on the walls. James left after two years to run other pubs. When he came back as manager in 2013, he decided the decor would stay. Part of me thinks he couldn’t face the removal job. I decided against the Fuller’s offerings on tap; James likes his Guinness, so I knew it would be good. It sat heavy in the glass and when I drank it oozed around my mouth and sang songs on the way down. After four pints, I was ready for the house pad thai, of perfect size and saltiness for the hungry boozer. It kept me going until closing time, a traditional 11pm. In a haze, I shook James’s hand and left. “It was a pleasure,” he said. Yes, it was. churchillarmskensington.co.ukBritons partial to a festive glass of port or sherry should nurse it carefully this Christmas as a shake-up of alcohol taxes threatens to add at least £1 to bottle prices next year. The chancellor announced a sweeping overhaul of alcohol duties in the budget, reducing the tax take on lower-strength drinks, such as draught beer, but increasing them on products, such as fortified wine, with an alcohol content above 11%. Andrew Hawes, the managing director of the wine importer Mentzendorff, said port and sherry fans were about to be hit with the “largest single alcohol tax rise in UK history”. UK shoppers buy 10m bottles of sherry and close to 9m bottles of port each year. “Local wine merchants up and down the country are aghast at the suggested tax rises, which will see port and sherry brands such as Taylor’s and La Gitana take on the largest single alcohol tax rises in UK history,” said Hawes. “Ultimately I fear it will be the consumers who will pay the price, which is a shame especially as we’ve invested so much to attract a new following to the joys of these fortified wines, which to date have offered incredible value.” Steve Moody, the managing director of Fells, another importer, said it made “absolutely no sense” to target the fortified wine category as sherry and port were “enjoyed in moderation” by friends and families on special occasions. “If the proposals remain unchanged it will result in the retail price of a bottle of port increasing overnight by £1.09,” he said. “That’s an immediate increase of more than 13%.” The Wine and Spirit Trade Association (WSTA) is concerned the higher prices will kill off the sales revival being enjoyed by fortified wine makers, who have won a new, younger after thanks to the emergence of Fino bars. Sherry has also become a popular ingredient in homemade lockdown cocktails with UK sales up 13% in 2020. Whilse some alcoholic beverages can be adapted to bring down their alcohol content or ABV, there are strict production rules for port and sherry that do not allow producers to tamper with strength. The WSTA is calling for the government to rethink the plan which is the subject of a consultation that runs until the end of January. Miles Beale, the WSTA’s chief executive, said that if you enjoyed a port or sherry at Christmas “make the most of it this year as it might be priced out of your Christmas shop in the future”. The government needed to make sure it wasn’t introducing a new system that “embeds unfairness between products”, he added.Guardian cartoonists had a successful night at the Political Cartoon of the Year awards 2021. Ben Jennings was named political cartoonist of the year for his portfolio throughout a turbulent year, while Henny Beaumont won Covid cartoon of the year for Lost Generation, a cartoon published in June about the plight of young people during the pandemic. Accepting his honour, Jennings, whose work also appears in the i newspaper, said the year offered rich material to cartoonists: “The versatility of cartooning in its ability to take on subjects, capture moods and evoke a variety of responses made it a worthy medium to tackle a year like 2021. I never imagined when I was a kid scribbling with crayons that I’d be doing much the same as an adult to document a plague in real time.” Accepting her award, Beaumont said she was personally grateful but placed her work in a wider context: “Winning this award has felt really significant for me and it feels like there is a real move towards appreciating and recognising the contribution women are making to political cartooning and I am proud of being part of this movement.” She also referred to those whose lives she depicted in the winning image. “The cartoon is dedicated to all the young people who missed out on so much during lockdown, had such a tough time and took so seriously their responsibility to protect those more vulnerable than themselves.”Pick of the week The Witcher A second season for the supernatural epic starring Henry Cavill as Geralt of Rivia – a being with special powers and the kind of physique and bone structure that, in fantasy fiction world, can only indicate either great nobility or great evil. As we rejoin this sensitive monster-slayer, he’s in near exile after battle. But this allows world-building opportunities – tonight, we meet Geralt’s old friend Nivellen (Kristofer Hivju), a man cursed to live in a monster’s skin. The show does its best to explore these ideas as existential quandaries as well as adventure narratives. What does being a monster mean and what does it mean to kill them? Spectacular and portentous to the point of absurdity. PH Netflix, from Friday 17 December *** The Grand Tour: Carnage a Trois Making a snarky special about the minutiae of French motoring without leaving Blighty feels like one of the most defiantly old-school Top Gear moves imaginable. Although, to be fair to Clarkson, May and Hammond, there was the small matter of the pandemic standing in the way of foreign travel. The trio still manage plenty of their trademark irreverence and gratuitous destruction in the Welsh hills where this was filmed – in fact, once you’ve seen them drop a car from 500ft to test its suspension, you’ll understand that it’s business as usual. As ever, a TV phenomenon that implicitly smirks and sniggers at rational analysis. PH Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 17 December *** The Future Diary “Would I still grow to love you, even if I know how it ends?” There’s scripted reality and then there’s this. Arguably, it’s the opposite: unscripted unreality but still an attempt to carve a real-life narrative out of a deliberately artificial scenario. Two people who have never previously met are cast to live/act out a romantic storyline by enacting the events of a pre-written diary. Cue cute bonding scenarios – pushing a broken-down car, an idyllic day at the beach – and an eventual “breakup”. But will genuine infatuation take over? Bewildering and intriguing. PH Netflix, from Tuesday 14 December *** The Beaker Girls “The story of the Beaker girls is just beginning … ” For millennials who grew up learning about life through Jacqueline Wilson books, the promising exit line of this year’s Tracey Beaker reboot was a welcome one. Following a now grownup Tracey and her “mini Beaker” daughter Jess, it scratched a nostalgic itch while continuing to beautifully explore the care system, with plenty of silly moments in between. Expect more of this in the Christmas special, which sees them deal with a storm and an unexpected arrival. HR BBC iPlayer, daily from Monday 13 December *** Selling Tampa Much like the Real Housewives TV dynasty before it, this aspirational Netflix semi-reality hatewatch behemoth is beginning to spread its wings and launch into other regions. After all, is there anywhere that wouldn’t benefit from the sudden arrival of dozens of uber-glamorous realtors tramping its picturesque streets? While we await the arrival of Selling Tottenham, we’ll have to make do with this: a brokerage based in Tampa, Florida, centring on the formidable Sharelle Rosado. “Get ready to make some money, bitches!” PH Netflix, from Wednesday 15 December *** With Love Messy, cheerful, slightly cheesy comedy-drama exploring the tangled personal lives of multiple generations of the Diaz family as they negotiate the joys and pitfalls of romance. At the heart of the story are siblings Lily (Emeraude Toubia) and Jorge (Mark Indelicato) but expect to hear from parents and children, too. The narrative is framed by those emotionally overheated family occasions when getting up close and personal with your nearest and dearest is unavoidable – the holidays, the birthdays, the weddings and the funerals. PH Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 17 December *** Uninterrupted’s Top Class A second season of the basketball documentary series that combines hoop dreams with the hard-knock realities of growing up (and particularly growing up Black) in the United States. The pandemic has hit the Trailblazers hard – after 12 months with no competitive games, the team are looking to reboot. The players have become used to being a powerhouse but, in reality, they’re drawn from a comparatively small school and have always punched above their weight. With problems affecting several of the prime movers, can standards be maintained? PH IMDb TV, from Friday 17 DecemberThe latest wireless headphones from the Swedish company Urbanista hide an ingenious solution to battery life woes: solar charging. The Los Angeles cost £169 ($199/A$349) and look no different from a normal set of headphones, apart from a flexible Powerfoyle solar cell on top of the headband. Fairly compact with simple, clean lines, they are available in either black or gold, the first of which helps the solar strip blend in the most. They feel solid and well made with a soft-touch finish, but are slightly heavier than the market-leading Sony 1000XM4. The headband is well padded, but they have some serious clamping force on the sides of your head, requiring a bit of stretching out on first wear. But at least they don’t move around when worn. Controls, connectivity and battery life The Los Angeles are standard Bluetooth 5.0 headphones supporting the universal SBC and AAC audio formats used by most devices, and maintained a solid connection to various Apple and Android devices. The right ear cup has three buttons for controlling playback and volume. Taking off the headphones also pauses the music. The left ear cup has a button for adjusting the noise-cancelling functions and a USB-C port for charging. They lack a 3.5mm headphone socket for using them without Bluetooth, which is irritating for use on a plane. But where the headphones really stand out is through battery life. Without the solar charging the headphones last a tremendous 80 hours on battery (50 hours with ANC on), which is far longer than most competitors. But the solar charging makes them last almost indefinitely unless you only use them in a darkened room. When the battery charge drops below 90%, the solar strip tops it up when exposed to sufficient sun or artificial light. In my time testing the battery never dropped below 50%, topping them up by leaving the headband facing a window when not in use. Specifications Weight: 320g Drivers: 40mm Connectivity: Bluetooth 5.0, USB-C and solar charging Bluetooth codecs: SBC, AAC Battery life: 50/80 hours ANC on/off Sustainability Urbanista estimates that the battery will maintain in excess of 80% of its original capacity for more than 300 full charge cycles, but it is not replaceable nor are the headphones repairable, ultimately making them disposable. The headphones do not contain any recycled materials. The company does not offer trade-in or recycling, nor does it publish environmental impact assessments. Sound and noise-cancelling The headphones have active noise-cancelling, which works well enough to dampen the drone of a plane engine or road noise, but struggles with higher pitched tones such as fans or speech. They beat most cheaper headphones but won’t trouble some of the market leaders, making them about right for the price. The ambient sound mode is fairly good too, allowing you to listen out for announcements or traffic, but struggles with wind noise. The headphones have a reasonably wide and expansive sound that handles tracks with plenty of energy. But the sound is skewed to the low end with plenty of well-controlled, punchy bass producing lower notes than most headphones can manage. Treble and high tones are pretty good, but will get squashed by the bass. There is no equaliser available to manually turn it down, sadly. Feed them some high energy electronica and they sound great, but less so with classical music or more nuanced tracks. Activating the noise-cancelling makes them sound slightly less wide, expansive and energetic. Observations The announcements made when you switch on the headphones or change modes are too loud and can be quite shocking if you’re listening in a quiet space. Call quality is average with my end of the conversation sounding a little robotic even in quiet environments. The ear cups rotate to be flat and slide in the case, but do not fold up for travel. Price The Urbanista Los Angeles cost £169 ($199/A$349) and are available in black or gold. For comparison, the Urbanista Miami cost £129, Anker’s Soundcore Life Q35 cost £130 and the Sony WH-1000XM4 cost £249. Verdict The Urbanista Los Angeles are the first solar-charging headphones on the market and deliver on one thing above all else: almost limitless battery life. If you use them in bright environments you may only have to charge them once or twice a year, or not at all if they’re left facing daylight when not in use, which is remarkable. And they manage this solar feat while looking like a regular, tidy set of headphones. They sound good, but very bass-heavy with no adjustments available. The noise-cancelling is reasonable, but can’t touch market leaders. The Bluetooth connection and controls are good, but they lack a 3.5mm analogue headphones socket and crushed my ears a little. Despite their solar credentials, the headphones are not repairable and the battery is not replaceable making them ultimately disposable and losing them a star. Pros: solar charging, near-infinite battery life, Bluetooth 5.0 with SBC and AAC support, active noise cancelling, pumping bass and energetic sound. Cons: bass can override other tones, noise cancelling struggles with speech, call quality is not great, no 3.5mm analogue socket, tight fit, battery cannot be replaced, headphones not repairable. Other reviews Anker Soundcore Life Q35 review: budget headphones with good noise-cancelling Sony WH-1000XM4 review: Bose-beating noise-cancelling headphones Bowers &amp; Wilkins PX7 review: Bose-beating noise-cancelling headphonesIt’s that time again, when the photo editors on the picture desk at the Guardian sift through the edits of the best of the millions of images that they see over the course of a year, supplied by the various press agencies from around the world, from staff and freelancers alike. It is not possible to mention as many of the talented photographers who have supported our journalism visually, creating outstanding work and stories of their own, as we would like to but we have picked out a few. Felipe Dana Drug users detained during a Taliban raid walk in line on their way to the detoxification ward of the Avicenna Medical hospital for drug treatment in Kabul, Afghanistan, 2 October 2021. Felipe Dana is a photojournalist covering news and stories for Associated Press. Felipe’s work this year has taken him from Brazil via Israel and the Occupied Territories, to Tokyo for the Olympics. In Afghanistan, where he has largely been since September, he has gained close access to the Taliban regime, spent time with fighters and covered their drug treatment programme. A family sits inside a makeshift tent built amid the rubble of their home, destroyed by an airstrike in Beit Lahiya, northern Gaza Strip, 14 June 2021. Portraits of Taliban fighters taken at various police stations in Kabul, Afghanistan. Migrants arrive aboard a Spanish coast guard rescue ship at Arguineguín port, in Gran Canaria island, Spain, 21 November 2021. Zohra Bensemra Female primary school students leave school after a class in Kabul, Afghanistan, 25 October 2021. See more on this story here. Based in Dakar, Senegal, Zohra Bensemra has covered drought and Covid, and has been in Kabul since October, one of the few female members of the international press working in the country, where she has covered the evolving situation for women and girls under the new hardline Islamist Taliban regime. Fallou Diop, 19, a jockey, rides a young mare called Raissa Betty, whom he trains to compete with in the future, out of the Lambafar stable, in Niaga, Rufisque. See more on this photo story here. Supporters of Gambia’s president and presidential candidate Adama Barrow celebrate after partial results of the presidential elections showed Barrow leading in Banjul, 5 December 2021. Emilio Morenatti Volcano’s lava flows destroying houses in Las Manchas village, on the Canary island of La Palma, Spain, 6 December. Emilio Morenatti is chief photographer for the Associated Press in Spain and Portugal. His ethereal photographs of the ash-covered La Palma, Canary Islands have really stood out and engaged our readers, in addition to his coverage of Tokyo’s Olympics anddomestic news in Spain. A couple kiss in front of a barricade set on fire by demonstrators during clashes with police following a protest condemning the imprisonment of rap singer Pablo Hasél in Barcelona, Spain on 18 February 2021. Melissa Stockwell plays with her children, Dallas and Millie, in their home in Colorado Springs, ahead of the Olympics. Abandoned cats wander in search of food at a road covered by ash, and a soccer field is covered with ash on La Palma, Canary Islands, 1 December 2021. People dance on a promenade facing the Mediterranean Sea, as sun sets at a beach in Barcelona in October 2021. Yasuyoshi Chiba Wounded captive Ethiopian soldiers arrive on a truck at a rehabilitation centre in Mekelle, the capital of Tigray region, Ethiopia, 2 July 2021. After being stationed in São Paulo, and then Rio in Brazil, Yasuyoshi Chiba, who works for AFP, has been posted in Nairobi since 2016. This year his work has taken him from Kenya to Ethiopia for the unfurling Tigray crisis, Sudan and Uganda, as well as to Tokyo for the Olympics. A local farmer walking in a swarm of desert locusts in Meru, Kenya, February 2021. Supporters of the incumbent Ugandan president, Yoveri Museveni, celebrate in the streets of Kampala on 16 January 2021. Right: Members of Dance Centre Kenya perform in a dress rehearsal of the Nutcracker in November 2021. Ariana Cubillos Children jump a rope as they play at a court close to the Pavia garbage dump in Barquisimeto, Venezuela, 3 March 2021. Colombian photographer Ariana Cubillos is based in Caracas, Venezuela. The desk has noticed her joyful stories filed among the difficult times that the country is facing, such as the Musical Vaccine orchestra tour. Musicians join pianist, composer and conductor Jose Agustin Sanchez on the bed of an 18-wheeler truck for a musical tour coined a musical disinfection in Barquisimeto, Venezuela, 4 March 2021. A woman holds a sign that reads in Spanish: “Sex education to decide, contraceptives to avoid abortion” as she jumps with another woman as part of the Global Day of Action for access to legal, safe and free abortion, outside the parliament in Caracas, Venezuela , 28 September 2021. Danish Siddiqui People wait to cremate victims who died due to coronavirus at a crematorium in New Delhi, India, 23 April. Indian photojournalist Danish Siddiqui, based in Delhi, who led the national Reuters multimedia team, was killed on 15 July while covering clashes between Afghan security forces and the Taliban forces near a border crossing with Pakistan. His work during the year covering the tragedy of the wave of Covid infections across India was very powerful. A member of the Afghan special forces keeps watch as others search a house during a combat mission against the Taliban, in Kandahar province, Afghanistan, 12 July 2021. Demonstrators are stopped by police during a protest against the arrest of 22-year-old climate activist Disha Ravi, outside police headquarters in New Delhi, 16 February. A Naga Sadhu wears a mask before the procession for taking a dip in the Ganges river during Shahi Snan at Kumbh Mela festival, in Haridwar, 12 April. Lillian Suwanrumpha Pro-democracy protesters confront riot police whilst marching to Government House to call for the resignation of Thailand’s prime minister, Prayut Chan-ocha, in Bangkok on 18 July. Lilian Suwanrumpha is a Thai photographer who has been based in Bangkok for Agence France-Presse since 2016. In 2021 they covered ongoing anti-government demonstrations, environmental issues and daily life alongside the coronavirus pandemic. They have covered a tumultuous year for the the country. Pro-democracy protesters make the three-finger salute during an anti-government demonstration in Bangkok on 24 March 2021. Medics haul an oxygen tank onto the back of a police car for an elderly Covid-19 coronavirus patient in Bangkok, 30 July. Right; A research team from Chulalongkorn University collect sweat samples from vendors in a fresh market as they develop a novel device that detects the Covid-19 coronavirus through specific odours. Brandon Bell People walk through the French District during Hurricane Ida on 29 August 2021 in New Orleans, Louisiana. Brandon Bell is a staff Photographer for Getty Images, based in Houston, Texas. He has covered the border story extensively, as well as some remarkable work during Hurricane Ida. Migrants are accounted for and processed by border patrol after crossing the Rio Grande into the United States, 1 July, in Roma, Texas. Medical assistants Crystal Leyva and Keitia Perez administer Covid-19 sampling tests, to laboratory technicians, at Foxconn Assembly in Houston, 13 August. Right Bailey Salinas, 10, meets Democratic gubernatorial candidate Beto O’Rourke after a campaign rally at Republic Square, Austin, on 4 December. People exit a border patrol bus and prepare to be received by the Val Verde Humanitarian Coalition after crossing the Rio Grande, 22 September, in Del Rio, Texas. Fatima Shbair Palestinians return to the rubble of their destroyed homes in Beit Hanoun, Gaza, 24 May. Fatima Shbair, 24, is a a self-taught, freelance photojournalist photojournalist based in Gaza. Shbair is the youngest winner of the Anja Niedringhaus Courage in Photojournalism Award. A Palestinian girl stands amid the rubble of her destroyed home on 24 May 2021 in Beit Hanoun, Gaza. Farah al-Bahtiti, 5, and Sarah Al-Matrabiee, 4 in the Zeitoun neighbourhood, who were injured by missile strikes on the Gaza Strip in May. Hollie Adams Hollie Adams is a freelance photographer based in London shooting largely for Getty Images. Her coverage of UK news has stood out, from rare London snow in January through a turbulent year. A patient is transported out of an ambulance by medics at the Royal London hospital on 2 January. Demonstrators hold smoke flares during a Reclaim Pride March, 24 July. Right; women in The Purge costumers pose for a photo on Halloween at Between the Bridges at Southbank on 31 October. Hannah McKay Fish-eye view of fireworks after the Olympic cauldron is lit during the Opening Ceremony of the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games. Reuters staff photographer Hannah McKay is based in London. In 2021 her images from the Clapham Common vigil arrest went viral. Patsy Stevenson is held down by two male officers at a vigil in Clapham, south London, following the kidnap and murder of Sarah Everard, in London, 13 March. Olympic athletes in action as rain falls in Tokyo, 2 August. People watch a Fridays for Future march from their windows, and activist Greta Thunberg speaks later in the day at the same march, 5 November, Glasgow. Christopher Furlong Messages of support at the newly repaired mural of England footballer Marcus Rashford by artist AKSE_P19 in Withington, Manchester, after after it was defaced by vandals in the aftermath of England’s Euro 2020 final loss on 13 July. Christopher Furlong is Getty Images chief photographer in the UK covering news, documentary and daily life. Dancers take to the famous Blackpool Tower Ballroom and move to the sound of the famous Wurlitzer organ, 5 August. Festival fans listen to the Lathums during day two of the Tramlines Festival at Hillsborough Park in Sheffield, 24 July. Boris Johnson tries to open his umbrella next to Prince Charles, at the dedication ceremony of the new national UK police memorial at the National Memorial Arboretum in Alrewas, central England, on 28 July 2021. Right; Nine migrants drift in the Channel after their engine failed in Dover, 6 September. Wakil Kohsar A Taliban fighter walks past a beauty salon with images of women defaced using spray paint in Shar-e-Naw in Kabul on 18 August. Few nations endured as tumultuous a year as Afghanistan in 2021, and Afghan-born Wakil Kohsar currently serving as the chief photographer for AFP in Afghanistan, captured the dramatic fall of the country to the Taliban following the sudden American withdrawal in August including the scenes at Kabul airport. Afghan people climb atop a plane as they wait at the airport in Kabul on August. A US soldier point his gun towards an Afghan passenger at the Kabul airport in Kabul 16 August. Right; Afghan newspaper journalists Nematullah Naqdi and Taqi Daryabi show their wounds in their office in Kabul after being released from Taliban custody.Every autumn, Anil Kalyan, from Kutail village in India’s northern state of Haryana, would join tens of thousands of other paddy farmers to set fire to the leftover stalks after the rice harvest to clear the field for planting wheat. But this year, Kalyan opted for change. He signed his land up for a trial being held in Haryana and neighbouring Punjab as an alternative to the environmentally hazardous stubble burning that is commonplace across India and a major cause of Delhi’s notorious smog. His 16 hectares (40 acres) were instead serviced by a tractor spraying an enzyme, which decomposes the stubble into useful fertiliser in just under a month. “We used to burn the stubble. We had no other solution for it. Burning caused quite a lot of problems – one was pollution, the second was the death of soil-friendly microbes, and the yield also reduced a lot. The costs incurred increased a lot every time we ploughed the field,” he says. “This [new solution] will benefit us a lot. It will reduce our cost, increase our yield severalfold, and reduce pollution to a great extent.” The crop-residue management programme, the largest ever project to eliminate stubble burning in India, hopes to end the scorching of more than 2.3m hectares (9,000 sq miles) of paddy fields annually. The scheme was conceived and led by nurture.farm, a digital platform for sustainable agriculture that was launched 18 months ago. More than 700 spraying machines were deployed across 170,000 hectares in 23 districts. More than 25,000 farmers took part in the experiment. Findings from the trial, published on Wednesday, found more than 1m tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions had been prevented. The enzyme, developed by the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, increases organic carbon in the soil and maintains overall soil health. Satellite pictures from the European Space Agency were used by nurture.farm to locate burning fields. Stubble burning occurs globally, but particularly in India, the world’s largest rice exporter. The fires diminish nutrients in the soil as well as adding to air pollution. During the crop-burning season, the practice can account for up to 45% of Delhi’s pollution, according to government meteorologists. Dhruv Sawhney, chief operating officer at nurture.farm, says more than 70,000 farm fires were detected by satellite imagery in this year’s stubble-burning season in India. He says: “Stubble burning has now become a perennial issue because of a mismatch of policy and agricultural practices and, crucially, the lack of options available to farmers.” He wants to give farmers carbon credits for good agricultural practices, to sustain and scale up the project. The firm is launching a “sustainably grown rice” label so people can buy rice from the fields where burning no longer happens. “We’re also considering generating more carbon credits through introducing additional sustainable practices such as alternative wetting and drying [of rice paddies], which will save water and reduce greenhouse gas emissions,” says Sawhney. The programme will expand next year to cover about 800,000 hectares of land, roughly 40% of the area usually burned. Previous bans on stubble burning and threats of fines have done little to dissuade farmers, who see it as the only viable option to clear fields in the short period between two crops. Faced with farmers’ protests, the government decriminalised stubble burning in November. “If just by penalising farmers, stubble burning could be stopped, we should have been able to end it by now. We have evidence that in areas where alternatives are implemented, fire incidents have come down,” says Anumita Roychowdhury, head of the clean air programme at India’s Centre for Science and Environment, in the Hindu. “Penalty without access to solutions does not work,” Roychowdhury says. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Australia is facing an “existential threat” to its democratic institutions from “mass influence” actors including Russia, Cambridge Analytica and Facebook, research for the department of defence has found. Commercial operations and foreign government agencies are collecting data to manipulate populations, spreading disinformation and propaganda, and in the worst cases, converting online activity into violence. Defence commissioned a multi-disciplinary group from five universities to outline the scope of the problem as it works towards its own “counter-influence” capabilities. In Understanding mass influence: Three case studies of contemporary mass influence activities, researchers studied Facebook, Cambridge Analytica –the firm that harvested Facebook data to target American voters) – and the “troll farm” set up by Russia as the Internet Research Agency (IRA). The researchers studied the “grey zone threats” in space and cyberspace to understand the damaging effects of such mass influence campaigns. Among the recommendations is a suggestion that, to counter influence and illegal data harvesting, Australia will need to develop its own influence capabilities and improve its data collection. “A broad range of platform, user, usage, consumer, third party and campaign data will be required to develop, validate, and compare understanding of the reach, impact and effectiveness of influence campaigns and counter-campaigns over time,” is one of the recommendations. Defence’s Joint Capabilities Group’s head of information warfare, Maj Gen Susan Coyle, said in the context of a deteriorating strategic environment, traditional warfighting domains have evolved to reflect the changing environment. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “However, military modernisations, technological disruption, and the risk of state-on-state conflict are complicating Australia’s strategic circumstances,” she wrote. “Expanding cyber capabilities – and the willingness of some countries and non-state actors to use them – are further complicating Australia’s strategic environment. As one of Australia’s instruments of national power, Defence’s response to active interference, disinformation campaigns and economic coercion are a constant challenge.” Defence has outlined in its 2020 Defence Strategic Update and Force Structure Plan the importance of influence and grey zone threats and the need to counter them. The report emphasises that the views in it are the authors’, not those of the defence department. Academic lead, the University of Adelaide’s Professor, Michael Webb (Defence and Security Institute director), said actors were increasingly using cyber capabilities to influence populations “psychologically, politically and economically”. “We found that low levels of cybersecurity awareness, high levels of user credulity and strong incentives for organisations to seek to persuade, manipulate or coerce target audiences, contributed substantively to detrimental outcomes – intended or otherwise – for individuals and organisations,” he said. Webb said 50 academics across 14 disciplines from five universities created three “collegial” teams, and that they all felt strongly about the issue. “There’s a sense of existential threat we’re feeling around our democratic institutions, so we’re motivated to do what we can,” he said. Cambridge Analytica, for example, profiled and targeted individuals and groups to shift public opinion “at scale”. “It was a $20m investment by one guy who wanted to shift the Republican party further to the right … it’s undermining the fabric of our democracy,” Webb said. But more “terrifying” were the Russian interventions, which were successful in converting online interactions into offline violence and disrupting the 2016 US election. “The number of staff involved (up to 1,000), the diverse sets of skills, that is really a serious operation they’re mounting,” Webb said. “Their objective wasn’t to get (former US president Donald) Trump in, it was to undermine trust in democracy, and in western society. “They made some real inroads and we haven’t really come back from that.” The researchers found the Russian IRA was “motivated, uninhibited by laws or society norms, well-resourced and well-coordinated” at spreading disinformation and propaganda and turning opposing groups on each other in a way that could end in violence. (More detail on each case study will be released at a later date.) Facebook, meanwhile, is “likely to remain an efficient platform for propagating disinformation for the foreseeable future”. Webb said the teams’ work was to inform defence, which is working on its own Australian influence operations capability using cyberspace, artificial intelligence, and information warfare. “As a society I’m not sure we understand just how amazing and important democracy is. It’s precious but it’s precarious as well,” he said. “We always have differences of opinion. But that shouldn’t stop us from being able to have dialogue. Democracy supports that. If we allow ourselves to be fractured into echo chambers, that’s not a promising foundation for the future.”Officials working on conservation matters in the New South Wales environment department have been barred from holding financial interests in the state’s biodiversity offset scheme. This follows an investigation of the department’s management of potential conflicts of interest. Senior officials told a parliamentary inquiry on Friday that staff who work on the offset scheme or in the department’s biodiversity, conservation and science sections had been told they could not work in those roles and hold personal interests in properties and companies that were involved in the financial trade of offset credits. It follows two external investigations that were commissioned by the department after Guardian Australia uncovered a series of failures in offset programs. Offsets exist to allow developers to compensate for environmental damage in one area by delivering an equivalent environmental benefit in another. But there have been problems with the system, including in one case a 20-year delay in delivering environmental protection and so-called “double-dipping” by developers in areas of urban sprawl. Guardian Australia also revealed the state and federal governments bought tens of millions of dollars in offset credits from properties linked to consultants whose company advised the government on development in western Sydney. The reporting triggered a string of reviews, including one by the legal firm Maddocks and one by the consultancy Centium examining how the environment department had managed potential conflicts of interest associated with staff holding financial interests in offset sites. Guardian Australia has reported on one case involving a former staff member who bought land during their time in the department that went on to become an offset site from which the state government bought credits. There is no suggestion there was any impropriety involved. Dean Knudsen, the deputy secretary for biodiversity, conservation and science, told Friday’s hearing of the offset inquiry there had been fewer than five officials with such financial interests. After the reviews, the department has introduced a new conflict of interest protocol that deems some investments “high risk” and presenting an “unacceptable risk to the integrity” of the scheme. Knudsen said as a result, staff in certain sections could no longer participate in the scheme and those with historic interests had 12 months to divest. “For departmental staff we’ve effectively said you’re not supposed to be participating in the scheme,” he said. “If you have historically, we’ve told them what you have to do to effectively distance them from that.” The Greens MLC Cate Faehrmann, who is chairing the inquiry, said the changes were welcome. “This should have happened at the start of the scheme to help prevent the types of windfall gains by a few individuals with detailed knowledge of the offset industry,” she said. “However, we also need to see a tightening of conflicts of interest [rules] within the industry itself, including within ecological consultancies.” Officials were also asked about delays in securing permanent protection of offset sites to compensate for habitat destruction caused by coalmines in NSW. Responses to questions on notice in the parliament from the independent MLC Justin Field state that of the 41 coalmines approved in New South Wales in the past decade, one did not require offsets, 14 had not yet triggered the requirement to deliver their offsets, nine had land set aside but permanent protections were not yet in place, and 17 had “substantially finalised” their offsets. Field asked officials to explain what substantially finalised meant and was told for “all intents and purposes the offsets have been secured” but certain aspects – such as finalisation of some of the legal arrangements protecting the site – were outstanding. Officials agreed the process for securing offsets for mines had not been “as timely as [they] should be”. Field said it was not good enough that “not one single coalmine approved in the last decade has secured their required offsets through finalised in-perpetuity arrangements”. “The government needs to improve the transparency around what the hold-up is, put a deadline on finalising these arrangements and hold these mine operators to that deadline,” he said.When the Greek poet George Seferis rose to give his speech on being awarded the 1963 Nobel prize for literature, he asserted that the Swedish Academy’s honour was not so much for him as for the language in which he wrote: “A language famous through the centuries, but not widespread in its present form.” The peoples who have spoken it in one version or another over the past 3,500 years are the subject of Roderick Beaton’s magisterial new book. He writes: “The Greeks of the title and the pages that follow are to be understood as speakers of the Greek language.” This language used to be very widespread indeed; and served as a lingua franca, so to speakas it were, across polities and cultures. At its peak, the Hellenistic world stretched from beyond the Hindu Kush mountains in today’s Pakistan to the south of France, its scope revealed in place names that endure to this day. Alexandria, Naples, Nice – all are legacies of a world that used to be, in some sense, “Greek”. Consider the Septuagint, the third and second-century BC Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible. Done in Egypt, it met a need among Egyptian Jews, losing touch with Hebrew, for an intelligible version of the original text. And as in so many other times and places, intelligible meant Greek. Huge as the Hellenistic world was, the cultural influence of the Greeks over the millennia has been greater still. The world is littered with their architecture; university curricula and political structures, among other social forms, draw from their customs and institutions. “The Greeks have got just about everywhere,” Beaton writes. His focus on language has us happily roaming beside Greek speakers across a vast geography and chronology, and plays to the author’s strength as an expert in its many forms and dialects. But the book’s real engine is perhaps Seferis himself, on whose life and writings Beaton is the greatest living authority. The poet, who spent a lifetime pondering the meaning of the modern Greeks and their connection to the ancients, wrote the famous words: “Greece is travelling, always travelling.” This image of constant wandering, but also of protean dynamism, is captured well by Beaton. His Greeks are constantly changing, debating and interacting with the worlds of which they have been a part. The Hittites of the second millennium BC; the countless peoples of the Hellenistic world; the varied cultures of the early Christian era; the Venetian and Ottoman Mediterranean of the Renaissance and Early Modern Periods; the modern Europe of today – all have been antagonists and neighbours, influencers of and influenced by the Greeks. Some, in adopting the language as their own, have themselves “become Greek”. In this way, Beaton’s language-based definition of the Greeks is far more than a narrative frame. It goes to the heart of a longstanding academic question, and one of the most charged debates among contemporary Greeks themselves: what “counts” as Greek? The current Greek nationalist answer – which generally invokes Orthodox Christianity alongside a relatively recent ancestral connection to the lands that today constitute Greece – is distinctly modern, inflexible and constrained. Beaton’s work restores multiple identities to the Greeks, reflecting the depth and complexity of all that they have been over their long history. As Seferis put it in that Nobel speech, the Greece of today is “a small country, but its tradition is immense”. One of the greatest paradoxes of Greece, and arguably the trait most characteristic of it today, is this simultaneous humbleness and world-conquering ethos. Beaton is probably the only person alive who could manage with such subtlety and authority to convey it in one coherent volume. After decades as a diplomat, Seferis returned to his homeland in 1962. He was pained to see how the country had changed, largely as a result of having given itself over to tourism. The summer of his return, he had a vivid nightmare of a future in which he stood among a throng on the Acropolis. To his horror, he discerned that the crowd around him was there for an auction: the Greek government had given the Parthenon to the highest bidder, an American toothpaste mogul. The dream was prescient: in 2010, at the peak of the financial crisis, two German politicians set off a furore by proposing that Greece repay its debts by selling off its ancient buildings and its islands. The suggestion led to outrage, and a boycott of German goods. But on a more symbolic level, it touched on questions such as: who owns the Greek past? How is that past connected to the modern Greek present? And, most fundamentally, who are the Greeks? With this remarkable historical account, Beaton points us towards answers. This dazzling series of peoples with their many civilisations, identities and traditions have animated the world – and they continue, as always, to be on the move. • Katherine Fleming is a professor of Hellenic culture and civilization and provost of New York University. The Greeks: A Global History by Roderick Beaton is published by Faber (£25). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Scott Morrison has signalled Australia is likely to open up to international students and skilled workers next week, while health authorities continue to weigh up whether to adjust the timing of booster shots. The federal government revealed it would extend emergency powers for a further two months to February 2022, keeping in force mandatory mask wearing for international flights and restrictions on international travel from countries deemed high-risk. The impact of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 was top of the agenda for the final national cabinet meeting of the year, but Morrison said his government was inclined to reopen to international students and skilled workers on 15 December. That was originally due to happen at the beginning of December, but it was delayed to allow authorities to gather more information about the Omicron variant. Asked on Friday whether the borders would open on that date, Morrison said the government was “taking more advice at the moment, but that is certainly our disposition”. He planned to “keep moving forward, not to go back”. Despite Morrison’s upbeat message, the federal government has decided some measures need to remain in place for longer. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, briefed national cabinet that Australia was “still in the early stages of understanding the Omicron variant”, according to a summary issued by Morrison’s office. The meeting noted that the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, had extended the human biosecurity emergency period under the Biosecurity Act to 17 February. Hunt said the arrangements, which have been in place since March 2020 “to protect Australians during the Covid-19 pandemic” and extended several times, would continue based on health advice. Hunt said the two-month extension would “allow the important measures currently in place to continue as the government continues to reopen Australia and act decisively to respond to the emergence of the Omicron variant”. That would see the extension of mandatory pre-departure testing and mask wearing for international flights, restrictions on international travel from high-risk countries, and restrictions on outbound international travel for unvaccinated Australians. But the federal government is keeping open the option of revoking any of these rules earlier than February “to take into account the latest medical advice”, as more information is gained about Omicron. The extension will also continue restrictions on the entry of cruise ships to Australia. But Hunt said the government would “continually review, on a monthly basis, whether the current restrictions on cruise ships can be safely lifted or amended”. The meeting also received an update from the national vaccination coordinator Lt Gen John Frewen on administering vaccine boosters and delivering them across Australia. That follows the announcement that children aged five to 11 will be able to receive the Pfizer Covid vaccine from 10 January. The Labor MP Alicia Payne told Sky News: “I think parents will really welcome this approval for children. I know many parents have been really hanging out and waiting for their children to be able to be vaccinated.” Fewen briefed leaders “on the plans to close the gap in vaccination rates between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians and the general population, and on preparations under way to administer Covid-19 vaccines to children aged 5 to 11 years, including targeted communication strategies”, Morrison’s statement said. National cabinet decided to update existing Covid-19 outbreak management plans to protect Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities “in light of the Omicron variant and current outbreaks in the Northern Territory”. The Northern Territory detected four Covid cases in Katherine, as a cluster linked to three crowded households continued to grow. Earlier, Morrison gave a hint that the federal government was considering bringing forward booster shots. “We are continuing to review the evidence about how that time period for the booster shot might be able to be reduced … and we’re working with the medical experts on those issues,” he told reporters in Sydney on Friday morning. Morrison played down the severity of the illness caused by Omicron, saying that was “potentially quite a game changer with the pandemic around the world about how the virus may well step down, but we’ll see”. National cabinet is next due to meet in February, when it will consider fresh advice from Kelly and the Doherty Institute on what threshold should be met to move to phase D of the national reopening plan. The meeting on Friday noted “significant progress in reopening Australia”, with Western Australia set to reach 80% over-16 double-dose vaccination coverage within days, meaning all parts of the country will have entered phase C of the plan. Morrison told 2GB radio he did not believe state premiers would rush again to close domestic borders, suggesting the response to the Omicron variant had been “a good test” of holding their nerve. He praised the South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, for not closing the state border and the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, for the imminent reopening of its border. Morrison urged all Australians who had their second Covid-19 vaccine dose at least six months ago to come forward to receive booster shots, “because that will be important as we go into next year”. Queensland reported on Friday four new locally acquired Covid-19 cases and two interstate-acquired cases out in the community. Queensland’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, said a Gold Coast lockdown was unlikely but urged residents to get vaccinated and wear a mask. “Today is the day that we’ve been planning for,” she said. Victoria recorded two new cases of the Omicron variant among travellers who landed in Melbourne from Dubai on 30 November.With that, we will wrap up the blog for the evening. Stay safe out there. Here are today’s major developments: National Cabinet met for the last time until February. High on the agenda were Omicron and international travel, as well as the expansion of the vaccination rollout to five to 11 year olds. Gladys Berejiklian will not run on the Liberal ticket in the seat of Warringah. Was she ever going to? Probably not. A 44-year-old woman died in Queensland flood waters north of Brisbane, after getting trapped in a car that became submerged. Wild weather is expected to ease on the east coast this evening. In WA, firefighters are still battling to contain a blaze at the Leeuwin Naturaliste National Park near Margaret River, with a bushfire emergency warning still in place. Four local Covid cases have emerged on the Gold Coast just three days before NSW border restrictions ease. There were a further four cases acquired interstate including two detected in the community. The health minister says lockdown is “unlikely”. New South Wales Covid cases have continued to rise, with 516 reported overnight. The ACT recorded six new cases, and Victoria recorded 1,206 new cases and two deaths, including two cases of the Omicron variant. Speaking of Omicron, the first case of the variant has potentially been detected in South Australia, with testing underway related to “a couple of cases” overnight. The Northern Territory has reported four Covid cases but they have not been announced to be of the Omicron strain. In Tasmania, the state has announced Covid testing rules for residents who travel interstate. They will be required to get a Covid test and isolate until receiving a negative result once arriving home. In nice news for Hobart, Tasmania is also likely to host the fifth Ashes Test. 124 Australian species, including the bogong moth have been added to the endangered species list. The bogong moth’s listing should be a “wake up call” about declines in Australia’s invertebrates, scientist Marissa Parrott said. Alan Jones is launching a new web show and podcast which he believes will be a great success. Jones was dumped by Sky News Australia but says “the voices have got to be given a voice”. OK, have a great night. Here’s a seagull screaming in terror to ease you into the weekend: More on Tasmania hosting fifth Ashes Test here: Some potentially good news for Tasmanian cricket fans. The ABC is reporting the fifth Ashes Test - which was due to take place in Western Australia - will now go ahead in Hobart. Cricket Australia is yet to confirm the news, but an official announcement is expected to be made over the weekend. Bellerive Oval has a capacity of approximately 20,000. There are new exposure sites in Queensland following those cases reported today. Access the full list here. We can bring you another late Friday announcement: the federal government says the entirety of Hezbollah and neo-Nazi group The Base were today formally added to the list of terrorist groups. This is not a surprise, because the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, announced her intention to do so about two weeks ago (she was writing to state and territory governments, as part of the formal process). Now it’s official. Andrews said in a statement issued a short time ago: “Terrorism is an abhorrent crime. The Morrison government will do everything in its power to prevent it and stamp out the hateful ideologies that fuel it. From today, both groups are rightly considered terrorist groups; enabling the application of terrorist organisation offences to these groups, and aligning Australia with international partners such as the United Kingdom and Canada.” For more on this issue, see our previous story: Default end-to-end encryption across messaging platforms will not lead to a spike in child abuse material, Meta’s global head of safety says. AAP reports: Amid fears the extra privacy would allow potential abusers to thrive, Antigone Davis says she is confident the company can continue referring those sharing illegal material to authorities. Meta is the parent company of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp. At a parliamentary hearing into how law enforcement can tackle child exploitation, committee chair Julian Simmonds referenced Australian Federal Police’s belief that encryption would restrict Meta’s ability to detect and refer incidents of child abuse material. The committee heard Meta referred more than 21,000 incidents to the National Centre for Missing and Exploited Children between July 2020 and June 2021. It comes as child sex offence prosecutions increase in Australia, up to 35 a month from 20 a month three years ago. Those statistics came from commonwealth prosecutor Mark de Crespigny, who said cases involving child sexual abuse material were becoming more complex, with more live streaming activity. Davis, who noted already-encrypted WhatsApp made more than 400,000 reports of suspected child abuse material last year, said Meta was taking a three-pronged approach. She said that included focusing on initial harm prevention by measures such as defaulting minors’ accounts to private settings and making it more difficult for suspected accounts to view minors. Meta will also make it easier for users to report suspected child exploitation and add additional layers of control, including the ability to blur photos. But Simmonds said law enforcement estimated 60% of its referrals would no longer be possible once encryption is the default across Meta’s platforms. A submission from the Communications Alliance said all cooperation processes would remain and “meaningful data” would continue to be handed to law enforcement. But Simmonds challenged this, stating: “I don’t know how you can tell me there will be a meaningful number of referrals when you just told me you can’t quantify what that number is.” Labor MP Anne Aly asked when Meta’s messaging platforms were encrypted, how it could penetrate closed groups of potential criminals. (These) services ... allow people to set up a closed group where they can share these images, like going into a room and closing the door and locking it behind you, then sharing those images with each other. Nobody in there is going to report it because they are part of that group. Not so in Queensland: Victoria can look forward to some rare normal weather this weekend: And here is a statement from Greg Hunt, confirming the human biosecurity emergency period will be extended for a further two months until 17 February. The arrangements have been in place since 18 March last year: The extension of these arrangements made by the governor general was informed by specialist medical and epidemiological advice provided by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) and the commonwealth chief medical officer. Continuation of these arrangement will allow the important measures currently in place to continue as the government continues to reopen Australia and act decisively to respond to the emergence of the Omicron variant. Four existing emergency requirement determinations will remain in place: Mandatory pre-departure testing and mask wearing for international flights Restrictions on international travel from high risk countries Restrictions on outbound international travel for unvaccinated Australians Restrictions on the entry of cruise vessels within Australian territory Hunt: As has been the case throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, these arrangements will be reviewed regularly to take into account the latest medical advice. The government continues to work constructively with the cruise ship industry, with whom we remain actively engaged alongside state and territory governments to enable a phased resumption of cruising in Australia on the basis of medical advice. As part of this work, the government will continually review, on a monthly basis, whether the current restrictions on cruise ships can be safely lifted or amended. We have a statement from the national cabinet, which met for the final time today, predominantly to discuss the new Omicron strain of the virus. It will meet again in February next year. On Omicron, the cabinet received an update from chief medical officer Paul Kelly, who advised Australia was still in “early stages” of understanding the variant. Health minister Greg Hunt has extended the human biosecurity emergency period for a further two months to 17 February. On borders, national cabinet “noted” the steps taken by the commonwealth to adjust settings consistent with the suppression strategy and proportionate to Omicron: As more evidence relating to disease severity, transmissibility and vaccine effectiveness becomes available, the commonwealth will continue to consider Australia’s international border settings in a manner consistent with a suppression strategy. National cabinet welcomed Queensland’s announcement that it would reopen to fully vaccinated Australian citizens or permanent residents who have a negative Covid test taken within the 72 hours prior to departure from 13 December 2021. The coordinator-general of the vaccine rollout, Lieutenant General John Frewen, provided an update on the booster program and plans to close the gap in vaccination rates between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians and the general population. He also provided an update on preparations to vaccinated 5 to 11 year olds from next year. National cabinet confirmed test, trace, isolate and quarantine measures alongside public health and social measures like mask wearing were “key” to ensuring Covid cases remained at clinical capacity. It noted settings could be adjusted for different local circumstances. On outbreak management plans for Indigenous communities, national cabinet agreed existing measures needed to be updated in light of Omicron and current outbreaks in the NT: The commonwealth will continue to monitor the situation and provide the relevant state and territories assistance against the virus during the pandemic, including variants of concern. National cabinet noted the significant progress in reopening Australia under the National Plan to Transition Australia’s Covid-19 Response. All jurisdictions are expected to reach 80% vaccination coverage for their populations, 16 and over, and enter Phase C of the national plan by the end of 2021. National cabinet welcomed plans by Queensland, Tasmania and the Northern Territory to reopen borders next week. National Cabinet agreed the chief medical officer will work with the Doherty Institute to develop advice on thresholds to inform transition to Phase D of the national plan for the next meeting of national cabinet. It also received an update on enhancing health system capacity under the reopening plan and the need to support primary care providers, and provided provided in‑principle endorsement of the National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Agreement (National Agreement), which will be finalised in early 2022. Victoria’s shadow treasurer, David Davis, just appeared on ABC Afternoon Briefing, justifying his decision to attend the state’s anti-pandemic legislation protests: I think Victorians have had a terrible time, Patricia. And you as a Victorian understand that. The impact on families, on school kids, on businesses has been quite profound and extraordinary. And Victorians are entitled democratically to have their say at the ballot box, they’re entitled to have their say with petitions and online approaches. They can ring up your show indeed and have their say. But they’re also entitled to demonstrate. I say demonstrations should be peaceful and lawful. But people are entitled to demonstrate and that’s part of their democratic system. I never regret talking to Victorians but, let me be clear, in those rallies was a big range of everyday Victorians. People who have lost their jobs. People who have lost their businesses. The weather is still pretty dicey on the NSW south coast but conditions are expected to ease this evening. Over in Western Australia, there is still an emergency bushfire warning in place for the Leeuwin-Naturaliste national park. It’s 10 December, and you know what that means! This tweet is now a decade old: Now that’s over, the Covid update has been taking place in Tasmania. Tasmanians travelling to “high risk areas” will have to be tested once they return to the state, even if they spend less than a week there. Arrivals from overseas will have to isolate for seven days and get three Covid tests upon their arrival. No decision yet on mask-wearing in indoor settings. Did you catch the races? Morrison found a way to weave in the Bathurst 1000 where he did a hot lap last weekend. Hopefully this weekend we’ll see him on a ute! Now Scott Morrison is talking about independents running in marginal seats, a concept he finds confusing: I don’t quite get this ... they’re independents but they’re only running against Liberals? (laughs) I think people see that for what it is ... they’re pretending not to be a party, they are a party, they’re backed by big money and they’re about trying to attack the Liberal party. Conversation turns to Kate Jenkins’ report on sexual harassment in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces. Morrison says he was implementing the 28 recommendations from the report before they were even announced. Wow! We’re getting on with it right now and we’ll be making more announcements soon ... this is an issue in our workplace, it applies to the Labor party, the Greens, our party, everyone who works in that building ... many people don’t know this but the survey even talked to media who work in that building ... everyone’s working together and taking responsibility to get it fixed. Morrison reckons children under 12 will be given “an ice-cream or a bit of chocolate” after they get their vaccinations from 10 January: We had some challenges [with the vaccination rollout] at the start but it’s about how you deal with it and we fixed those problems ... now we’ve got a vaccinated country, a strong economy and we’re heading into 2022 really positive, very confident. I didn’t have to pay them to do it, others thought we’d have to, and I never thought that because they knew it’s important ... people are pretty sick and tired of governments telling them what to do ... it’s been a very invasive time, necessarily, I’m sure we all agree but ... it’s time for government to get out of people’s face and let them move on with their lives. Scott Morrison says Omicron was the major topic of discussion at today’s national cabinet meeting. He tells 2GB: This is progressing well, we’re obviously getting more information, the severity of this virus is so far not presenting to be worse than what happened with Delta. I’d really want to encourage everyone to go and get their boosters, this is really important, particularly with Omicron. That booster program is available to everybody ... so if it’s been six months since your last second dose then please go and get your booster. There are at least two Omicron cases in Victoria. Scott Morrison is about to appear on 2GB following the last national cabinet meeting of the year. I’ll bring you the highlights here. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has made a formal pandemic declaration applying from 15 December until 12 January next year as part of the state government’s new pandemic management framework. The declaration replaces the current state of emergency declaration, which expires at 11.59pm on 15 December and will not be extended. In making the declaration, the premier was “satisfied on reasonable grounds there was a serious risk to public health throughout Victoria arising from the coronavirus pandemic disease”: In advising the premier to make a pandemic declaration, the chief health officer noted the widespread community transmission of coronavirus in Victoria and the presence of active cases in the community – a significant proportion of whom require supported care. The chief health officer also advised protective measures were necessary to ensure the Victorian health system is not overwhelmed. The initial pandemic declaration can be renewed within four weeks, if the premier is satisfied on reasonable grounds the pandemic continues to be a serious risk to public health. After the first declaration, further pandemic declarations can be extended every three months. The statement of reasons and the advice of both the chief health officer and minister for health will be tabled in parliament. A copy of the pandemic declaration will be published in the government gazette. The Northern Territory has detected four Covid cases as a cluster linked to three crowded households continues to grow. Here’s more from AAP’s Aaron Bunch: A woman in her 40s and her primary-school-aged daughter who live with nine other people in Katherine, 320km south of Darwin, tested positive. Another woman diagnosed with the virus is in her 20s and lives with six people in the same small pocket in the town’s east. The new cases were found after health workers launched a testing blitz in four streets, which are home to multiple Aboriginal families. A health order mandated tests for any resident seeking to leave the area, with those who refused ordered into quarantine. Once tested, residents were free to move about the community. The targeted and legally enforceable rule came after days of positive wastewater results and infections in two infants and a teenage girl. Despite Katherine’s vaccination rate surpassing 80% double dosed, pockets remain where people have resisted the jab and dodged testing. The new infections bring the current outbreak to 67 cases with more expected. The fourth new case reported was a man in his 60s who tested positive after travelling to Darwin from London aboard a Qantas flight. Two other household contacts linked to the flight have previously contracted the virus. The latest Roy Morgan polling data shows Labor increasing its lead approaching the end of the year, but a lot can happen in a few months. The Roy Morgan Research CEO, Michele Levine, says: Today’s Roy Morgan poll on federal voting intention shows the ALP 56.5% (up 1% point since late November) increasing its lead over the L-NP 43.5% (down 1% point) on a two-party preferred basis to a new record margin during this term of parliament. The ALP’s margin has grown consistently over the last few months since NSW was plunged into a long second lockdown in late June 2021 following an outbreak of Covid ... ALP is ending 2021 in a stronger position than it has been at any other point during the current parliamentary term. The ALP’s lead is broad-based across all five mainland states ... the ALP also has clear leads with both genders. Women’s support has never been stronger during the current parliament with the ALP on 60.5% heavily favoured over the L-NP on 39.5% on a two-party preferred basis. The ALP’s lead amongst women follows the release of Sex Discrimination Commissioner Kate Jenkins’ Set the Standard Report into Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces. The report, which was conducted by Roy Morgan, outlined many problems with over half of all people currently working in Commonwealth parliamentary workplaces reporting at least one incident of bullying, sexual harassment or actual or attempted sexual assault ... the Morrison government is ending the year as it began – with questions about how serious it is about the safety and security of women as well as whether their commitment to gender equality is genuine. A lightning strike has caused a house fire in the New South Wales town of Nowra: We’ll be hearing from Tasmania in the next hour. Blame La Niña on this one I reckon: In other news, the federal member for Kennedy, Bob Katter, has released a truly wild Christmas message on “finding happiness in the simple things”, which, for Bob, means “the bush, the pub or a simple game of touch”. Here’s an excerpt: My station, when I was heavily involved in mining, cattle and other enterprises, was called Saint Francis. And I had taken to reading Saint Francis Assisi prayers: “O, Divine Master, grant that I may not so much seek to be consoled as to console; to be understood as to understand; to be loved as to love; for it is in giving that we receive; it is in pardoning that we are pardoned; it is in dying that we are born again to eternal life.” I have some difficultly with the pardon part, I’ve never been that good at being pardoned or pardoning. On occasion, I ask the question: Why are our young people so unhappy with life that they just leave this life? What is wrong? I feel it is a complete lack of understanding of what are the important things in life ... so let us enjoy the glitter and fun. One of my greatest joys when I get down and depressed is to simply go down to the pub, team up with a few mates and tell a few funny stories (I don’t tell the naughty ones and try not to laugh at the ones I hear). And then you realise in those moments, what does it matter if you have no money? What does it matter if you get laid off? Or you end up in the school of hard knocks? These are just things that happen. We Australians, down the pub, we couldn’t care less about all of these things. We just enjoy the company of others. That’s what’s important. The personal details of at least 38,000 South Australian government employees – and potentially up to 80,000 workers – have been breached in a cyber-attack on external payroll software provider Frontier Software. The South Australian government says Frontier was the victim of a “ransomware cyber attack” and personal information was published on the dark web. The health department secretary, Brendan Murphy, has just been up alongside Scott Morrison chatting all things Omicron. He says doctors and medical professionals will keep monitoring data as it comes in from overseas, and there’s no need to panic yet: We’re still doing lab tests on this variant and, as I said before, there is a suggestion that the vaccines will benefit from a booster to protect against this strain. We don’t know how it will spread in Australia, but we do know that it is here, and certainly in Sydney, and it is likely to spread. But we don’t need to panic. We just need to study it more and, very importantly, make sure we get boosters. What we’ve seen across this country now with the sustained transmission in Victoria and NSW, is very low rates of hospitalisation and severe disease in the vaccinated population. An update on the bushfire in Western Australia from AAP: Firefighters battling a major bushfire in Western Australia’s renowned Margaret River region have made good progress but the blaze remains uncontained. The fire has ripped through more than 6,000 hectares in the Leeuwin-Naturaliste national park over the past two days. Authorities are particularly worried about properties on the eastern side of Caves Road as a trough passes through the area from the coast. Residents were urged to leave on Thursday as more than 150 firefighters battled to strengthen containment lines in hot and windy weather. Conditions have since improved and it is believed there has been no loss of property despite the fire remaining uncontrolled. “We’ve made some very good progress overnight ... it is slightly cooler than yesterday down here in Margaret River,” incident controller Brad Barton told Perth radio 6PR on Friday. “Our priorities are to build on our containment strategies along these eastern boundaries, to tie the fire into the national park and prevent further impact out into the private property areas.” This is a really good rundown from our medical editor, Melissa Davey, on everything we know about vaccinating children: Victoria has recorded two new cases of the Omicron variant. The health department has just announced two travellers who landed in Melbourne from Dubai on 30 November have both tested positive for the Omicron variant. Genomic sequencing is under way for a third person on that flight who has tested positive for Covid-19. Large numbers of stranded travellers have begun arriving at the Queensland border days ahead of its scheduled reopening, increasing concerns about long delays at police checkpoints. It remains unclear how the police border checkpoints will operate, though delays of up to four hours are expected and authorities have asked people to consider travelling at a later date and to “pack your patience”. With just days until the reopening at 1am on Monday, the build-up of people wanting to cross the border by car presents other potential problems. They include the ability for border area commuters – including Gold Coast hospital workers and others – to get to work on Monday morning. A woman has died after being swept away by flood waters in south-eastern NSW. From AAP: The body of a woman swept away by flood waters in south-east NSW has been recovered, as heavy rains add to ongoing floods around the state. The flood waters claimed the woman, believed to be aged 37, early on Friday morning after a vehicle she and a man were travelling in became trapped in water at Tuross. Police were told she exited the vehicle and was then swept away. The man travelling with her was found nearby and did not require medical treatment. The woman’s body was recovered by the NSW SES at about 7.15am on Friday. And we have a better breakdown of Covid cases in Victoria, NSW and Queensland. Starting in Victoria: 1,206 new cases have been reported, down from more than 1,300 yesterday. Two more people have died. Some 313 people are in hospital with the virus and of those 61 are in intensive care. Vaccinations continue to surge ahead – 91.5% of Victorians 16 and over are double-vaccinated. More than 93% have had one dose. In NSW, there are 516 new cases, a jump from 420 yesterday. Good news – there are no new Omicron cases and no Covid-related deaths have been recorded. There are 158 people in hospital, 24 of those are in ICU. NSW continues to lead vaccinations with 93% of people 16 and over are double-vaccinated. The first dose rate is sitting at just under 95%. Queensland has recorded nine new Covid cases, with six locally acquired. Those infections are on the Gold Coast and have been out in the community for up to eight days. The Australian Human Rights Commission has called for an overhaul of discrimination law. AAP reports: Australia’s discrimination laws are “falling short” and its system to deal with complaints is “hopelessly out of date”, with the boss of the nation’s Human Rights Commission calling for a major overhaul. A new 350-page discussion paper, released by the Australian Human Rights Commission on Friday to mark Human Rights Day, outlines a roadmap to reform discrimination law following two years of consultation. It makes 38 recommendations including building a preventative culture, modernising the regulatory framework, enhancing access to justice and boosting the practicality of laws. “Put simply, Australia’s discrimination laws are falling short,” the Human Rights Commission president, Rosalind Croucher, said in a speech on Friday. “They are outdated and they are difficult to use. Some of these laws have remained substantially untouched since they were introduced over 30, even 40, years ago.” Four sets of federal discrimination laws and the overlapping of them with state and territory-specific regulations makes the mix “complex” and at times “inconsistent”, leading to difficulties. And I have this week’s Weekly Beast from Amanda for you ... They were once so common, swarms of Australian bogong moths almost seemed to “block out the moon” at certain times of the year. Now, the bogong has been listed as endangered on the global red list of threatened species after crashes in its population in recent years. The list, compiled by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, was updated overnight with 124 new entries for Australian wildlife. The addition of the bogong moth, famously seen in swarms at Parliament House in Canberra during its annual migration to the Australian alps, should be a wake-up call about declines in Australia’s invertebrates, the scientist Marissa Parrott said. From AAP: Victoria’s deficit has blown out to $19.5bn thanks to the Delta outbreak but the state treasurer is predicting a quick economic recovery. State Treasury’s mid-financial year budget update, released on Friday, shows the 2021/22 deficit increased by $7.9bn, largely due to additional spending on health and business support during lockdowns. The report said the state’s economy was “rebounding strongly” in early 2021 before a lockdown in July and then another that lasted from August to October following the emergence of the new variant. The outbreak of the Delta variant of Covid-19 caused a setback to this strong recovery, but the economic recovery is expected to resume quickly now that most domestic restrictions have been eased. The state government spent $10bn on business support during the two lockdowns and the federal government spent $3bn. Some $2.5bn was spent to strengthen the public health response, including additional testing capacity and support of the vaccine rollout, while $700m was spent on education as students returned to home learning. Treasurer Tim Pallas told reporters: No government has the clarity and foresight that we can predict exactly how the pandemic will operate going forward and the fifth and sixth lockdowns had a dramatic impact. We had to make those investments quite obviously to keep the community safe and resource our pandemic response. If we hadn’t done that then the resilience and enduring nature of the recovery would have been compromised. Good afternoon everyone, this is Cait Kelly. As always many thanks to Matilda who has steered the ship across the morning. I just want to flag there are some new contact tracing locations for our Queensland readers – have a look below. With that, I shall leave you in the safe hands of Cait Kelly. See you all next week! As national cabinet meets today (it started at 10am AEDT), three points are worth highlighting from Scott Morrison’s press conference this morning. First, the prime minister gave a hint that the federal government wants to bring forward booster shots: We are continuing to review the evidence about how that time period for the booster shot might be able to be reduced. And we’re working with the medical experts on those issues ... and we’ll talk about that today with the premiers and the chief ministers. Second, Morrison signalled that he would be urging state premiers and territory chief ministers to hold their nerves and proceed with reopening internal borders. He said 80% double-dose was “the key trigger point, threshold to reach to be able to start and to be living with the virus”. He said WA was only a few days away from reaching that goal. He also welcomed Queensland’s “fantastic” recent border reopening announcement: I look forward to receiving further updates today from all premiers and chief ministers about how they are keeping the deal with Australians. Third, Morrison said it was the federal government’s current “disposition” to reopen the international border on 15 December. You’ll remember that the government delayed by two weeks the planned reopening Australia to international students and skilled workers. Asked this morning whether the borders would open on that date, Morrison said the government was “taking more advice at the moment, but that is certainly our disposition”. He said the delay had been to receive more information about the Omicron variant. Morrison today played down the severity of the illness caused by that variant: That is potentially quite a game changer with the pandemic around the world about how the virus may well step down. But we’ll see, it’s a little too early to make those sort of judgments. But our plan is to keep moving forward, not to go back. Just jumping back in case you missed it, here was Scott Morrison’s reaction to being asked about Gladys Berejiklian’s decision not to run for federal politics (after he spent weeks urging her too). Reporter: You must be disappointed Gladys isn’t going to run for Warringah. Do you have another candidate in mind? Morrison: Sure. I mean. Gladys has been a dear friend over a long period of time, and she has served the people of New South Wales so great and I’ve been pretty clear about what I thought about her treatment. She’s made a decision to go forward a new chapter of her life, and Jenny and I wish her all the very best. She’s been a great friend to Jen and I, particularly over these last couple of years as we’ve worked together to combat the pandemic. NSW has done extraordinarily well, and she’s going to go on to a new chapter of her life. But, you know, we’ve got great female candidates in particular who are coming to stand in our team. Just yesterday, as Greg Hunt will know, I was down there with Steph Asher in Corangamite yesterday and of course, Dr Fiona Martin standing here right next to me. So, you know, Gladys has sort of blazed a trail, I think, for women in the Liberal party and so many of the great professional women who are coming forward and standing up as part of our team have been inspired by Gladys’ achievements. So she’s been a trailblazer. She’s off to blaze a new trail now, but we wish her all the best for her future, and I know that she will continue to provide tremendously strong support to me and my team, and I thank her very much for that. Reporter: Have you spoken to her since she decided not to run? Morrison: Yep. More from D’Ath: Yvette D’Ath says there is unlikely to be a lockdown due to the cases but urged all Gold Coast residents to get vaccinated and wear a mask. In relation to that news of significant community spread of Covid-19 in the Gold Coast, health minister Yvette D’Ath says “today is the day that we’ve been planning for”. Here is what we know about the cases so far: One is a man who had received one vaccine dose and recently moved to Queensland. He has been infectious for five days. Another case is a close contact of this man. Next is a child, who attends the Broadbeach state school, and his two parents. The mother works in the border zone has been infectious for eight days. And the sixth case is a male musician who works at Byron Bay. More from Queensland and the state’s health minister Yvette D’Ath has confirmed that six people have been infectious in the Gold Coast community for a number of days, with two of the four interstate acquired cases detected in the community rather than hotel quarantine. We can assume there is transmission happening across the Gold Coast. Alan Jones has announced he will go it alone with a “pioneering initiative” which he believes will be a great success because “hundreds of thousands of people” want to know what he thinks. “Radio is a rather old-fashioned medium”, said the man who made his name as a legendary radio broadcaster. Jones, who was dumped by Sky News Australia, announced at a press conference streamed on Facebook that he will be back in the game from Monday on a new platform, Australian Digital Holdings, backed by former ABC chair Maurice Newman. In live video streams and podcasts, Jones will talk about the issues of the day. “I believe the voices have got to be given a voice,” he said. Are we a liberal democracy when [health] advice which has brought business to its knees is not debated? But the announcement of the new digital platform hit its first hurdle when the press conference was almost inaudible. “Hope the audio improves moving forward,” one viewer said. Queensland has recorded four local Covid-19 cases, four interstate, two of which were detected in the community, and one overseas acquired case in hotel quarantine. This comes as a school on the Gold Coast has been closed, and students and parents ordered to get tested after a case was detected there. Gladys Berejiklian says she is bound for the private sector and will not contest the federal seat of Warringah at the coming election, despite the urgings of Scott Morrison. The former New South Wales told Sydney’s 2GB radio on Friday morning she didn’t have any appetite to contest the seat but had considered taking on the independent Zali Steggall out of “respect” for the prime minister “and so many other colleagues who really asked me to consider this”. “It’s not something that I want to do,” Berejiklian said. You can read the full report below: Amanda will be bringing you more updates from this... situation... shortly! A number of locally acquired Covid-19 cases have emerged on the Gold Coast just three days before NSW border restrictions ease. The Broadbeach state school has reportedly sent a text message to parents on Friday morning informing them that an active case visited the school and that they would need to self isolate and get tested, Marty Silk from AAP reports. “There has now been a confirmed infectious case of Covid-19 at Broadbeach state school, please keep your child and your household members at school, all will need to be tested today,” the message said, News Corp reported. The Fuel Bakehouse at Currumbin Waters also closed its doors on Friday after reporting a positive Covid-19 case had visited the premises on Wednesday morning. The Bakery’s Facebook page on Thursday night said: We regret to inform that we have had a positive Covid case come through our doors yesterday morning... We are taking all actions required which means we won’t be able to open our doors tomorrow as we are testing all our staff as directed. AAP understands that health minister Yvette D’Ath will announce a number of new cases later on Friday morning. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded six new cases of Covid-19 in the latest reporting period. Two crashes within minutes of each other on a major Melbourne freeway has left two dead and disrupted morning traffic, AAP reports: A woman was struck by a truck after pulling over and getting out of her car on the Monash Freeway near Darling Street at about 8.10am on Friday. The woman died at the scene and is yet to be formally identified. The truck driver stopped shortly after and is assisting police as they work to determine the exact circumstances of the crash. The freeway is closed between High Street and Warrigal Road, with motorists told to use the Princes Highway instead. About 20 minutes earlier, further southeast at Doveton, a motorbike rider crashed into a pole on the Monash Freeway. He also died at the scene despite the efforts of first responders. There are flood warnings in Victoria now as well. Stay safe everyone. Here are the full details on Joyce accidentally forcing three UK ministers into isolation after testing positive to Covid-19. Tests are underway to determine if the new Omicron variant of Covid-19 has been detected in South Australia, reports Tim Dornin from AAP. Premier Steven Marshall says there are concerns related to a “couple of cases overnight”. He told radio FiveAA on Friday: We don’t have any confirmation so we’re taking it very cautiously ... It hasn’t moved as quickly as we were thinking it might but we still have very little information on Omicron. Sometimes when you get a new case it takes some time to get that assessment, I think they call the genome sequencing, so we can know exactly what strain it is. We did get a couple of cases overnight and we are testing those to see if they could be our first cases of Omicron. It remains unclear if the possible spread of the new strain to SA could disrupt the state’s plans to lift more local virus restrictions later this month or early in January based on the vaccination rate hitting 90%. Hear ye, hear ye! We shall hear from the Queensland health minister with a Covid-19 update at 10.30am Brisbane time, 11.30am Melbourne and Sydney time. The Australian government is at risk of coming to the US-trumpeted Summit for Democracy “empty handed” given its failure to put in place a promised anti-corruption commission, the opposition says. With the virtual summit entering its second day on Friday, tax transparency campaigners also called on the prime minister, Scott Morrison, to pledge to ban anonymous shell companies and create a public beneficial ownership register. While a lot of the early media focus was on the Biden administration’s decision to invite Taiwan – a move that triggered protest and scorn from China – attention is now turning to the commitments the US is asking leaders to bring to the two-day event. The summit is meant to focus on three key themes: defending against authoritarianism; addressing and fighting corruption; and promoting respect for human rights. You can read the full report from Daniel Hurst and Christopher Knaus below: I mentioned it before on the blog, but it seems the Delta outbreak and lockdowns have plunged Victoria into the red. Here is the full statement from the state government below: A potential flood evacuation warning has been issued for Combo, low-lying areas of Whittingham, Scotts Flat Road in NSW. Here is what the SES’s alert has to say: The Bureau of Meteorology has predicted possible flooding along the Hunter River for the Whittingham and Scotts Flat areas. As a result residents and visitors to these areas should take action now to prepare for possible flood impacts... Low-lying properties may experience impacts due to flash flooding and/or riverine flooding. Storm and flood impacts may interrupt essential services such as electricity, phones, internet, water and sewerage. People in these areas need to closely monitor weather and road closures and make informed decisions early based on individual circumstances. Australia will scrap its entire fleet of Taipan defence helicopters and instead use US Black Hawks and Seahawk models, reports AAP. The decision will see the army and navy replace the 47 European-designed Taipans at a cost of $7bn. It’s expected Australia will bring in 40 of the US helicopters for use. The Taipans had been beset with a large number of groundings and availability issues. Defence minister Peter Dutton told the Nine Network on Friday the decision was a necessary one: The Black Hawk made perfect sense, they are much cheaper to fly than what the Taipans were, the Taipans have been unreliable... By bringing in up to 40 new Black Hawks, it gives us a capability, we will maintain our edge in the region. He said the new helicopters would bring Australian forces closer in line to US equipment, given the instability in the Indo-Pacific region. The men and women of the ADF are excited about the prospect of a new platform that is going to be reliable... Hopefully, we can get them online sooner rather than later. They were once so common, swarms of Australian bogong moths almost seemed to “block out the moon” at certain times of the year. Now, the bogong has been listed as endangered on the global red list of threatened species after crashes in its population in recent years. The list, compiled by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, was updated overnight with 124 new entries for Australian wildlife. The addition of the bogong moth, famously seen in swarms at Parliament House in Canberra during its annual migration to the Australian alps, should be a wake-up call about declines in Australia’s invertebrates, the scientist Marissa Parrott said. You can read the full report below: Another day of high cases for NSW with 516 new infections recorded in the latest reporting period. Australia’s curling duo of Tahli Gill and Dean Hewitt have claimed a historic Olympic berth, winning the final qualification tournament in the Netherlands, reports AAP’s Melissa Woods. With two mixed doubles spots up for grabs for the Beijing Games in February, Gill and Hewitt stormed through seven matches in the 14-nation competition in Leeuwarden without a loss. They are the first Australians to qualify since curling became a full Olympic medal sport in 1998. They topped Pool A while the USA were also unbeaten to win Pool B, with both teams skipping past the first round of play-offs. World No.14 Australia faced South Korea, who are ranked six places higher, with an Olympic berth on the line. They were able to peg back an early 2-4 deficit thanks to an impressive manoeuvre by Gill. In the sixth end, Australia called a timely power play and managed to clear out Korean stones early. Gill produced a nose-hit on the only Korean stone in the house to score three points and take a 5-4 lead. In the eighth and final end with the scores tied at 5-5, Gill showed nerves of steel with her final throw using the backing of the one Korean stone lying in the house to draw the one point that gave her team a 6-5 win and a place in the Olympic Games. “It’s still sinking in a little bit” said 22-year-old Gill, who is from Brisbane. As basic as it sounds, I thought I’ve just got to throw the right split and the right line. I took a really deep breath and that was all I focused on. I didn’t think about it being a shot to go to the Olympics or anything like that. I knew I had to throw the right line and weight. Hewitt’s father Steve was part of the Australian team that competed at the Albertville Olympics in 1992, when it was a demonstration sport. The Victorian said reaching the Olympics was the culmination of years of hard work. I called Tahli about three and half years ago and said, ‘Look, do you want to make a run at these Olympics?’ We’ve been working so hard over the past few months and the past couple of years and it’s all paid off. The US beat Russia in the other final to also book a place in Beijing. Australia’s coal-fired power plants are likely to shut at almost triple the pace currently announced, with Victoria’s brown coal fleet to be closed in just over a decade and the main electricity grid becoming coal-free by 2043, according to the market operator. The draft Integrated System Plan 2022, an industry blueprint updated every two years and released on Friday by the Australian Energy Market Operator, plots how the grid serving eastern Australia will change to meet emissions reduction and market goals. It detailed four scenarios based on extensive consultation over 18 months. The most probable path, dubbed the “Step Change” option, anticipates a nine-fold increase in large-scale renewable energy, such as wind and solar farms, as electricity supplies double to meet the decarbonisation of transport and other sectors without coal. You can read the full report below: Here is the full statement of the vaccine rollout for children aged five to 11. Morrison: To all those five- to 11-year-olds, those brave five- to 11-year-olds, they will come to places like here ... they will now join this program which has helped to keep Australians safe. The fact that we’ve achieved such a high rate of vaccination means we can look into 2022 with confidence. Even though other strains come, as we’ve seen with Omicron and Delta and others in the past, is Australia is set up to live with this virus, to live together with this virus. And as we’re seeing Australians come together as we get into Christmas, only one state has to get past that 80% mark, Western Australia, and they’re only a few days away and the fact that we’ve got through this year as we set it out as our task at the start of this year to get to exactly where we are. I want to say thank you to all Australians that have made that possible so we can look forward to a great Christmas together and come back in 2022 to lead the economy and the other things I know Australia will achieve in the future. Scott Morrison is speaking now for a very crowded pharmacy filled with Liberal MPs somewhere in Sydney. There is a lot of emphasis on the word “choice” today, which I think is worth noting from an election campaign point of view. Morrison: Today we can announce there have been more than 40m doses of vaccine delivered in Australia and that is a great achievement by the entire team who have been involved in delivering these doses all around the country. Now, from that first day, I was there back in February and we’ve had around 137,000 doses a day. Just think about that. That’s going all the way back from February to now, an average of 137,000 doses a day and almost 100 per minute over the course of this extraordinarily ambitious vaccination program. And the outcome of that is Australia having one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. Now, back in September, we made the decision, based on the best possible medical advice that we would extend that vaccination program to 12- to 15-year-olds, and that program has been going extremely well and now we have taken the decision, based on the best possible medical advice, through the TGA, that we’ll be extending that vaccination program to five- to 11-year-olds and giving parents the choice. A motorbike rider is on the run after setting a teenage driver alight in an apparent road rage attack in Melbourne’s outer north, reports AAP. Police have been told a car and motorbike almost crashed on Narina Way, Epping at about 8pm on Thursday. It is alleged the rider followed the 19-year-old Lalor man to a nearby property and threw flammable liquid on him and his car before lighting a rag and tossing it at the victim. The Lalor man’s clothing and car caught fire and the rider fled the scene after a resident came out of the property. He suffered minor burns and was taken to hospital. By the way, we are expecting to hear from Scott Morrison pretty soon about the recently Atagi approvals for children’s vaccinations. Berejiklian: Well, I promised when the PM and others contacted me and urged me to give it consideration. I promised them and I did for a very short period of time and then obviously let them know that it’s not something I want to pursue and it is just a different direction. I want my life to change. Seems like Scott Morrison and other federal politicians weren’t just happy to have the former NSW premier if she decided to run, they were actively “urging” her to step up to the plate. Here is what Berejiklian had to say just before when radio host Ben Fordham asked “How hard did Scott Morrison try to get you to have a go?” Berejiklian: Look, I’m really grateful to the PM and so many other colleagues who really asked me to consider this. It wasn’t something that I intended to do, but out of respect for those people ... I gave it some thought but decided against it. It’s not something that I want to do... I feel that the opportunities I’ve had have been amazing and my opportunity to give back to public life or give back to the public through public life has been amazing and that’s why, you know, I feel ready to start the next chapter of my life ... but I’ll never ever take for granted a single day that I had in public life. It was an honour just to serve the community. It’s something that I’ll always be very proud of. And something that gave me great personal satisfaction. Former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian has called into Sydney radio station 2GB to confirm that she does not intend to run for the federal seat of Warringah, despite enthusiastic urgings from prime minister Scott Morrison and other federal politicians. La Niña could create a spike in Covid cases by forcing people indoors to avoid the rain at the same time as the Omicron variant is spreading in Australia, say epidemiologists who are warning health authorities to delay the easing of social distancing measures. The weather pattern means north and eastern Australia is experiencing a relatively cool, damp and stormy summer. Epidemiologists say it could drive a spike in Covid cases by making more people gather indoors and by generating higher humidity which allows virus particles to linger longer in the air. NSW will relax its Covid rules from Wednesday. Unvaccinated residents will, from then, enjoy the same freedoms as those who have received their jabs. You can read the full report below: A woman has died after apparently getting trapped in a car that became submerged in flood waters north of Brisbane, AAP reports. But the driver managed to escape and survived. Queensland police are now investigating the circumstances leading to the death of the woman, 44, at Aspley, 13km north of Brisbane. Emergency services were called after the car was swept into a creek near Lucan Avenue by fast-moving flood waters about 8pm last night. The driver of the vehicle, a 52-year-old Geebung man, was found alive a short time later. A search for the woman ensued before the car was recovered from the water around 11.15pm. She was pronounced dead at the scene. The tragedy comes after a 75-year-old woman from Taringa died when her car became submerged in flood waters in West Brisbane as a severe storm cell lashed Queensland’s south-east. The car was swept off a street and into a nearby creek in Pullenvale about 4.40pm on Wednesday. The state can expect more flooding with persistent rain leaving many parts of Queensland waterlogged, deputy premier Steven Miles said. “Every Queensland life lost is tragic, and tragic for the family involved,” he said. “It won’t take a lot of rain to see flooding and we just say over and over again, if it’s flooded, forget it. It’s not worth it.” Good morning, everyone, and welcome to Friday! We made it! It’s Matilda Boseley here on the blog with you today and first up I have some good news. Children as young as five will be able to get a Covid-19 jab from January following final approval from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisations. The federal government has accepted Atagi’s recommendation to expand the jab program to children aged between five and 11. Prime minister Scott Morrison said yesterday: This will bring great relief to so many mums and dads, who now have a choice on what’s best for their kids ... They can have peace of mind knowing this has the tick from the best medical regulators in the world. The vaccines to be made available to about 2.27 million children contain one-third of the standard Pfizer dose. Bookings will open in late December and jabs will be rolled out from 10 January after child-specific training for healthcare workers and batch testing by the medicines regulator. In some less good news, the, three UK cabinet ministers including Dominic Raab – prime minister Boris Johnson’s right-hand man – have been forced to self-isolate after coming into contact with our deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce. Joyce tested positive to Covid-19 after travelling from the UK to Washington DC, and is now self-isolating for 10 days. He is fully vaccinated and is experiencing mild symptoms. UK transport secretary Grant Shapps and the secretary of state for housing Michael Gove have also been forced into isolation after meeting with Joyce. With that, why don’t we jump right into the day? There is certainly enough to get through!Two Democratic senators have resisted Joe Biden’s vaccine-or-test mandate for large businesses, illustrating problems the US president faces even within a faction of his own party, despite having the support of scientists and public health experts. The US Senate on Wednesday evening voted to overturn the mandate as new cases and hospitalizations continue rising in the country. The West Virginia senator Joe Manchin, who co-sponsored the bill, and Montana’s Senator Jon Tester crossed Democratic party lines to vote yes and join 50 Republicans in their political opposition to the public health policy. The bill is seen as a largely symbolic gesture, since it would also need to pass the Democratic-led House and would probably be vetoed by Biden. The mandate was already put on hold by a federal appeals court, and the future of the mandates will likely be decided by courts, not lawmakers. But the vote showed the significant political problems Biden has faced in carrying out his public health policies to combat the pandemic. He has encountered virtually implacable Republican opposition – now joined by rebel Democrat senators – that has ranged from ideological concerns over how far government power can be exercised to fringe conspiracy theories and quack science. Manchin, who is vaccinated and boosted, said the rule represents federal overreach, which is why he co-sponsored the bill. “It is not the place of the federal government to tell private business owners how to protect their employees from Covid-19 and operate their businesses,” he said in a statement, nonetheless urging “every West Virginian and American to get vaccinated to protect themselves and their loved ones”. West Virginia, which has the third-highest rate of deaths from Covid in the country, and Montana, where some health systems instituted crisis standards of care, have suffered devastating surges throughout the pandemic. Half of all West Virginians and half of eligible Montanans are fully vaccinated, both lower than the national average. Public health experts fear the mandates, and political opposition to them, have further cemented the politicization of health policies. West Virginia has joined other states in suing to undermine the mandates for large businesses and government contractors, both of which have been blocked by federal courts. Governor Jim Justice has said there’s “no chance” vaccines will be mandated in West Virginia schools. “The data is very clear that mandates work,” Christopher Martin, a physician and professor at the West Virginia University School of Public Health, said. “I don’t know of any other measure right now that would get more people vaccinated other than requiring them to do so.” There is a long precedent of strong vaccination requirements in workplaces and schools in West Virginia and around the country. But concerns over the Covid vaccines combined with political polarization have “unintended consequences” because “people are mistrustful of governments”, Martin said. The opposition is not based on public health concerns but on civil liberties and other arguments. “That starting point of not wanting the vaccine in the first place again arises from this broad and inherent mistrust in institutions,” he said. “People perceived these institutions to fail them.” In West Virginia, widespread job losses over the past several decades have eroded trust in the government. The vaccine mandates expose larger societal rifts, Martin said. “Vaccinations in particular in this current climate have really exploded the problems that we have in our society.” Officials, including in public health, “need to begin the exercise of restoring trust”, Martin said. In the meantime, vaccine mandates will work like seatbelt laws once did, gradually becoming the norm, he said. “It improves compliance, but it takes a long time.” The US is now seeing an average of more than 119,000 new Covid cases and 1,700 deaths every day.In July 1968, the visionary US guitarist John Fahey – whose albums, with names such as Death Chants, Breakdowns &amp; Military Waltzes, hadn’t exactly been money-spinners – was out the back of a record store. “I saw all these cartons of Bing Crosby’s White Christmas,” he later recalled. “The clerk said it always sells out. So I got the idea to do a Christmas album.” The New Possibility: John Fahey’s Guitar Soli Christmas Album has not achieved the ubiquity of Merry Xmas Everybody or Last Christmas, but it served its role. Purists might sneer – Mojo magazine once dismissed the album as “Cliff-territory bland” – but The New Possibility has never been out of print, selling more than 100,000 copies. Fahey ended up making five Christmas albums, and they served as a financial bulwark in a career that had its share of vicissitudes. This tactic has become bigger business than ever. Christmas music has always done well – in Nick Hornby’s novel About a Boy, one of the characters lives off the royalties from a festive hit – but in the internet age it has assumed a new importance thanks to playlists on streaming platforms. Spotify alone has 44 different options on its Seasonal Playlists page – leaving aside the vast number compiled by users – offering you hits, carols, punk, jazz, Disney and metal among many other genres. The first track on the first playlist is Mariah Carey’s All I Want for Christmas Is You. It’s a song so big that it’s pretty much an industry all of its own. It has risen up the UK and US singles charts faster than ever during the past two years as listeners reach for festivity amid the bleakness, resulting in startling figures: the first holiday song to be certified diamond (that’s above platinum); more than a billion streams on Spotify. In 2019 alone – when it reached No 1 in the Billboard chart 25 years after its release – it had 309m streams across all platforms in the US. (In second place was Brenda Lee’s Rockin’ Around the Christmas Tree with a comparatively paltry 193m plays.) Quite how much money the song has generated for Carey is uncertain, but last year George Howard, associate professor of music business and management at Berklee College of Music, estimated that she was likely earning $10m a year from it. Certainly, she now puts on Christmas shows every year, modelled after old TV variety shows, complete with present-clutching kids scampering across the stage. These revolutionary effects of streaming on Christmas music can’t be overstated. “Lots of independent artists who have ended up on one of these Christmas playlists can have a semi-viable career as a musician,” says Jamie Cullum, who has just released The Pianoman at Christmas – The Complete Edition, an expanded version of his album from last year. “Through streaming, the casual listener has moved on to mood-based listening,” he explains. “It’s unlikely you’d put on a mood-based playlist if you’re a record nerd, and that’s fine. But the idea of having a mood-based playlist that is part of your life is a very powerful thing for an independent artist. My listenership on streaming goes very high around this time of year, since having my first Christmas song out four years ago.” Conrad Withey runs Instrumental, a company that analyses data from streaming services and social media to spot musical trends. “Before streaming, Christmas music was about gifting: an album by a known artist, or you’d repackage Christmas tracks as a Now! Album,” he says. “You’d get a lot of radio play for the old songs, but none were released as singles. Streaming has transformed that.” What streaming – and social media – have shown is that for all the complaints about Christmas starting earlier every year, it’s not entirely down to rapacious capitalism: it’s our fault, too. Withey says Christmas tracks start to build momentum from early November. “Because people put on a playlist and listen to everything, tracks from lots of playlists make their way back into the chart. Christmas music is no longer defined by retailers and labels.” At the time of writing, one-third of the UK Top 30 is old Christmas songs. By the time the presents are unwrapped, it will be even more tinselly: last Christmas Day, 14 of the Top 20 singles were old Christmas songs; two were new Christmas singles; and two were novelties released for the Christmas market. Only No 19 and 20 had nothing whatsoever to do with sleigh bells, snow or Santa. In the album chart, Michael Ball and Alfie Boe’s Together at Christmas went to No 1 last December, later followed by the king of contemporary Christmas, Michael Bublé: his 2011 festive album has sold 12m copies, and should return to the Top 5 this week. This year brings new Christmas albums from Norah Jones, Kelly Clarkson (whose 2013 single Underneath the Tree might be the most recent addition to the Christmas song canon) and a host of country artists, as well as Gary Barlow. His first seasonal album, The Dream of Christmas, is a mixture of originals and covers. He remembers the moment he realised that the public appetite for festive music was far greater than he had ever imagined. “I was at [radio station] Magic the year they were launching 100% Christmas” – in 2017, Magic put a Christmas-music pop-up station on air; since then the main station has gone totally Christmas for the season – “and I said, ‘What? All day long? That’s never going to work.’ And of course, what do I know? Everyone loves it.” There’s a reason Barlow’s album is the way it is. A large chunk of his audience wants the man who wrote Back for Good and Shine and Never Forget and all the rest of the Take That hits to be singing his own songs. But, equally, it’s Christmas, and to make an impact you need to give people songs they know and already love. “Christmas is one of those things you should be careful not to mess with too much,” he says. “Like when you go: ‘We’re not going to have turkey this year, we’re going to have a goose.’ And everyone the following Christmas goes: ‘Jesus Christ, bring me that turkey back, will you?’ Reinterpret it a little bit, but don’t try and reinvent it. So I felt like four original songs and 12 classics is quite a good balance.” The success of the old Christmas songs, though, means getting new ones noticed is harder than ever. The tactic of Ed Sheeran and Elton John, currently at No 1 with Merry Christmas, was to stockpile sleigh bells and make the most quintessentially Christmassy song imaginable. “It’s easier for people to listen to covers,” says Leona Lewis, who has this year reissued her 2013 Christmas album as Christmas, With Love Always, with a couple of newly recorded tracks. “Originals are definitely harder, which is why it’s so amazing how Mariah Carey has transcended and become so huge. Everyone talks about her voice, but she’s an incredible songwriter.” “Original music is hard [to promote] anyway nowadays,” Barlow says, “especially at the place I’m at in my career. But the thing is, with Christmas albums, you’ve got to be stubborn. You’ve got to be proactive with these [new Christmas] songs and make sure you try and give them a moment every year.” Lewis and Barlow, of course, are at the upper end of things – Lewis’s One More Sleep is another of the rare modern songs to have entered the Christmas pantheon. They are the kind of artists who measure success in a very visible way. Below that level, though, the pressure to have high chart placings is less important. “If you look at the charts, it’s very hard to make an impact at that level,” Withey says, “but if you talk about artists targeting streams, it’s really accessible. Streaming has opened subgenres to a global audience. What we’re seeing is artists able to target quite large playlists, but not necessarily the top Christmas playlists. Do an acoustic version of Mariah and find your way on to a more specialist playlist – that can still drive millions of streams.” Withey’s company, Instrumental, also helps artists release music – it is behind LadBaby, the maker of the last three Christmas No 1s, and very possibly this year’s too – and, Withey says: “We’ve got one track that gets multiple millions of streams from being on a Christmas jazz playlist. In the global market you can make lots of money without troubling the charts, and you don’t need a major label to do it.” If all this makes Christmas music seem cynical, that’s the fault of the times. In fact, for decades artists have made Christmas records because they – like everyone else – grew up loving them. Gloria Estefan duets with Nat King Cole on a new Christmas album, A Sentimental Christmas With Nat King Cole and Friends. “Christmas music highlights the season,” she says. “It’s a feeling. I start playing Christmas music way before Christmas, because the season is too short for me.” To be part of the lineage of A Christmas Gift for You From Phil Spector, and those other records that soundtrack the season, she says, is “a privilege and an honour”. It was Sufjan Stevens’ 2006 box set, Songs for Christmas, that made Cullum feel that a festive album “was a viable artistic thing to do, and not just a cash in”, he says. “When I put the Sufjan Stevens record on – and I know my records aren’t like that – it really gives me a feeling that Christmas has started, and I love digging that record out every year. It makes me feel warm. It makes me feel like my family are close. It makes me think about people I’ve lost. As an artistic statement, it’s a valuable thing. I felt I would like to do something like that.” For Lewis, Christmas was about listening to her favourite Motown artists. “So for me it’s always been a relationship of love,” she says. “There are some major Christmas records that became part of my Christmas every single year, like the Stevie Wonder and Phil Spector records.” And this year, of all years, maybe we need Christmas cheer more than ever. Barlow made his record to lift his own spirits, as much as anything. “Last Christmas was such a bloody letdown,” he says. “We usually have a big Christmas with family, and of course we had none of that last year. In an attempt to extend the life of Christmas I was nipping off into the studio on the 27th, 28th and starting to write these songs. So when the new year came and I went in to my record label, everyone said: ‘Oh God, this should be a Christmas album.’” Yes, Christmas music is big business, but it’s more than that. It answers some deep need for a great many people. It’s not just the sound of money; it’s the sound of home.The prosecution: Ines Jay hates fish because of a distressing childhood experience, but it means I can’t have it either I can’t cook fish for me and my boyfriend, Jay, in our shared flat, and it’s getting annoying. I do most of the cooking and I really love seafood. When we were in lockdown I was bored with the usual meat dishes and craved a bit of salmon, but Jay insisted that we didn’t buy any. It’s a big compromise as I’m Portuguese and have grown up on wholesome, healthy fish all my life. Lockdown brought home how much I’ve missed the cooking of my childhood. Jay needs to come round because it’s affecting our mealtimes together. All our joint meals are fish-free so if I want seafood, I cook it when he’s away. One time Jay was out for a work meal and I thought, great, I’ve got free rein, and fried up some mackerel in a pan. Jay came back early and completely overreacted, saying “whoa, that stinks.” He kept washing the pan over and over and wouldn’t use it for a week as he thought the fish smell lingered. We can’t go out to seafood restaurants either. And when we do eat out, Jay goes crazy if I order fish. In fact, he hates it so much that if I’ve got fish on my plate I’m not allowed to use my fork to try some of his food. He’s so fearful of the flavour, even though I ensure there’s never any fish on the fork. It’s irrational and ridiculous. We usually split dishes and bills 50/50, but if I’ve ordered a fish dish, he will tell me I have to pay more because he didn’t get to try my order. Jay says he hates fish because when he was six, his dad gave him pasta mixed with a can of crabmeat that was three years past the sell-by date. It was disgusting. Since then he’s not been able to stomach seafood of any kind. I would like him to try fish again: he’s an adult now and surely our tastebuds change over time. I tell him the crabmeat episode was a long time ago and that he could try a prawn, but he tells me I am forcing him to eat something that makes him feel sick. It’s time for Jay to try and update his palate. The defence: Jay I was traumatised by seafood as a child, and my tastebuds do not need ‘updating’ I reject the idea that Ines isn’t allowed to cook fish in our flat. She’s strong-minded and if she wants to cook seafood, she will. I think she’s just learned that, because I hate it so much, it’s simply easier if she waits until I’m away. What’s wrong with that? I compromise, she compromises. I’ll admit, I’m not over the moon when she cooks fish at home, but I just ask her to exercise caution if I’m there. The only times I have overreacted are when we had one non-stick frying pan to share between us, and I had to use it directly after her. Fish can leave a strong aftertaste and smell. For that reason, when we eat out at restaurants, I’d rather she didn’t stick her fishy fork in my food. I won’t stop her ordering a mound of molluscs, but I don’t want to taste them, thanks very much. I’ve been traumatised by seafood. At six, my dad gave me bad crabmeat and I was violently ill. I also used to work on a fish counter at Sainsbury’s and had to fillet mackerel. Fish guts got stuck to the bottom of my shoes. Once, I went on holiday and left my work shoes in my car and when I returned the stench was awful. Recently, Ines forgot to turn on the extractor fan when she was cooking, which turned our home into a marine smokehouse. There was a putrid stench in the flat for days, just like the one from my fish-gutting days. It brought all those horrible memories back. I told her that this couldn’t happen again. I’m a reasonable man, but boundaries had to be set after incidents like that. Now if fish is cooked, appropriate ventilation and extraction are required and I need prior warning. I need to sign off Ines’s fish-cooking plans, so I’m prepared. Ines is the primary cook in the house because she’s better at it than me. I’ll eat whatever she wants most of the time, but if she tells me prawns are on the menu then a little part of me dies inside. We’re never going to agree on that. My tastebuds don’t need “updating”, as she puts it. I’m quite happy never tasting fish again, and Ines shouldn’t try to force it down my neck if the mere smell triggers me. The jury of Guardian readers Should Jay try to overcome his aversion to fish? Is it a food phobia or just a dislike? Jay uses words like traumatised – if so, he should get professional help. Jay’s idea of compromise is not mine; he could agree to her cooking some fish at home, and cook other things himself. Maureen, 69 Ines has compromised enough. Going crazy when ordering fish; paying less because he couldn’t try her order; “signing off” on cooking plans? Jay, I sympathise with you hating fish, but if you really don’t want it, you could cook your own meals. And then try some sustainable halibut. Tristan, 45 Stuck on a desert island, would Ines crave her prawns or her partner? If the former, there’s something fishy going on here! So long as Jay isn’t using his phobia to control Ines, I’d shell out for a second pan, agree to some “fish days”, and buy Jay a takeaway. Iona, 49 It’s a battle between Ines’s longing for Portugal and Jay’s unresolved childhood trauma. Those are more important things than the smell of fish. They should share a session with a friend or counsellor and talk about the underlying issues. The words fish or seafood are not to be mentioned. Bas, 52 Jay claims to be reasonable but seems to underestimate the strength of his reactions and the effect they have on Ines. It’s ridiculous that Ines should be held hostage by his pickiness. Maybe it’s not the tastebuds but the boyfriend that needs updating. Katherine, 28 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Jay try and get over his phobia of seafood? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Lakshmi should spend less money on her cats, something that annoys her boyfriend, Rob. 25% of you said no – Lakshmi is innocent 75% of you said yes – Lakshmi is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereTwo days of one-way traffic on Vulture Street had threatened to derail England’s Ashes campaign from the outset but, through a resumption of Joe Root’s remarkable form in 2021 and Dawid Malan’s penchant for Australian conditions, an impressive fightback was marshalled on the third. By stumps it felt as if their tour had finally begun in earnest. Root was unbeaten on 86 from 158 balls, fresh from overtaking Michael Vaughan’s record of 1,481 runs in a calendar year and smiling once more, while Malan was 80 not out from 177. England appeared to need snookers when 147 proved their maximum on day one but through the pair’s unbroken stand of 159, one that took the tourists to 220 for two, just 58 behind, the gloom had lifted. Both Englishmen batted beautifully. Root was back in the bubble that has returned six centuries since the start of January, removing all risk, sweeping Nathan Lyon confidently to continue the off-spinner’s hunt for a 400th wicket and repelling the seamers with authority. The captain had spoken of setting the record straight in Australia before this series and, having battled through cramp and worn blows to the body and knee along the way, a new highest score in these parts had put words into action. More important, however much Australia remained favourites to take a 1-0 lead, the pair had delivered an important reminder to others that life does get easier once the Kookaburra ball goes soft and the heat kicks in. If Lyon can be successfully milked, the pressure on the seamers increases. Root, at the crease for eight of England’s 10 century stands this year, was always likely to be one to issue this diktat. Back in the UK there is every chance that Ed Smith, the former England selector, was nodding away in his pyjamas about Malan. It was Smith who dropped him in 2018, with the parting comment that his game was perhaps better suited to overseas hanging over the left-hander for some time. Yet as ill-judged as that appraisal was, given Malan’s sensitive nature, it did acknowledge what is a clear strength. Now an experienced campaigner at 34, and with a century in Perth four years ago to his name, Malan clearly thrives on bouncier surfaces. There was one narrow escape here when a ball from Lyon missed his off-bail by less than two centimetres, plus a review for caught behind on 23 that showed nothing on HotSpot despite Australia’s belief to the contrary. But otherwise he held firm, his well-judged recall last summer summed up by one imperious driven four off Pat Cummins that was arguably the shot of the day. Needless to say that on a day when one brave England supporter successfully proposed to his Australian girlfriend in the stands, the alliance that formed out in the middle was desperately needed. When Mark Wood speared a yorker into the stumps of Travis Head on 152 in the morning to terminate Australia’s first innings for 425, the first-innings deficit of 278 runs looked as sheer as California’s El Capitan. Having ransacked a century the previous evening, Head helped plunder 83 more runs in the space of 20.3 overs, mowing Jack Leach square to bring up his 150 from just 148 balls and bringing up three figures in the left-armer’s runs column to boot; coming in 12.1 overs, Leach’s gallon is now the fastest in Ashes cricket. At least the return of Ollie Robinson and Ben Stokes with the ball allayed concerns over their fitness. Rory Burns and Haseeb Hameed gambolled off the field to strap on their pads, the former having been the embodiment of his side’s misery up to this point after a diamond duck on the first morning and the inexcusable drop at slip that gave David Warner a reprieve halfway through his eventual 94. Moments such as this are when Test cricket offers unrivalled torture for the player but has the audience reaching for the popcorn. Australia’s fielders were handed plenty of material too when, for just the third time in 30 Tests (and the first without a nightwatchman at the other end), Burns declined to face the first ball of an innings. But despite this, the delayed rematch with Mitchell Starc delivered instant drama when Burns was given out lbw on the field third ball, only for his review to prove the ball was going over. Reaching lunch unbeaten on 13, with England 23 for no loss, Burns could soon breathe a bit easier. However, the bounce that saved Burns (and was yet to return a single lbw by the end of the eighth session) proved the undoing of both openers after the restart. Cummins almost immediately got one to rear off the surface and take the shoulder of Burns’s bat for a simple slip catch. Although Hameed lined up well for the second time, showing courage under fire and again ignoring the Queensland heat by batting in a cable-knit tank top, a strangle down leg off Starc made it scores of 25 and 27 for the match. This was smart captaincy from Cummins, who after the fall of Burns had then held himself and Josh Hazlewood back in the hope of hitting Root with fresh legs. But from 61 for two, still 217 in arrears, Root got himself off a pair fourth ball and, alongside Malan, set about constructing two sessions of determined yet positive resistance. With Hazlewood sending down only eight overs to prompt questions over a possible niggle and Warner off the field all day after being struck in the ribs by Ben Stokes 24 hours earlier, Australia finally had headaches of their own.Britons who kill endangered animals abroad for fun will not be able to bring their hunting trophies home, the government has announced. The proposed law will prevent big game hunters from bringing home body parts of 7,000 species including lions, rhinos, elephants and polar bears. It comes two years after the government pledged to introduce a ban. The environment secretary, George Eustice, said the measure was expected to be one of the toughest in the world and would go beyond the government’s manifesto commitment by including near-threatened and threatened species as well as endangered ones. “We will be leading the way in protecting endangered animals and helping to strengthen and support long-term conservation,” he said. The ban will apply whether or not a trophy has been obtained from a wild animal or one bred in captivity specifically for the purpose of trophy hunting. Breaching the rules could land hunters in prison for up to five years. In the past two years about 300 trophies from endangered animals have been shipped to the UK, according to the Campaign to Ban Trophy Hunting. The campaign’s founder, Eduardo Gonçalves, noted that the government had not specified a timetable for implementing the legislation. He said: “The bill, as far as we’ve seen, looks to be in pretty good shape, but it has been two years since it was originally announced in the Queen’s speech, and many animals have been cruelly and needlessly killed in that time. So it is really imperative for the government to bring the bill to parliament as quickly as possible.” Gonçalves said ministers had told him the bill could come to parliament next spring or summer, by which time “potentially another 100 or more animals will be killed and their trophies brought back to Britain”. He said: “Delay costs lives: every week that goes by without this ban means more animals, including endangered species, are being shot by British hunters, and their trophies brought back to the country. Some of these species are careering towards extinction, and certainly the British public are very strongly opposed to trophy hunting.” Boris Johnson has called trophy hunting a “disgusting trade”, and his father, Stanley Johnson, has campaigned extensively in favour of a ban. Plans for a law banning hunting trophies were prompted by the shooting of Cecil the lion in 2015 by an American dentist, Walter Palmer, at a reserve in Zimbabwe. In 2019 the government consulted on plans for a ban, which received overwhelming public support.More than 50 years on from their first recordings together, and 14 albums in, there’s not much mystery to a new release from Neil Young and Crazy Horse. The band will sound ragged, as if they have tumbled half-asleep into the studio; Young’s guitar solos will sound like forked lightning; there will be volume, but also the restraint that comes from not indulging in millions of overdubs. And so it proves. Barn – titled for its recording location (“Barn, high in the Rockies) – sounds much as you’d expect, although that’s a tribute to the ensemble’s reliability rather than a complaint about repetition. Sometimes the old sounds are recontextualised in slightly different ways: on the brilliant Heading West, Young’s burning, acidic lead guitar is backed by rolling piano rather than yet more guitars and married to a melody that would shine on one of his classic albums. That’s one of a pair of tracks on which he’s fretting away at the past, and at movement; the other, Canerican, sees him recalling how “I was born in Canada, came south to join a band” and how that has shaped his identity. Barn highlights both the strengths and weaknesses of this set-up: They Might Be Lost barely feels like a song, just the same chords Young has been strumming all his adult life, yet it manages to be eternal and deeply moving. Equally – and this is a little like complaining fire is too hot – one can’t help but feel some of these songs sound as though they were being written as they were recorded. But that Crazy Horse sound? Well, they could more or less be playing Crazy Frog and it would still sound great.The introduction of Covid-19 countermeasures across the UK and the rest of Europe, not to mention the US and Asia, to try to combat the spread of the Omicron variant has raised the spectre of the global economy stumbling into 2022 in a distinctly weakened state. But how big is their impact likely to be? Will there be redundancies? Employers are unlikely to panic in the run-up to Christmas, no matter how disappointed they are that customers have begun questioning spending decisions. Many firms, especially in the hospitality, retail and tourism industries, were already short of staff. A longer spell of working from home could change how firms respond, while even tighter restrictions are expected to be met with an increase in the number of firms going bust, possibly before they get a chance to make staff redundant. A recent Bank of England report found that more than 30% of UK’s small businesses were classified as highly indebted, with borrowing levels of more than 10 times their cash balances – up from 14% before Covid-19 hit. Rishi Sunak has rebuffed calls from industry bosses to bring back the furlough scheme, and rejected Labour’s demand for an increase in sick pay to support workers who test positive to the virus. However, the chancellor has hinted that steps to protect the worst-hit industries will be considered should Omicron force ministers to adopt further measures. Will prices rise even higher? There is a strong prospect of shops raising prices in response to the stricter restrictions. As rising cases and rule changes make going to bars, restaurants and shows less attractive, millions of households are expected to channel the money they would have spent there on purchases, at a time when restrictions mean it is more difficult to import items into the UK. Future lockdowns in some of the world most important manufacturing hubs, including China, could further restrict the number of goods coming to the UK, adding extra pressure on prices. Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, said the emergence of the Omicron variant would slow the recovery and increase the risk of higher inflation. “It has arguably increased the upside risks to our consumer prices index inflation forecasts,” he said. Will there be another recession? Most economists believe mask-wearing in shops and working from home will do little to alter their forecasts for growth over the next couple of years. Most businesses have adapted to home working and its reintroduction will cause only minimal disruption. That means they expect the recovery to continue and the economy to climb back above its pre-pandemic level. However, plenty of businesses will be harmed by a lack of shoppers, and the January sales could prove to be a massive flop. Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the impact of Omicron could be measured in lost GDP, with a cut in his estimate for growth to just 0.3% in the first quarter of 2022 compared with a previous forecast of 0.8%. It would not mark the beginning of a recession – which needs two consecutive quarters of negative growth – but would be a painful reminder of the enormous cost of the pandemic.“Went to bed in the early hours,” says Colum Fordham, “watching Travis Head belt a six off Stokes with the rain pouring down in Naples. Woke up to find bright sunshine and a frankly unbelievable scoreline of England 220-2. Obviously just a dream. Root and Malan on eighty. Honestly? As Basil Fawlty opined, ‘I can take the despair. It’s the hope I can’t stand.’” Well, you’re just going to have to cope with the hope for the rest of the day. When play resumes tonight, with the new ball due after ten overs, Root and Malan will have to dig in again twice. But a handsome reward is beckoning to them - both are a few crisp strokes away from a hundred, which, for Root, would be his first in a Test in Australia. I’ll be back, if England last that long, halfway through the day, or the night, or whatever the hell you call it. Thanks for your company, which has propelled this page to No.2 in the Guardian chart – just behind a story about a man being attacked by otters. That’s almost as far-fetched as an England fightback. For Ali Martin’s report on the day’s play, click here. “Tempting fate?” goes the next subject line. “Tim,” says Kim Thonger, “would it be tempting fate to point out that, if Root and Malan could overhaul Peter May and Colin Cowdrey’s partnership of 411 against the West Indies in 1957, we might have an outside chance of winning this match?” I hope that’s a joke, because if not, the fate-temptometer has just exploded. “Day 3 grumpy Aussie,” says the subject line of an email from Don E. “Yes,” he continues, “we had a bad team culture till recently. But we were way too nice today. We should have kept the pace bowlers and pressure on. England now has a chance.” 70th over: England 220-2 (Malan 80, Root 86) The last over is entrusted to Cameron Green, which is surprising, but he rises to the task. After dishing up a few dots to Root, he tempts him into an indiscretion off the very last ball – a boyish flirtation outside off which very nearly takes the edge as he changes his mind and yanks the bat away. But these two survive, and so do England’s faint hopes of getting out of Brisbane without defeat. The partnership is 159 off 49 overs, the deficit has dwindled to 58, Root is back in top form after his duck, and Pat Cummins has just discovered that captaincy can be even harder work than fast bowling. The old innings defeat still can’t be ruled out, given England’s deep ingrained tendency to collapse, but they have recovered their self-respect after taking a hiding from Travis Head. “Just the day England needed,” says Alastair Cook, “and the tour needed.” In other news, here’s the story on Hobart hosting the fifth Test – not in the bag yet, it seems, but expected. 69th over: England 220-2 (Malan 80, Root 86) Malan, Gower-like again, drives Lyon for a gorgeous four. Then he remembers his true calling, and plays and misses going for a cut. One over left. “Just noticed,” says Kandukuru Nagarjun, “that Jack Leach has played only two professional T20 games, and none at all before the last English summer. Now it all falls into place. When Warner, Labuschagne and Head got after him, Leach didn’t have a defensive game to call upon. Batters need a sound defence in Tests to counter attacking bowling; with batters more adept at attack now, surely defensive skills are just as important for bowlers? Perhaps the ECB could find a way for Leach (and Dom Bess) to play more T20. And Silverwood ought to play Parkinson in this Ashes; with his T20 experience he’ll handle it OK when the Australian batsmen try to take him down, as they certainly will.” That’s a great point. “PS: in non-cricket matters, big fan of the Connell guide on writing well.” Ah, thanks. 68th over: England 215-2 (Malan 76, Root 85) Malan is a man on a mission, to beat the world Test record for most plays-and-misses in an innings. This one is a waft at Cameron Green that even David Gower might have considered a bit extravagant. He makes amends with a classy cover push for two. 67th over: England 213-2 (Malan 74, Root 85) Starc, who’s been expensive, foes for just a single off this over, and beats Malan outside off to boot. I’ve just had a glance at the predictor on CricViz, which reckons England will get a grand total of ... 292. O come, all ye faithless. 66th over: England 212-2 (Malan 73, Root 85) Root seems to have taken some painkillers, so maybe it’s a knock rather than cramp. Anyway he seems himself, dancing back to glance Green for two,then adding a single to bring up the 150 partnership. When Root came in, one of the commentators said “they need to put on 150, these two,” and they have. England have made ten hundred partnerships in Tests this year, and Root has been there for eight of them – the other two being by Hameed and Burns. “Re Tony Mason’s comment, over 63,” says Anthony White. “Ah, squinting and scrolling, the curse of OBO followers! I also tilt my gadget away from my eyes so that the screen is more of a grey blur, dreading that the dark mass of ‘WICKET’! will jump out of the murk. Thanks for encouraging Root’s pantomime troupe with no jinxing!” You’re most welcome. Malan is back on his feet, but as he gets up Root goes down. He needs some attention from the physio – has he got cramp too? 65th over: England 208-2 (Malan 72, Root 82) Starc has a half-appeal for LBW against Root, but as Isa Guha instantly observes, it’s pitching outside leg. Malan mis-hits a pull and gets away with it as the ball lollops to the ground, short of mid-on. Malan goes to ground too, perhaps getting a touch of cramp. He’s an England top-order batsman, he’s not used to being out there for hours. A good question comes in from Amod Paranjape in Mumbai. “Will the English fans now relax,” he wonders, “or will we see the customary messages of doom and gloom?” Put it this way, Amod: it’s too early to rule out an innings defeat. 64th over: England 206-2 (Malan 72, Root 82) Root reverse-sweeps Lyon again, but this time he finds the fielder at backward point. He picks up a couple of runs with a lovely late glide, almost out of Alex Carey’s gloves. 63rd over: England 204-2 (Malan 72, Root 79) A quiet over from Starc to Root, five dots then a dab for a single. This partnership, now 143, is closing in on England’s whole first innings. “Morning Tim.” Morning, Tony Mason. “My wife’s kindly got up and made tea this morning. She couldn’t bear my reaction on looking at the score first thing after yesterday’s effort. But so much better than my dream in which, for some unfathomable reason, I was keeping wicket to Joey Benjamin who bowled at a single stump from square of the wicket (my dream rules allowed it). The ball went for 4 byes, of course. Anyway, scrolling through the day’s play, is there anything worse than being notified of an update and then having to squint your eyes in the hope that it is only a de Lisle rambling rather than Root’s wicket. Thanks for the entertainment.” Rambling? Moi? 62nd over: England 203-2 (Malan 72, Root 78) So how would Root like to bring up England’s 200? With a reverse sweep off Lyon, that’s how. Lyon now has none for 61 – not in Leach’s league, but not himself either. 61st over: England 198-2 (Malan 72, Root 73) Australia’s new-ball bowlers haven’t been seen for some time, though as far as we know they’re not injured. Now Cummins brings back Starc, whose first ball is slapped for four by Malan. Root follows up with a straight push for three, nice and easy. The sun is still shining, by the way: the rain we were promised hasn’t turned up. And as they’re going so well, England won’t mind. They trail by 80. 60th over: England 190-2 (Malan 67, Root 70) Root sweeps Lyon and technically gives Labuschagne a chance, but it flew at him and a chance is what he didn’t stand. It goes for four, so Root is off 66, but Tom van der Gucht has a good spot for us. “Checking up on your comments about Root’s runs this calendar year,” Tom says, “I was impressed to see he is also currently averaging his shirt number as I type, with the very pleasing average of 66 for 2021. A nice coincidence and, as the type of person who kooks for signs like this as reliable gambling information, I now need to decide whether it means I should buy two number 6 scratch cards, 6 number 6s or a number 12 ... I might go for a 12 as they’re cheaper.” 59th over: England 185-2 (Malan 66, Root 66) Cummins appeals for LBW against Root, but it’s struck him outside the line and he’s playing a shot, so the only person getting excited is Labuschagne, who’s notoriously excitable. “Morning @TimdeLisle,” says Guy Hornsby on Twitter. “This is far better for my brain than when I woke up at 3am and found Travis Head had 150. It’s good to just see England batting well, threatening making the Aussies bat again. All I need now is not having to listen to Warne for 4 more Tests. He’s so draining.” I know what you mean – for all his insight, he often dishes up something that isn’t commentary, but sledging by other means. 58th over: England 185-2 (Malan 66, Root 66) Just a single off the over from Lyon. Root 66! And Malan 66 too, though, as far as I know, nobody’s written a song about that. 57th over: England 184-2 (Malan 66, Root 65) Both the wickets that have fallen in this innings were caused by sudden sharp bounce, possibly off divots on the pitch. There’s more of it now as Cummins gets the ball to leap off a length at Root, who is good enough to get his gloves up in time. Malan then comes close to being caught at backward square leg as Marcus Harris, with the sun in his eyes, is slow to spring forward. 56th over: England 181-2 (Malan 65, Root 63) Cummins takes Labuschagne off and brings back his proper spinner, Lyon. Again, though, he doesn’t back his choice up with close catchers: just the one slip, nobody bearing down on the batter at shirt leg, let alone silly point. Malan gives Lyon some encouragement by playing and missing for the umpteenth time as he tries to cut. 55th over: England 179-2 (Malan 65, Root 63) Root saw that pose Malan held just now and raises him a high-elbow cover drive. It’s as if Geoff Boycott was back and had acquired some elegance. And that’s drinks, with England – dare I say it – motoring along nicely. The deficit is down to 99! Ice creams all round. “G’day Tim,” says Nicholas Hartley. G’day mate! “Thanks for the comms, it’s helped me follow the cricket whilst getting through the day here in the office.” My pleasure. Well actually my torture, as I was up at 3am, but an element of pleasure is in there somewhere. “If you could perhaps help Kim Thonger who queried the Covid restrictions earlier. A touring Test team and their entourage is traditionally known as a Touring Party, so not only are England very much on brand for Boris’s Britain but they are also in compliance with the Plan B rules back home.” Ha. 54th over: England 173-2 (Malan 64, Root 58) Labuschagne, having gone from amateurish to respectable, now moves on to being milked – five singles off the over. 53rd over: England 168-2 (Malan 62, Root 55) A breather for Green, so where is Cummins going to turn now? To himself. But he can’t find the breakthrough yet: Malan cracks a cover drive for four and enjoys it, holding the pose. “I see Root just skipped past Ponting 2003 in the runs in a calendar year,” says Arran Watson in Aktau, Kazakhstan. “Next target is Ponting 2005 ... a great player indeed. Hope Root can eclipse a few more in the next few weeks.” 52nd over: England 162-2 (Malan 57, Root 55) A better over from Labuschagne, who finds his length and even ventures an LBW shout against Malan (going down). Root eases him into the off side for a single to bring up the hundred partnership off 30.1 overs. It’s been purposeful, fluent, and just what England needed. 51st over: England 159-2 (Malan 55, Root 54) Root plays out a maiden from Green, who has kept it tight, by hook or by crook: four overs for only six runs. 50th over: England 159-2 (Malan 55, Root 54) Cummins finally gives up on Lyon and brings on his sixth bowler, the part-time leg-spinner Marnus Labuschagne. He starts in part-time-honoured fashion, with a pair of long hops. Malan pulls them for four and one, and England’s overdraft is down to 119. 49th over: England 153-2 (Malan 50, Root 53) Green pitches it up for once and finds some swing, sending Carey down the leg side as Malan shoulders arms. You wait days for an England fifty, then two come at once: Malan brings up his by cutting for two. He has needed a lot of luck, but has ridden it well. 48th over: England 150-2 (Malan 47, Root 53) It’s still Lyon: Cummins is determined to get him to 400. Again, there’s a single apiece to both batters, and for the first time in the series England have reached 150. Hallelujah. “Hi Tim,” says Wayne Trotman, “and greetings from Izmir, Turkey. On comms, Warne actually said that the figure of 29,000 at Hobart was the total for the five-day Test there v West Indies a while back. Largest for a single day was around 6,000.” Ah sorry, my mistake. “Off comms, I suspect Warne is spitting feathers that the MCG didn’t get the fifth Test. And I think I’d agree with him.” 47th over: England 148-2 (Malan 46, Root 52) Green continues, either banging it in or drifting onto leg stump. Both batters take a single and the partnership reaches 87, which is a bogey number in Australia, but possibly only for the Aussies. 46th over: England 146-2 (Malan 45, Root 51) Sniffing a fifty, Root plays a rare false shot, a sweep at Lyon that goes way over the ball. A moment later, he nails the same shot, hitting it well in front of deep square to reach that fifty. It’s his 14th fifty in Ashes cricket and 74th in all Tests; 23 of those have blossomed into hundreds, which is very much what Root has in mind here. 45th over: England 142-2 (Malan 45, Root 47) Cummins, facing the first puzzle of his captaincy, sends for Cameron Green. He’s an odd-looking bowler: very tall, quite quick, but ungainly and somehow apologetic. He seems to be under instructions to dig a few in, yet he has the air of the guy at the party who’s a bit embarrassed. Meanwhile, on comms, Shane Warne is busy rubbishing Hobart, on the grounds that “no one turns up”. The top Test crowd there, he says triumphantly, is 29,000. Sounds pretty good to a Pom. 44th over: England 141-2 (Malan 45, Root 46) Malan advances on Lyon and on-drives for four. The commentators announce that the fifth Test in this series has been awarded to Hobart, in Tasmania, which will be making its Ashes debut. In my limited experience, it’s seriously windy. 43rd over: England 136-2 (Malan 41, Root 45) There’s a pause for a pitch invasion by a man in red trousers, presumably a Brexit supporter. Root looks irritated for a moment, then passes the time by chatting to the umpire, and when play resumes he plays a peachy straight drive for four. Starc’s retort is a trampoline bouncer which Root wafts at, and possibly feathers. Alex Carey tips it over the bar and the signal is four byes. “I awake,” says Kim Thonger, “to find the England batsmen hard at work, but under the new Covid restrictions shouldn’t they be working from home? Or is this Test match classified as a party?” Ha. 42nd over: England 127-2 (Malan 41, Root 40) Root sweeps Lyon handsomely for four, then takes a single to join Malan in the forties. There’s yet another play-and-miss from Malan, and it’s just not happening for Lyon, who hasn’t taken a Test wicket since January. 41st over: England 122-2 (Malan 41, Root 35) Root angles his bat to guide a single off Starc. If Bill Lawry was still with us, he’d be saying “Nice deflection.” Malan plays a less nice deflection, taking one hand off the bat, squirting through the vacant third slip, and getting four for it. That makes him the first England batter in this series to reach 40. Six have reached 25, including Hameed twice, and therein lies England’s downfall. They’ve actually had more top-seven batters getting a start than Australia did, and they’re still 150 behind. 40th over: England 117-2 (Malan 37, Root 34) A single to each batter off Lyon, who appeals for a caught-and-bowled as the ball pops back off Malan’s pad, but does it with a wry smile. The Barmy Army muster a chorus of Joe Root to the tune of Hey Jude. That gorgeous drive in the previous over, by the way, brought up the fifty partnership. 39th over: England 115-2 (Malan 36, Root 33) As if he’s just been told about that record, Root plays a sumptuous stroke, a cover drive off Starc that’s straight out of the coaching manual. Starc comes straighter, so Root tucks him off the pads for a couple. He’s in full flow: now he’s got to go big. 38th over: England 109-2 (Malan 36, Root 27) Lyon continues his quest and Malan gets the scoreboard moving with a push from down the track, nice and enterprising. Root swivels to pull for a single, which takes him to 1482 runs for this calendar year, a new England record, beating Michael Vaughan in his annus mirabilis of 2002. Well played that man. And just imagine how many he’d get if he wasn’t lumbered with the captaincy. 37th over: England 107-2 (Malan 35, Root 26) Cummins starts the evening session with Mitchell Starc, but doesn’t give him a vote of confidence with the field setting – just two slips and a gully, which is what you’d have if your lead was 50, rather than 175. Starc is tidy, Root is watchful, and that’s a maiden. 36th over: England 107-2 (Malan 35, Root 26) Malan’s innings has been half commanding, half tentative. He plays and misses yet again, at Lyon, but makes it through to the end of the over. And that’s tea, with England 171 behind. In the afternoon session they made 84 for 2, which is gold dust by their recent standards. This partnership is 46, and needs to go to 146. See you after some toast and marmalade. 35th over: England 107-2 (Malan 35, Root 26) Cummins comes close to getting Root LBW as he aims for the leg bail, although the Australians show less interest in it than their ex-team-mates up in the commentary box. When Cummins drops short, Root plays a lovely flowing pull but only gets a single as there’s a deep square leg. Malan is beaten again, nibbling outside off as Cummins goes round the wicket. 34th over: England 103-2 (Malan 33, Root 25) Root, in the groove now, pulls Lyon for four to bring up the hundred, then sweeps for a single. Lyon beats Malan outside the off stump, but the deficit is tumbling: down to a mere 175. 33rd over: England 98-2 (Malan 33, Root 20) Root plays his personal shot of the day, a straight drive off Cummins, crisp as a winter’s morning. Malan clips for two, and that’s 21 off the last three overs. It’s almost as if England are improving with some match practice. Two of their reserves trot out with refreshments: a guy called Anderson, and one called Broad. 32nd over: England 91-2 (Malan 31, Root 15) Lyon, who’s twitchy at the best of times, starts this over badly – a touch short to Root, who cuts gently for a single, and then well short to Malan, who cuts firmly for four. Lyon retorts with an LBW shout but it’s a poor one –a full toss that hits Malan’s foot on its way down the leg side. Malan then advances to drive for four more, so that’s nine off the over, and a tiny problem for Cummins, who may have to turn to Cameron Green. 31st over: England 82-2 (Malan 23, Root 14) Hazlewood gets a breather as Cummins brings himself back. The early signs are that, as captains go, he’s one who really likes to ring the changes. Root steers him for four through the slips, with lovely soft hands, but then nutmegs himself with an inside edge. It’s a good contest. 30th over: England 77-2 (Malan 23, Root 9) Lyon continues his quest for 400, while the batters are on the hunt for something more modest: the odd single. They manage one each, but Malan flirts with danger again by going down the track and almost handing a run-out chance to the man at short leg, who lets the ball through his legs. The England Lions, by the way, have just been bowled out for 103 by Australia A: good to see them taking their roles as understudies so seriously. 29th over: England 75-2 (Malan 22, Root 8) Root shows his class by clipping Hazlewood for four. That is Hazlewood’s 45th ball and only the second that England have managed to manoeuvre to the boundary. The first was a glance by Rory Burns that was, I’m told, quite close to leg stump. 28th over: England 71-2 (Malan 22, Root 4) “It’s 99 balls,” notes a commentator, “since Nathan Lyon reached 399.” Someone should give him a vanilla ice-cream with a Flake in it. Root finds a better way to attack him, reaching forward and playing a crisp low swat into the gap at midwicket for two. Then he goes for a big sweep and misses, but the LBW shout is in vain as he’s outside the line. And Lyon with his wait for no. 400, like Leach leeching runs earlier, has a hundred. 27th over: England 68-2 (Malan 22, Root 1) Hazlewood continues in his usual role of Mr Impeccable. He beats Malan outside off, thanks to some faint movement and a certain uncertainty. As one of the commentators said a few minutes ago, “You can’t flirt in Australia.” 26th over: England 68-2 (Malan 22, Root 1) Cummins does take himself off now, and brings Nathan Lyon back. That should be a bonus for Root, playing to his strength against spin, but he nearly perishes to a half-hearted lap that pops just over the shoulder of Travis Head at short leg. England suddenly look less assured without Hameed. 25th over: England 67-2 (Malan 21, Root 1) Hazlewood is so hard to get away, unless your name is Jos Buttler. Just one off this over as Malan clips to mid-on, where there’s another good stop by a fast bowler – Cummins this time. 24th over: England 66-2 (Malan 20, Root 1) Pat Cummins keeps himself on, and why wouldn’t you, when you’re the No.1 bowler in the rankings, and a captain still on honeymoon. He slips in a swinging yorker, which Dawid Malan does well to flick for a single. Joe Root plays a smooth on-drive but gets nothing for it as Mitch Starc throws his lanky frame to his left, bringing a warm round of applause from the slips. Morning everyone, or is it afternoon – my system seems a little confused. Many thanks to Geoff, what a class act. And what a mess, as far as England are concerned. If you’re an England fan, and they’re playing Tests in Australia, it’s the same old story: the story of your life. 23rd over: England 65-2 (Malan 19, Root 1) One over before drinks, Joe Root on a pair, facing Hazlewood who got him in the first innings. Hazlewood is hunting that front pad. Root just about keeps him out. Then fourth ball of the over, hops in the air and flicks a straight delivery square for one important run. Now then! A big appeal for caught behind off Malan. The Aussies are convinced. Umpire says no. They refer it - but there is no soundwave technology available in this Test. Another piece of equipment that failed and could not be replaced or repaired with the borders closed. So the replay shows the ball very close to bat. Hot Spot shows nothing, but it often doesn’t with very fine edges, that then show up on the soundwave. On-field decision stands, with Malan fanning outside off stump at a ball that leapt on him. Not out. And not out next ball, as he edges between slip and gully for three! That’s me for the day. Tim de Lisle is your guide and your lantern, next. Thanks for the company. 22nd over: England 61-2 (Malan 16, Root 0) Cummins brings himself on immediately with Root in the middle, as he did in the first innings. He had to bowl to Malan first, who shoulders arms. Smart move could be for Malan to soak up strike - not to protect Root, but to frustrate the Australians. Malan does stay on strike, but perhaps not by election: he just can’t get much bat on Cummins. Sways away from a couple of short balls to finish. 21st over: England 61-2 (Malan 16) Leaking runs, taking wickets: the Mitchell Starc way! Starts his over down leg again, glanced again for four by Hameed. Then short outside off, and Hameed plays a very understated cut square of gully to the fence. But the last ball of the over gets through. Shorter, also leg side, but Hameed tries to catch up with it, can’t handle the bounce and gloves it through to Carey. He walks off so, so slowly. 20th over: England 53-1 (Hameed 19, Malan 16) Nathan Lyon keeps hunting for wicket 400. He got to 390 in January 2020 with a 10-wicket match against New Zealand. In nearly two years since, he’s into his fifth Test and has taken nine wickets. It’s so close, but has remained distant. Malan blocks him out. 19th over: England 53-1 (Hameed 19, Malan 16) Runs suddenly come for Hameed, thanks to Starc bowling down the leg side. A glance fine for four, another glance for two. Then an off-side push for one. 18th over: England 45-1 (Hameed 12, Malan 15) Hameed finally finds a run off Lyon, pushed to the leg side. Malan is a bit more active, through cover for a couple. He has to be positive, otherwise he’s a sitting target. 17th over: England 42-1 (Hameed 11, Malan 13) That is why Malan is in this team. Starc on for Cummins, bowls a bit short, and Malan rides the bounce to cut it hard into the ground between gully and point for four. The deficit is down to 236. 16th over: England 38-1 (Hameed 11, Malan 9) First loose ball from Lyon, short and Malan is ready to cut it behind point for four. Not so good for Malan a couple of balls later! He leaves a ball expecting it to turn past the off stump, and instead it comes on straight and skips just over the off bail! Lyon exclaims. Malan remains. 15th over: England 33-1 (Hameed 11, Malan 4) Bouncer from Cummins - too much help from the pitch this time and it soars over Carey for four byes. Nope, given as a wide by the umpire, so five extras and a re-bowl. Big appeal as Cummins pitches up but it was fractionally outside the leg stump. He doesn’t talk for long about a review. Goes back to a hard length to Malan, who picks the line well to leave one, then fend the next to square leg. 14th over: England 27-1 (Hameed 11, Malan 3) A full over for Lyon against Hameed, who floats around the crease and concentrates on keeping the spinner our. 13th over: England 27-1 (Hameed 11, Malan 3) Edged and survives! Malan gets to leave most of the over from Cummins alone, but has to play at the last one with a tight line on the off stump. As in the first innings, bounce from a good length, a thick edge, and it lands just in front of Carey’s left glove and ricochets off it for two runs. 12th over: England 25-1 (Hameed 11, Malan 1) A run for Malan, final ball of a testing over from Lyon. One delivery in particular gets big turn and goes past the left-hander’s edge. He pushes his single behind point. 11th over: England 24-1 (Hameed 11, Malan 0) Hameed is not reading the ball coming back into him from Cummins. Gets hit on the body again, then on the pad and survives the lbw appeal from height. He’s able to defend alright when the line goes straight on, but this inward movement could be his undoing sooner than later. 10th over: England 24-1 (Hameed 11, Malan 0) Nathan Lyon immediately into the attack - is that because the left-handed Malan has come in? One slip and a short leg in position. Backward point, cover point, short cover, mid-off, mid-on, midwicket, short fine leg. Lyon bowling his off-breaks around the wicket. Malan blocks the straight one, misses the one that turns past his edge and into Carey’s gloves, the keeper taking the bails as Malan stretches forward. 9th over: England 23-1 (Hameed 10) What a bizarre shot from the last ball. It’s all pretty normal until then: Cummins bowling a nice line, Burns leaving and blocking. Then he gets a shorter ball about armpit height, but outside the line of his body. Too close to cut, far too close, but Burns plays a weird half-jab sort of cut shot at it, just fanning really, and gets a top edge through to the keeper. The break strikes again, along with some terrible batting. A few minutes away from the resumption, with the Australians milling around on the boundary. Jhye Richardson is still among them - David Warner is off the field with bruised ribs. I suppose that Australia batting again is academic at this stage, so even if England do bat all day, he can come back tomorrow. That was Australia’s session, no doubt, with Travis Head continuing his jaunt on past 150, while Starc and Lyon had some fun alongside him with the bat. A first-innings lead of 278 is nothing to be sneezed at. But at least England managed to get through without loss, their first little milestone on a road that will require many of them. The deficit is down to 255, the opening bowlers have been seen off, and the newest of the new ball. This could be quite a tussle after the lunch break. If you want something to do in the interim, have you listened to our Ashes Daily podcast yet? I’m on with Adam Collins, after being set up by Emma John. Find it in your apps and subscribe, and you’ll hear us every day after stumps. 8th over: England 23-0 (Hameed 10, Burns 13) Another scoreless over from Hazlewood, including a nick from Hameed that doesn’t reach the cordon, and that is lunch. 7th over: England 23-0 (Hameed 10, Burns 13) Here comes Cummins, the magnetism man, and he starts perfectly! Leaps at Hameed, takes him on the glove and lobs away into the leg side. Lands safe. Then rips past the edge of Burns, poking forward, before taking a top edge from Burns that carries just over a Jumping Jhye Richardson at midwicket! Three runs, but nearly out. Warner is off the field at the moment. That leaves Harris at third slip, which is a liability. Green at gully with the wingspan. Lyon at point. Head at mid-off. Hazlewood mid-on. Starc grazing on the boundary. 6th over: England 0-18 (Hameed 8, Burns 10) Hazlewood is hunting for Burns’ leg stump now, and Burns is able to repel it. Angling at the left-hander’s woodwork from a right-arm-over line, and nearly there but Burns gets bat in the way and glances four. Hands on head for the bowler, he could see his target twinkling away until the last moment. Double figures for Burns. “This has got annihilation written all over it, the daunting task of scoring 278 to make Australia even bat again is too much for England particularly with Cummins bowling so well and Starc and Hazlewood and Lyon yet to come to the party. I’ve seen England flogged at the Gabba many a time and this looks set for Groundhog Day. Thanks for your great OBO and the Guardian cricket coverage in general.” I’ll say to you for comfort, John Clarke, that the pitch will be at its best for batting today and possibly tomorrow, so if a couple of players can dig in for a long stay then some recovery might be possible. One never knows in this game, until it’s done. 5th over: England 0-14 (Hameed 8, Burns 6) Straightening up behind Starc’s line is Burns, keeping him out. Not much more than quarter of an hour until lunch, so that will be the first target. Flirting with danger on the leg stump again though, as Starc bowls just down that side of the wicket and doesn’t miss by much. Burns makes contact on his next attempt at a leg glance, getting Hameed on strike and given the chance to hop up on his toes and cut for four! Compact stroke, just places the bat in the right spot. Three slips, gully, point, no one at cover. 4th over: England 0-9 (Hameed 4, Burns 5) Hazlewood is a brute of a bowler. He’s not as dramatic as his teammates, but he pins players to the spot with a really difficult length, then moves the ball both ways off the surface. When it decks in and hits the body, as it does to Hameed here, you realise just how quickly he does bowl. When it decks away, as it does a minute later, you realise why he gets so many edges to the cordon. 3rd over: England 9-0 (Hameed 4, Burns 5) Hello, Burns! That’s better for the Englishman. He plays a solid pull shot to a Starc short ball, and with the field up it goes for four. He’s still moving across his stumps, but perhaps a bit less than the brief first innings. England have trimmed that deficit to 269. 2nd over: England 3-0 (Hameed 3, Burns 0) Very good start from Hameed against Hazlewood, defending stoutly on the off-stump line, leaving alone outside it. Of course, as soon as the England innings has begun, a bit of cloud over has come back over. Not heavy, but it does deny seeing the ball in bright sunlight. 1st over: England 3-0 (Hameed 3, Burns 0) Can’t imagine why there has been a mid-match change, but Haseeb Hameed is facing the first ball of the innings this time rather than Rory Burns. Starc starts well, thundering it into the right-hander’s pad, but via the inside edge. Second up, a nasty one that rears and hit him on the elbow, I fancy, with his bat still in its backlift. Confounded by pace. But he gets a fuller ball third up, and drives it with an English-style open face through cover for three, composed sort of stroke. It brings Burns on strike. Leaves his first ball. Survives his second. Reprieved from his third! Given out lbw by Paul Reiffel as Starc zings it in, over the wicket, past the inside edge. Hits him on the knee roll but with a stretched out front leg. Looks very good live, but Hameed takes pity on Burns and suggests the review, and Starc’s bounce is taking it just over middle stump. What a beginning. Here we go for the third innings. A correspondent after my own heart, Patrick Myer. “The best way to get my 10-week-old daughter to sleep is by playing Daft Punk’s song Around the World, often. It’s made me ponder the nature of repetition and why bowlers overstep when the consequences of doing so are so high. Surely the bowling coaches are employed to ensure that every time, the start of the run up is the bathing dancers, the back foot is the skeletons, and the front foot is the robot men?” Nyew, nyew nyew nyew nyew, nyew nyew nyew nyew, nyew nyew nyew nyew. Nyew. Nyew. Nyew... A huge score for Head, a huge score for Australia, and a huge deficit for England to face. They’ll need 278 runs to make Australia bat again. It’s possible, on this surface, if Root carries on his 2021 and a few others come with him. But it will take something special. The roller is on the pitch, the bowlers are warming up, and we’ll start England’s reply shortly with 45 minutes until lunch. That’s it at last! One ball after Hameed drops another catch, running around from deep square leg while wearing the shin pads, trying to catch a lofted shot lunging forward but only flailing one hand at it when he could have used two, he puts down Head’s lofted flick. Two runs conceded. So Wood goes Route 1 with the next ball, straight and off stump, and Head trying to make room to carve misses out and the bails fly. 104th over: Australia 425-9 (Head 152, Hazlewood 0) Leach will be in the firing line now, with Head on strike and nine wickets down. First ball, whack! Slog-sweep through deep square, four. Head charges and tries the same shot but only drags a single. 103rd over: Australia 420-9 (Head 147, Hazlewood 0) Josh Hazlewood comes out at No11. He’s a left-hand bat despite being a right-arm bowler. Two slips and a gully only. Wood bumps him, in at the ribs, right-arm around the wicket. Hazlewood gloves it away. Australia’s media manager doesn’t have much faith, setting up for the post-innings interview on the boundary line. Hazlewood digs out a full ball to close the over. Nathan Lyon lights up the Gabba on 420. Doesn’t much fancy the pace of wood. Gets four off the top edge with a pull shot that is dropped by Buttler, periscoping one arm up behind the stumps. But it only costs England those four runs, as Lyon goes again at the next ball and gets a much higher top edge that drops into the hands of square leg not too far from the pitch. 102nd over: Australia 415-8 (Head 146, Lyon 11) I thought England had frozen him in carbonite like Han Solo or something. 11 overs, 1 for 95 yesterday. But he’ll get a go after drinks. Lyon edges a single. Head takes two balls to come down the wicket and attack, but can’t beat cover. In the end just a couple of singles from the over. An early deep breath for Leach. Malan is off the field again. Been off three times in 90 minutes. I think he has the runs. (Uniquely among England players.) 101st over: Australia 413-8 (Head 145, Lyon 10) Nearly bowled, is Head, as he steps across his stumps in an effort to use Wood’s pace and deflect him high over fine leg. Misses completely, and it zips past his leg stump. But he nails the shot four balls later - after he’s scored a run and Lyon has pulled three - off his pads and way over long leg for six! Long boundary at the Gabba but that carries all the way. Here’s Richard Williams. “I know we’ve all been dealing with covid and that but there’s nothing like staying up late for a horrible first two days in the opening test of an Ashes series Down Under to really make you depressed. Sorry, I mean come on England!” 100th over: Australia 403-8 (Head 138, Lyon 7) It’s looking pretty comfortable out there for Lyon, driving crisply for none to mid-off after tucking two runs off his pads. Woakes bowling with two staggered slips, a fifth slip / gully, and a backward point - bets hedged. His final ball dies through to the keeper. The lead is 256. 99th over: Australia 400-8 (Head 137, Lyon 1) Oh, England. A boundary for Lyon now, who tucks into a pull shot from Stokes. Can’t say he nails it, but it trickles away behind square for four. Another Australian milestone arrives. 98th over: Australia 395-8 (Head 136, Lyon 1) Lyon has five balls to face after a leg bye. Appeal from Woakes against Lyon after beating the inside edge, but that’s going well down the leg side. Before that... was that a chance? Just saw it on the replay, Lyon’s straight drive actually carried past Woakes on the full, and bowler got a hand to it. Another one down. 97th over: Australia 394-8 (Head 136, Lyon 1) A bit of Nathan Lyon, then, as Lou Bega might have sung had his interests been differently aligned. Lyon always gets super nervous before he bats, but he’s entertaining for the crowd. Head dinks a ball to square leg, short of the onrushing Hameed, after skewing an edge to deep third. One run apiece for those shots. Lyon picks up his first in between. “How did you manage to magic your way into Brisbane, then?” asks Andrew Benton. “I like Brisbane loads - though its the only Aussie city I’ve been to - nice weather, and nice people. My old mate has a bamboo farm a bit north of there - its quite a place to wander around under the cathedral of bamboo poles. Would be a good place for England to go meditate and get some much-needed inspiration!” I magicked my way in by being willing to do two weeks of isolation for three days of cricket. Simple, unsubtle, but effective. The price to pay. 96th over: Australia 391-8 (Head 134) The Warwickshire Wizard is back for another spell. The cauldron isn’t to his liking initially. Starc smites him through long on for four. Stuart Broad wanders around the boundary line in his training kit to have a chat with Rory Burns at deep midwicket. The reason for that is a mystery. “You’ll be on for a bowl soon Burnsy, pitch it up”? But perhaps Broad’s visit is a benediction. Because from the last ball of the over, Starc aims a huge swipe, and Burns has time to settle underneath it and avoid dropping another catch. 95th over: Australia 386-7 (Head 133, Starc 31) Ben Stokes comes on to bowl for the first time today, and Travis Head slots him for six! Second ball, lofted drive on the up, sailing over the rope. That’s a statement piece. He follows up with a pull shot, hard but only for one run with Hameed strolling disconsolately in the deep. 94th over: Australia 379-7 (Head 126, Starc 31) Dawid Malan is back on the field, so perhaps that injury story was a false alarm. A false Malan? Anyway, he’s out there. Fielding at short straight mid-on, next to the non-striker. No use as Starc belts a straight drive underneath the feet of a leaping Robinson in his follow-through, four runs. The Australian lead is 232. 93rd over: Australia 375-7 (Head 126, Starc 27) Serious pace and carry from Wood as he cranks up the catapult again. It zooms past Head’s bat, nowhere near it. But Head steers away a couple of runs, glances a single, then Starc gets a thick edge through the gap for four. The pain keeps coming for England. 92nd over: Australia 367-7 (Head 123, Starc 22) Robinson keeps probing away, this time beating Starc on the inside edge and beating his off stump at the same time. Head is happy collecting singles at the moment. 91st over: Australia 366-7 (Head 122, Starc 22) Wood to Starc, and you have to admit, the Australian quick has dished out plenty but can take it as well. Looks quite calm against the pace, ducks the short ball, clips a couple of runs when it’s straight. 90th over: Australia 364-7 (Head 122, Starc 20) Robinson is bowling pretty well to Head now. Starts outside off stump, tracks back gradually, and has him play another couple of false shots. Head’s weak spot, but he has seemed impervious to good bowling in this innings. 89th over: Australia 362-7 (Head 120, Starc 20) Mark Wood to Starc, this could be a contest, as Head cuts a run to deep point. Two staggered slips and a backward point for Wood, with cover, mid-off, mid-on, midwicket, deep square leg and fine leg. Starc cuts between point and cover for two. No bouncers from Wood. 88th over: Australia 359-7 (Head 119, Starc 18) Robinson to Head, who is still happy to play a shot a ball. A good line from Robinson though means that he finds the field each time, until guiding a single past gully. Sam writes from the airport. “About to board my flight home having witnessed the first two days with my very close, and very vocal, Australian friend. Memories to take home and cherish, even as an Englishman hoping for a way back into this game. Alas, it can be done! I have seen England rebound and they have 3 whole days to do so (over rate permitting). Bring it on I say. Wishing for Burns to be 50+ upon hitting the tarmac. Enjoy the cricket!” 87th over: Australia 358-7 (Head 118, Starc 18) Second over of the day, and Woakes increasingly looks no teeth, all gums. Drops short without effect, and Head pummels that pull shot for four. Woakes strays down leg, conceding an extra off the thigh pad, allowing Mitchell Starc a look at him. One look is all it takes, Starc using his full height and driving off the back foot through long-on for four. Now that’s a shot. 86th over: Australia 349-7 (Head 114, Starc 14) The batting fast bowler stayed around in defensive mode last night, but he’s keen to get going this morning. Lofts a drive from Robinson between the bowler and mid-off, not hitting it cleanly but getting a run down the ground for his trouble. Head opens the face to push to point, then gets an overthrow as Hameed pings the ball between keeper and first slip. Start as you mean to go on, I guess... 85th over: Australia 347-7 (Head 113, Starc 13) Chris Woakes starts us off, and draws a couple of half-false shots to begin with: Head off the outside portion behind point, Starc off the inside through square leg. Starc picks up three runs for his trouble though, after a Head single. “Probably been mentioned before. Practising in nets, why don’t bowlers or coaches pay more attention to the line?” asks Steve Richards. “And a simple free-hit penalty seems to have sharpened minds in 20/20. Would that be fun in Tests? Especially if the slip / gully / short-leg field has to remain in place?” Generally the video system picks up every no-ball these days, so there is already an impost with the extra delivery and extra run. But it can sometimes - as we saw with Jasprit Bumrah during the English summer - be in a bowler’s interests to get a few extra deliveries at a player. So it’s not perfect. But few things are. An England injury update: Stokes is ok to bowl, Robinson is fine and only had cramp... but Dawid Malan isn’t out there today. Did a hamstring, apparently, from chasing leather all day. Zak Crawley is out there in his place. Here come the players, into the bright Brisbane sunshine. Travis Head resumes on 112 not out, of course. He’s joined by Mitchell Starc out there, with Australia’s lead at 196. Chris Woakes has the ball in hand. Here we go then... Pat Cummins for prime minister? “I said for years I think Imran Khan is now the president of Pakistan,” says Langer. “He was the captain. No reason why a fast bowler can’t be a captain. He’s so so composed. Huge upside in Pat Cummins’s leadership. The way... He’s a superstar player. But the way he goes go his business he’s so well respected. He’s calm, he’s relaxed and started off so well for him. Let’s hope it continues.” Langer on Travis Head: “What I love about it, if you look back on the history of Australian cricket players get dropped and they either... Two things happen. They either get better or they fall by the way side. Travis Head is another great example. He’s gone away... I loved how he was covering his off stump. He was getting across. That brings his pull shot in, his cut. Playing on drive to get his 100 up. That’s one of the toughest shots in the books. He’s really improved his game. He’s so composed and it’s great to have him back in the team.” Australia coach Justin Langer is speaking to host broadcaster Channel Seven. “It’s been amazing the way the boys have gone about their business. Great to bowl first on the first morning and relentless yesterday. Dave Warner partnership with Marnus was incredible. Travis Head coming back from not playing for a while, what an innings that was.” It wouldn’t be an Ashes Test without a degree of controversy, and yesterday was no different as a pretty major tech failure - with the no-ball camera system not working - made headlines for the wrong reasons. More on that below: Weather report: There was a big electrical storm in the skies over Brisbane last night, but the players will be bathed in sunshine when they walk out onto the Gabba turf in about 20 minutes for the start of today’s play. Or if you want some more detail in an audio medium, Adam Collins and I are doing 15-minute reviews of each day for the Guardian on The Final Word podcast. Emma John is sitting up late to write beautiful summaries of the day before we get into the analysis. You can find this on normal podcast apps anywhere, or here. Here is Ali Martin’s wrap of the day yesterday, in text form. A big Brisbane hello to all of you out there in the world, from the few of us in here, in the privileged position to actually be at this match. Most of the press contingent is in Sydney or Melbourne doing it remotely, but there is a hardy few banded together at the Woolloongabba ground. And you’d scarcely credit it, but the skies are largely blue, the radar is clear, and the forecast is mostly sunny at a top of 31 degrees by the sensible scale of measurement. The score is Australia 343 for 7 in the second innings, after England’s 147 in the first. But there is a way back into this match for England. The deficit is 196. The weather is set fair for the next two days. The way is: get these last three wickets quickly, then bat like a dream. Make about 400, get a couple of hundred ahead, and be in the game on the final day. It may not seem likely at this stage, but I would guess this pitch will be its best to bat on today and tomorrow, with more time in the sun. Given Australia’s push towards 400, England could make one too. But of course, that depends on getting those three wickets. And we’ve seen the last few partnerships put on plenty before. One of the players resuming will be Travis Head on 112 not out from 95 balls, having made one of the fastest ever Test centuries by an Australian. He trusted his hands and eye last night, played a shot at each ball, and it worked for him. If he can push on today, he can shut the gate on even that narrow English avenue back into the game.Heathrow has said passenger numbers were 60% lower in November than before the coronavirus pandemic and there were “high cancellations” among business travellers concerned about being trapped overseas for Christmas as Omicron spreads. The UK’s largest airport said the government’s travel restrictions had dealt a fresh blow to travel confidence and predicted it was likely to take several years for passenger numbers to return to pre-pandemic levels. This week ministers said passengers arriving in the UK would have to take a pre-departure Covid test, as well as a post-flight test, because of fears about the spread of the new variant. “[The] high level of cancellations by business travellers concerned about being trapped overseas because of pre-departure testing shows the potential harm to the economy of travel restrictions,” the airport said in an update. Heathrow said the drop in traveller confidence owing to the new travel restrictions had negated the benefit of reopening the all-important corridor to North America for business and holiday travel last month. Eleven African countries have been added to the government’s red list, requiring travellers to quarantine before reuniting with families. “By allowing Brits to isolate at home, ministers can make sure they are reunited with their loved ones this Christmas,” said John Holland-Kaye, the chief executive of Heathrow. “It would send a strong signal that restrictions on travel will be removed as soon as safely possible to give passengers the confidence to book for 2022, opening up thousands of new jobs for local people at Heathrow. Let’s reunite families for Christmas.” Heathrow said that if the government could safely signal that restrictions would be lifted soon, then employers at Heathrow would have the confidence to hire thousands of staff in anticipation of a boost in business next summer. The airport is expecting a slow start to 2022, finishing next year with about 45 million passengers – just over half of pre-pandemic levels. This week Tui, Europe’s largest package holiday operator, said it expected bookings for next summer to bounce back to 2019 levels. However, Heathrow said on Friday not to expect the aviation industry to recover for several years. “We do not expect that international travel will recover to 2019 levels until at least all travel restrictions (including testing) are removed from all the markets that we serve, at both ends of the route, and there is no risk of new restrictions, such as quarantine, being imposed,” the airport said.On Saturday, for the first time in their history, the Portland Timbers will host the MLS Cup final. Portland, who face New York City FC, are playing in their third MLS Cup final in seven seasons. But Timbers midfielder Eryk Williamson says the historic match brings a new level of anticipation. “It’s unbelievable because you see the games and the playoff games that we’ve been in and you’ve never felt this energy,” Williamson says. More notably, the Timbers feature prominent Black players from three continents, such as Williamson, Dairon Asprilla and Yimmi and Diego Chará, who are up against NYC FC captain and goalkeeper Sean Johnson and Afro-Brazilian forward Talles Magno in one of the whitest cities in America. Those players represent the diversity within American soccer and the Black diaspora says Williamson. Portland became one of the focal points of last year’s racial justice protests that followed the police murder of George Floyd, with federal agents called into the city at one point. During the protests Williamson, who is a member of Black Players for Change, discussed increasing Black representation at the club with head coach Giovanni Savarese and general manager Gavin Wilkinson. “When you look at the players, we’ve done a good job at building a strong Black core,” Williamson says. But Portland, Oregon’s largest city, which is nowadays associated with its progressive, hipster culture, hasn’t always welcomed Black Americans and immigrants. The city has also been home to systemic racism and white supremacy since it was established in the 1800s. From 1857 to 1927, Black people were prohibited from entering Oregon, while Chinese Americans were banned from owning property in the state’s early history. The Ku Klux Klan was active in the state well into the 20th century, with 14,000-20,000 members by the mid 1920s. In 2017, Walidah Imarisha, an expert on Oregon’s Black history, told the Guardian that while “Portland spends a lot of time being incredibly self-satisfied”, the “foundation of Oregon as a state, and in fact the whole Pacific north-west, was as a racist white utopia”. Indeed, the state’s constitution included clauses such as “No free Negro, or mulatto, not residing in this state at the time of the adoption of this constitution, shall come, reside, or be within this State, or hold any real estate” until voters chose to remove it in 2000. When Williamson was traded from DC United’s academy to Portland in 2018, he says the small Black presence in the city was “eye-opening” compared to DC. Black people only make-up 6% of the city’s population (compared to around 12% of the US as a whole), a figure due in part to the practice of redlining that kept Black Portlanders from buying property in white neighborhoods. Black residents of the city were pushed to the floodlands of the Vanport housing project which was eventually wiped out when a dam broke. This history clashes with the public image of the club’s main supporters group, the Timbers Army, which is known for its progressive values. In 2019 the Timbers Army made international news when MLS banned its members from displaying the symbol of the anti-fascist Iron Front group (MLS subsequently reversed the ban after widespread outcry). Jeremy Wright, co-founder of the Timbers Army, says the organization actively upholds anti-racist values and has always acknowledged why Portland is a white city and the specific laws passed to keep Blacks out. “We’ve always tried to hold space around that and it’s always been a challenging conversation in our liberal white city,” says Wright. “It’s one thing to say it, but you have to actively stake out your claim and support your players.” Wright, like Williamson and former Timbers players Chris Duvall and Jeremy Ebobisse, marched during the 2020 social justice protests. Wright agrees with Williamson that Saturday’s match is a good stage for the team’s Black players. “We see this as our opportunity to clapback and say this is who we are and this is what we’ve built,” Wright says. “It’s important that a majority white city is embracing a team made up of Black men from around the world.” MLS also sees an opportunity to showcase the league’s diversity. At his annual State of the League Address this week, commissioner Don Garber highlighted the diversity and hiring policy updated by Sola Winley, MLS’s executive vice-president and chief DEI officer, in collaboration with Black Players for Change and the Soccer Collective on Racial Equality. The league is positioning itself to reflect the diversity of the US and Canada. “We are working on our diversity initiative to ensure we have more diversity in our front office and technical staff to reflect the diversity of our country and the increased number of Black players participating on our fields.” Garber says. “The goal is to increase representation, particularly, among the Black community.” That goal will hopefully get a little closer on Saturday.Pick of the week Another Round An ambivalent attitude towards drinking and its central role in society suffuses this Oscar-winning Danish drama from Thomas Vinterberg. Mads Mikkelsen uses his hangdog features to fine effect as worn-down teacher Martin, unhappily married and bored of trying to inspire his students. When he and three colleagues start taking daily doses of alcohol as a psychological experiment, they enjoy a brief kick of creativity and joie de vivre. However, their incipient addictions increasingly complicate relationships at work and home. Vinterberg, the director of similarly forensic dissections of social norms in Festen and The Hunt, avoids easy answers as tragedy unfolds. Sunday 12 December, 10.25am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** Wild Rose For those unable to catch Jessie Buckley on stage in London in Cabaret, this 2019 film is more than enough evidence of her singing talent. She plays Rose-Lynn, a would-be country singer released from prison and returning to her two young children in Glasgow. The strain between her desire to make it big in Nashville and her parental responsibilities is constant, and her mother (a nicely underplaying Julie Walters) is left to deal with the fallout. Buckley is exceptional here, in her element on stage but giving coherence to Rose-Lynn’s wilfully destructive streak off it. Saturday 11 December, 9pm, Film4 *** Kill Bill: Volume 1 You could never accuse Quentin Tarantino of cinematic restraint, and his 2003 action film (split into two halves) is the apogee of his maximalist approach. Largely a homage to the Shaw Brothers’ martial arts films, but also chucking in blaxploitation movies, spaghetti westerns, the samurai genre and anime, it stars Uma Thurman as the yellow-jumpsuited Bride. Betrayed and left for dead by her fellow assassin squad members, she takes revenge in bloody fashion. Vivica A Fox and Lucy Liu are her targets in a stunning flurry of slicing and dicing. Saturday 11 December, 9pm, TCM Movies *** The Hand of God The arrival of Maradona at Napoli in 1984 is the peg on which writer-director Paolo Sorrentino hangs his zesty, autobiographical coming-of-age tale. Filippo Scotti plays 17-year-old Fabietto who, amid the loves and betrayals, jokes and tragedies of his extended Naples family, tries to figure out his future. Influences include Sorrentino regular Toni Servillo as his flawed father, Ciro Capano’s challenging film-maker and his glamorous Aunt Patrizia (Luisa Ranieri), whose mental health problems add an unsettling note to a mostly sun-soaked dose of adolescent angst. Wednesday 15 December, Netflix *** The Gay Divorcee The appearance of Astaire and Rogers films on our screens always presages the arrival of Christmas. Mark Sandrich’s 1934 musical, the duo’s second collaboration, has a few duds (Let’s K-nock K-nees was a dance that probably didn’t catch on) and gives Fred and Ginger a car chase. But it does show off their effortless grace in Cole Porter’s Night and Day and the set-piece number The Continental, as his dancer and her would-be divorcee miscommunicate their way to true love at the English seaside. Wednesday 15 December, 2.15pm, BBC Two *** Swan Song Featuring the clean architectural lines, evergreen forests and moral complexity of an Alex Garland film, Benjamin Cleary’s poignant feature debut uses future tech to explore loss and the selflessness of love. Mahershala Ali is superb as Cameron, secretly terminally ill but expecting a second child with wife Poppy (a radiant Naomie Harris). He tentatively agrees to buy a “duplicate” – a clone that has all his memories and can replace him – unbeknown to his family. But as he and his double delve into his past experiences, Cameron’s doubts and deteriorating condition threaten that transition. Friday 17 December, AppleTV+ *** Get Out One of the most influential films of this century, and certainly nearing classic status, Jordan Peele’s 2017 directorial debut expands on the pointed comedy of his TV sketch show Key &amp; Peele to chilling effect. Daniel Kaluuya’s Chris pays a visit to the family home of his white girlfriend, Rose (Allison Williams), to find that her parents (Catherine Keener and Bradley Whitford) are not the racially liberal types they appear to be. An excellent commentary on, and riposte to, the invisibility and marginalisation of Black people in the horror genre – and cinema in general. Friday 17 December, 11pm, E4Japanese city pop is an enigmatic genre. Emerging in the late 1970s and peaking in popularity throughout the 80s, it was a soundtrack to the country’s economic boom and newly christened “leisure class”: a loosely defined grouping of Japanese-language music influenced by American styles such as yacht rock, R&amp;B, funk and boogie. Recent years have seen a renewed interest in the genre among western audiences spurred on by cratedigging and YouTube. It has spawned expertly curated compilations, such as Light in the Attic’s 2019 album Pacific Breeze and, from We Want Sounds, 2020’s Tokyo Dreaming. Japanese label Nippon Columbia’s archive-raiding Tokyo Glow is the latest, producing 18 tracks of city pop that exemplify the genre’s wide-ranging diversity. Curated by DJ Notoya, the compilation plays as a paean to the spending power of major Japanese labels throughout the 80s and the open-eared aptitude of their artists. Able to provide top session musicians filling out horn sections, orchestral strings and backing vocals, each track plays as a sumptuously warm instrumental experience. Opener Kimagure is taken from actress Kumi Nakamura’s only album release and features her Patrice Rushen-style silken vocal atop a mid-tempo boogie bassline; Indo No Michibata continues that fusion funk feel with a horn section that references US R&amp;B band Tower of Power. But this is more than just a well-crafted replica of American styles. Each composition subtly subverts its reference points: Sumiko Yamagata’s balladic Minnie Riperton-style instrumentals are coupled with an eerie top-line synth; New Generation Company’s strutting funk, complete with vocoder banking, has a proto-techno feel; Mizuki Koyama goes full Drexciyan electro in the thundering opening to her Teena Marie-adjacent Oh! Daddy. Even though city pop is a genre largely coined in retrospect, Tokyo Glow’s varied selection is not a mere historical document. The compilation highlights these artists’ attention to instrumental detail and their delicate fusion of popular international styles with new technologies to create the sound of a city. It is one that is both of its time and still repeatedly listenable today. Also out this month Réunion Island experimental composer Labelle releases his latest album Éclat (InFiné Music), a deconstructed selection of string quartet works reframing classical melody through Maloya rhythms and contemporary electronics. Tuareg group Imarhan’s third album, Aboogi (City Slang), is their first record made in their native southern Algeria; the resulting tracks interweave field recordings with dextrous guitar lines. Producer Shay Hazan fuses north African gnawa rhythms with vamping jazz horns on Reclusive Rituals (Batov Records), highlighting the earthy bass tones of the three-stringed gimbri in the process.Neil Bartlett is a gay writer’s gay writer. Also a theatre director and playwright, he is much admired for novels that conjure a sexy, illusory London, including the Costa-shortlisted Skin Lane. In his 1990 debut Ready to Catch Him Should He Fall, a heady romance centred around an east London bar in the 1980s, the fear of bloody bashings is as palpable as the frissons of lust. In one passage, sybaritic men from prior centuries join in the party like fabulous ghosts. This transhistorical stagecraft is a queer strategy for grappling with a secret and censored past: to Bartlett, there can be no gay ancestry without fabulation. In the tender and curious Address Book, domestic spaces inform life experiences, which become subject to the whims of memory. Seven discrete chapters, each titled with an address in or near London, are delivered, monologue-like, by seven different narrators. The book opens during the Covid pandemic. Andrew, a doctor, is packing to move when he comes across a phone number that prompts a recollection of being a desirous teenager, and the suntanned man who gave him a blowjob that made him burst into song. The orgasm isn’t the only epiphany. In his memory, the man smiles unguardedly at the boy, who’d previously only known cruising to be accompanied by scowls. Having exchanged names, the boy realises: “None of the other men I’ve met has ever made me admit that the boy doing the staring and the boy with my name are the same person.” The mature Andrew reckons: “We all have places that we need to revisit ... to remind ourselves how the hell we got from there to here.” Through Bartlett, the habitats of others reveal how we’ve arrived not only as individuals, but socially. Historical contrast and continuum become most explicit over two chapters set in the same top floor flat on the Clerkenwell Road. In the earlier scenario, set in 1891, a teacher divulges his feverish plan to photograph a local Italian lad in the pose of a military saint. Bartlett’s prose – flamboyant, as if moustached, and dotted with asides (“Well; the imagination has its own dark chemistry, does it not?”) – is well suited to the Victorian period. He depicts the undulating streets of “il Quartiere” as bustling with immigrant piano makers, ice-cream makers and mosaic cutters. Young labourers strut like peacocks, their secrets hidden in plain sight. The teacher qualifies his tale: “I speak not for living ears; I speak to those who will come after me.” In 1987, the flat’s tenant is an acid-tongued Heaven habitué. He probably knows nothing of his predecessor, but has inherited social stigma and shame, now not just about sin, but Aids. As he struggles to sleep, passing ambulances cast colour across his ceiling; he flippantly imagines a light show over a dancefloor. He has recently purchased an expensive double mattress to spite a priggish Tottenham Court Road saleswoman, a kind of Margaret Thatcher of the mattress department. Contending with her disapproval – and possibly his own delusion – he’s one of many gay men dehumanised by panic and persecution at the hands of both authorities and vigilantes. In the shop, homophobia is a pernicious banality amid oppressively heteronormative bedroom displays. In the closing chapter, a man who has lost his husband comes undone in their sea-facing Worthing maisonette. He now resides with a misbehaving, mocking silence. The widower confides: “When your husband dies, there’s no safety anywhere. Not on the street; not in the sun, not anywhere.” These stories debunk the axiom “safe as houses”, revealing the domestic sphere to be as precarious as anywhere else. But Bartlett keeps wonder alive in his characters and spaces, so that while the dwellings can’t guarantee total refuge, they continually provide revelation. • Jeremy Atherton Lin’s Gay Bar: Why We Went Out is published by Granta. Address Book by Neil Bartlett is published by Inkandescent (£9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.On Thursday, the Uyghur Tribunal delivered its damning judgment on the human rights abuses allegedly committed by the Chinese state in Xinjiang. Over the past months this London-based people’s tribunal has heard testimony from international scholars as well as survivors of Chinese detention and “re-education camps”. While the ruling has no legal standing, the aim is to highlight the treatment of Uyghurs, Kazakhs and other Turkic Muslims in north-west China. Rachel Harris, a British ethnomusicologist and Uyghur specialist, has described the state’s strategy as an attempt “to hollow out a whole culture and terrorise a whole people”. Much has been written about the destruction of the Uyghur heritage: of the mosques and shrines, old city centres and traditional burial grounds. In order to understand what intangible heritage is being lost – what is being quite literally silenced – amid that bulldozing, I interviewed 10 specialists, including both Uyghurs in exile and international scholars with extensive experience on the ground. In Muslim soundscapes the world over, the adhan is the most salient of notes. Calls to prayer, though, have long been absent from urban Uyghur life and now, even private devotion has reportedly been muted. Through a policy called “becoming family”, government officials are sent to stay in Uyghur homes so as to root out anything deemed illegal (owning Uyghur-language books, wearing traditional clothing). Academics and pop culture figures have been disappeared en masse, among the estimated 1.5 million people detained in “re-education” camps, with children as young as one separated from parents and put in Mandarin-language state orphanages. Schools have been banned from teaching Uyghur and no Uyghur-language books have reportedly been published in China since 2017. “People used to bury their books,” the American photographer Lisa Ross tells me, “but now they’re afraid to even do that.” In a bid to cut off an indigenous culture at the root, the Uyghurs language, sound and music are being excised from the public and private spheres. When Darren Byler, an anthropologist from Colorado, lived in Urumchi in the early 2010s, student house parties – which were held most weekends – always involved everyone making music together. Friends would bring instruments. People were always singing. “Everyone is a poet,” he says. “People think poetically.” As a Turkic language, Uyghur is agglutinative, explains Byler, so they would often have fun adding rhyming suffixes to the ends of their words. This verbal dexterity defines ancient storytelling forms like the epic dastan – spoken tales – that pilgrims would hear at festivals in the Taklamakan desert. It also birthed a vibrant local hip-hop scene in Urumchi that Byler came to know. Now, all gatherings – prayer in public, mazar (shrine) festivals, traditional meshrep parties, hip-hop cyphers, even football matches – have been outlawed. Destroying a built structure makes visible the dismantlement of more abstract cultural ones. The mazar, which are dotted throughout the desert as well as in towns and cities, are a case in point. Before they were razed, these shrines were closed. This resulted in the rural community structures and ancient cultural practices that activated them being shut down, too. Mazar festivals would be held every Thursday at certain periods of the year: throughout the mulberry season at Imam Asim shrine, say, or during grape season at Kok Marim shrine. Starting in the early 2000s, Ross documented the mazar extensively. She photographed mountains of hand-made prayer flags and devotional objects affixed to wooden poles that day pilgrims – in their tens of thousands – would bring each year. A Uyghur scholar, who wishes to remain anonymous, describes what it felt like to be there. At Imam Asim, there were tandoori pots the size of small rooms, in which a gaggle of men with shovels would stir a stew called sheeylang. Pilgrims would add in whatever they could (a sheep they’d brought to slaughter on site; a single grain of rice). And the sound? “It’s like a wedding and a funeral happening at the same time,” the scholar tells me. There would be epic dastan sessions, stories reminding pilgrims of why they came and where they come from. There would be dancing, drumming, chanting, weeping, praying. “It is something you won’t hear anywhere else.” When Harris and Rahile Dawut – a Uyghur folklore expert who disappeared four years ago and whose imprisonment has since been confirmed – visited the largest and oldest shrine, Ordam Padishah, in 1995, they wrote that state opposition to the shrines lay arguably in the sphere of aesthetics – the sights and sounds – rather than in response to any political threat. The site was closed to the public in 1997 and satellite imagery now shows it has been entirely razed. Imam Asim, too. The Australian Strategic Policy Institute puts the number of mosques, mazar and cemeteries in Xinjiang that have been damaged or destroyed since 2017 at up to 80%. Elsewhere, a re-engineered version of living Uyghur culture has been instituted. This process is best illustrated by what has happened to meshrep. In this uniquely Uyghur festive tradition, music and storytelling are used to transmit cultural or moral knowledge. But when China sought for meshrep to be included on Unesco’s intangible cultural heritage list in 2009, Harris, who was acting as official examiner, pushed back. “I thought the only way for meshrep to be sustained would be by folkloric presentation,” she says. Unesco nonetheless granted China the heritage status it wanted and China promptly banned grassroots gatherings. Villages now have state-sanctioned meshrep centres with murals featuring slogans – “Everyone let’s dance”; “Welcome to our meshrep” – that drive home the notion of what is “healthy” (ie, acceptable) meshrep, and what isn’t. Religious lyrics are rewritten as revolutionary patriotism. Uyghurs are forced to attend. Performers also have to take part in exoticised song-and-dance spectacles that cater to the growing national tourism industry. “You can see them on YouTube,” says Harris, “and I mean, they are amazing.” But, she says, these shows turn the Uyghur people into “empty vessels who sing and dance and smile for tourists, but have no rights to develop their own culture or religion.” I speak to Mukaddas Mijit, a Uyghur academic, filmmaker and dancer who was born in Urumchi in the 1980s. She first left Xinjiang for Paris in the early 2000s to pursue classical piano studies but when she realised no one in France knew anything about where she came from, she pivoted to ethnomusicology and delved into her family’s history. She discovered her great-grandfather had been a Sufi master. “I came to my heritage through my studies,” she says. “It became my life.” Last year, Mijit and Harris organised an online event billed as the first transcontinental Uyghur concert. Under the banner “Longing for Home”, musicians from across the globe played from the classical muqam repertoire for two hours. It brought Mijit to tears. “It is really beautiful to hear this music,” she said. “Beautiful song, beautiful poetry. This is us, this is our voice, this is our culture.” Exile has always been a potent musical metaphor. But in the context of the Uyghur people’s plight, it is not imagery. It is an emergency.The 1982 video-nasty classic The Slumber Party Massacre – a confection of polyester sleepwear, orangey fake blood and phallic construction equipment with remarkable battery longevity, directed by Amy Jones – gets a reboot for a new generation with this, along with a more euphonious title, shorn of the definitive article. This time the director is Danishka Esterhazy, whose previous feature, The Banana Splits Movie, similarly retweaked a near-forgotten property from the pop-culture landfill. After an 80s-set prologue that establishes driller killer Russ Thorn’s (Rob van Vuuren) stalk-and-skewer modus operandi, we catch up with lone survivor Trish Deveraux (Schelaine Bennett) in the present day. Trish is now a paranoid parent, worriedly sending off her only daughter Dana (Hannah Gonera, delightful) off for a rustic overnighter with her friends. Will history repeat itself? Not quite. Esterhazy and co have a few clever-ish tricks up their sleeves that invert viewer expectations. First and foremost is having a second slumber party in full swing across the lake, this one featuring a house full of beefcake boys, all lovingly filmed ripped abs and tousled hair, sinking beers and wantonly conducting pillow fights. The young women, on the other hand, are ready for trouble and therefore much slower to be picked off by the serial killer predator. It all playfully flirts with horror film conventions, offering up a winking orgy of patently fake gore and irony that’s for the most part pretty fun. At least the cast seem well in on the joke and are clearly having a blast, although the package could have been improved with a fewer sharper one-liners and tauter comic timing. At least the cinematography is period accurate, resembling low-budget Betamax from the last century filmed with smudged lenses. • Slumber Party Massacre is released on 13 December on digital platforms.Speculation has surrounded the choice of the next actor to play James Bond after Daniel Craig hung up his tux with No Time to Die. On 7 December Barbara Broccoli, producer of the Bond franchise, told Hollywood Reporter that the candidate should be a British man of any ethnicity or race. Guardian readers share their take on which British actor should be the next 007. Idris Elba ‘He is the one – we all know it’ Who else other than Idris Elba? He has everything – charisma, presence and confidence. In Luther he showed us how much he can play a tormented soul. I don’t have anything else to say. Just look at him, he is the one. I know it, you know it, we all know it. Emeric Pierre, state worker, France ‘Fleming’s image of Bond’ He is very like Fleming’s image of Bond – and unlike others, he can act. He is also very cool and suave in the way that Bond is supposed to be. Morag, charity worker, Kirkcaldy Henry Cavill ‘Gravitas and presence’ He is a good actor and has had commanding roles such as Superman. He has something of the same brooding presence that Daniel Craig had in the role. The last Mission: Impossible movie shows he’s got quite a range and has the ability to play different roles. I think he would quickly grow into the role of Bond. He was interviewed by Lorraine Kelly on TV earlier this week and I was impressed by his gravitas and presence. Robert, retired civil servant, Devon ‘There is a suaveness about him’ He is a good actor, has a beautiful voice and is very good looking. There is a suaveness about him that goes with the Bond character, yet he looks tough enough to do the job. We loved Daniel Craig, but it might be good to see how Cavill approaches the role. I sincerely hope they choose him. Nadine Gardner, retired, Melbourne Tom Hardy ‘Streets ahead of anyone else’ I’d be very excited if Tom Hardy was given the role. Craig has raised the bar in so many ways. Maybe Hardy is “more of the same”, but he’s just such a top actor. Streets ahead of anyone else and the obvious choice for me. Brett Turner, videographer, Dubai ‘Gritty and comedic’ His gritty and comedic performance as Alfie Solomons [in Peaky Blinders] suits the style I believe a modern James Bond needs. I think Bond needs to be both. The one-liners and cheese of the older films shouldn’t be forgotten and need to be cherished. George Hexton, estimating and design manager, Lincolnshire Riz Ahmed ‘He would bring a unique intensity’ He’s an absolutely phenomenal actor and would bring a unique intensity to the role, as well as a truly modern sensibility, something that was lacking even in the Craig films. Tony McCarney, data engineering consultant, Coventry ‘He represents intersecting British identities’ He’s young and a good actor. He can do the thoughtful parts of Bond as well as the action, and represents today’s intersecting British identities very well. Chris Oxley, psychologist, Ottawa Richard Madden ‘Charismatic as hell’ He’s a bit “on the nose”, admittedly, but I think he ticks all the boxes. He looks the part, is charismatic as hell and fundamentally looks like, if the mood took him, he could kill or shag anyone in the room – which is the acid test for any Bond actor. With the right script he could be another Dalton. I may be biased, but I’d love a Scot to take the role back. Mike Prior, financial services worker, Glasgow ‘Could bring that classy status’ His role in Bodyguard was a very clear sample of his chances as a Licence to Kill match. Bond roles require more than a pretty face. Madden is young, has that hard face, and could bring that classy status required by the classic character Ian Fleming wrote. Octavio Maya Rocha, filmmaker, Mexico City Asa Butterfield ‘He could play a younger, more arrogant Bond’ Bringing a young, fresh approach to the films, Asa Butterfield would be an unconventional and unexpected choice. He could play a younger, more arrogant Bond, who is new to the secret service and must learn and grow as he completes his first missions and first kills. Harriet, fashion student, London Henry Golding ‘A growing talent’ A growing talent who will be stepping up rather than sideways to play the role. Golding is well known for Crazy Rich Asians but anyone who saw him in The Gentlemen got to see a dangerous but sleek presence who could bring a grit and humanity to a younger Bond, while perhaps bringing some much-needed humour to the franchise. Anonymous, civil servant, Kent ‘A British-Asian Bond would be a welcome leap’ I think it’s time for Bond to diversify from the British white man, and a British-Asian Bond would be welcome. Golding has been fantastic in recent roles which are adjacent to Bond, like Snake Eyes and The Gentlemen. Aaron, 24, Northern Ireland Jason Isaacs ‘Better looking than the recent ones’ I’ve followed Isaacs’ career with interest. He can play anything: posh diplomat, Irish-American gangster (in the fantastic crime drama series Brotherhood), psychopath, starship captain or private eye. Everyone says he’s too old to be the next Bond but he’s still better looking and has more screen presence that most of the recent ones. You could see him go from playing a terrifying psychopath to a serious British ambassador to the US, all in the same week. Stephen Haigh, retired animator, London Aaron Taylor-Johnson ‘He has the dangerous physical edge’ He’s got action and genre experience, but is still a relative unknown. He’s the right build, looks great in a tux, and is young enough to carry the franchise for about 15 years, as Craig did, if he wants to. He’s also a very good actor. I don’t think there’s any doubt he possesses the dangerous physical edge that Connery and Craig had, the suave manner that Brosnan had, and the cruel coldness that Dalton brought when it was needed. Hugh Parker, architect, East Ayrshire Damian Lewis ‘Exit blond Bond, enter red Bond!’ There are plenty of great contenders for the next Bond, and I’m well on board for promoting diversity. With this in mind, why not give it to Damian Lewis, supported by the red-haired ticket? Red-haired actors are at best typecast as a bumbling, comedic sidekick, and at worst written out completely. So why not do the right thing, and the best thing – exit blond Bond, enter red Bond! Duncan, digital product executive, AltrinchamA lot of people with a lot of power don’t see why women should have jurisdiction over their own bodies. That’s the anti-abortion argument in a nutshell, in that they claim a foetus, or even an embryo, or in some cases even a fertilised egg too small for the human eye to see, has rights that supersede those of the person inside whose body that egg, embryo or foetus might be. What was clear from the rightwing pundits and conservative supreme court justices who have piped up over the last month as arguments were being heard in the most significant abortion rights case since Roe v Wade, is that in a country whose constitution is supposed to grant us all a lot of rights, they are happy to strip away a right so fundamental it’s unimaginable in other circumstances – or that it would be stripped from other people, namely men. In the case, Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the state of Mississippi is asking the court to rule on whether it can outlaw abortions after 15 weeks’ gestation. They are asking, in other words, for the right to punish women for being women. On Friday morning, the supreme court issued a mixed ruling on another state law restricting abortion access: Texas’s law, designed to evade federal oversight. Eight of the justices upheld a lower court finding that abortion providers should have the right to sue; Justice Thomas did not join them. The four more liberal judges voted for broader rights to sue; the four other conservatives ruled that they can only sue the licensing officials. Judge Sotomayor, in a passionate dissent, wrote: “This is a brazen challenge to our federal structure. It echoes the philosophy of John C Calhoun, a virulent defender of the slaveholding South who insisted that States had the right to “veto” or “nullif[y]” any federal law with which they disagreed.” She added: “The Nation fought a Civil War over that proposition.” Before the civil war, the US was split between free and slave states; the contemporary nation is increasingly divided between reproductive-rights-access states and anti-abortion states. The goal of the anti-abortionists seems to be to enhance men’s privileges by undermining women’s rights, by making us separate and unequal. (People who do not identify as female also get pregnant and bear children, but the animosity is directed at women and girls, so I’m going to talk about women and girls here.) Since acknowledging this would undermine the anti-abortion case, the emphasis is instead shifted to someone else whose rights are claimed to trump those of pregnant people, the unborn. The unborn are a convenient constituency to advocate for, since they have no voice or vote and anyone can claim to speak for them. Those who claim to protect the unborn are largely conservatives who routinely reject universal access to healthcare, let alone meeting the basic material needs of babies and children with food, clothing, shelter and daycare. They also usually oppose reproductive education, including by defunding and demonising Planned Parenthood (which is where, as a teen, I got the reproductive care that protected me from an unwanted pregnancy). This is how we know that foetuses are not the real subject here. Miscarriages are not generally regarded by anti-abortionists as a loss of human life, unless it’s to criminalise women, some of whom have been sent to prison for miscarrying after allegedly endangering foetuses through their actions. Substance use in pregnancy is considered child abuse in 23 US states, but no one will go to prison for endangering both mother and child through denial of basic needs. Accounts suggest that most of the women being punished under these laws are women of colour. It is widely known that abortion restrictions primarily punish poor and minority-ethnic people too. Wanted pregnancies are often the occasion for impregnators to preen themselves and be congratulated, but unwanted pregnancies are treated as something wicked that women do all on their own. No man is punished under the law for unwanted pregnancy, though a significant percentage of such pregnancies are the result of sexual coercion and refusing to cooperate with birth control. Then there is the risk of homicide – one study showed that 8.4% of reported maternal mortality deaths were murders – with African American women seven times more likely to die this way than white women. The largest proportion of these cases occur at the hands of a partner. There is no other experience that could be so brutal physically and psychologically, could disable for months or result in permanent disability and injury, or even death, that anyone says an individual must undergo when there is a clear and comparatively safe alternative. (Maybe the military draft in times of war is the closest equivalent when it comes to risk and loss of self-determination, and I’m against that too.) Wanted pregnancies and births can be wonderful as well as intense, and I know plenty of people who experienced it that way. But pregnancy and birth can also be, as one of my friends who is the mother of two teens put it, harrowing. I remember a friend’s first pregnancy when she couldn’t stop throwing up, know of people who were bedridden for months, have heard of pelvic bones that broke, hips that came out of their sockets, chronic pain, cases of eclampsia that were life-threatening or fatal, miscarriages that led to haemorrhages. “Women in our nation are dying -- before, during and after childbirth,” said Kamala Harris this week announcing significant investment in maternal health. “In the United States of America, in the 21st century, being pregnant and giving birth should not carry such great risk.” We all know the sheer awkwardness of people in their third trimester who are heavily laden, often exhausted, in a body so transformed in size and function that it no longer feels like their own. To make someone undergo that involuntarily is punitive. To argue that pregnancy doesn’t really disrupt a life is ridiculous, but the supreme court’s Amy Coney Barrett did so when, during the hearing, she asked why the fact that babies could be given up at birth didn’t relieve women of the burden, arguing that if “forced parenting, forced motherhood, would hinder women’s access to the workplace and to equal opportunities … why don’t the safe haven laws take care of that problem?” Imagine telling a woman working as a janitor or a dancer or a farmer or trying to make law partner or compete in her sport that she’s unimpaired by her visibly changing body – and the physical and psychological impacts of it – because she can give away the baby at birth without being criminalised for it? It was also stunning that Barrett recognised that the subject was “forced motherhood”. Given that the majority of abortions are for women who already have children, imagine the impact on the other children of watching their mother go through an unwanted pregnancy and birth. A lot of women choose abortion out of love for their existing children and the desire to parent them as well as possible. The literature of early birth control advocates is full of the desperation of women who could not cope with the physical impact of another pregnancy and birth and the economic burden and workload of another child to care for. Medical providers I know who worked in a remote part of the Himalayas told me of women who came to them for birth control, swearing they would rather die than have another child. With illegal abortions, an alarming percentage of women do die. The mother of another friend of mine died giving birth to that friend’s younger sister, and I know of the brutality of caesarean sections, of 36-hour labours, of the rips and tears of vaginal birth that can cause incontinence, fistulas, and other permanent injuries. The hormonal changes are changes in consciousness, and for people whose wellbeing is already fragile, the experience can be devastating, and when it’s an unwanted pregnancy it can be more than that. The experience of bringing a new human life into the world is profound, and to make it involuntary is monstrous. Denying abortion without exceptions is saying that it’s fine for a child impregnated by her father to have to carry the child to term. We don’t force anyone to donate a kidney to someone dying of kidney failure; forcing someone to donate their body as an incubator is also an outrage. The late-term abortions that get so much attention are both rare and usually because the foetus is dead, not viable, or the mother’s life is at risk. Ireland’s voters legalised abortion after a dentist in Galway undergoing a miscarriage was unable to have the abortion that would have saved her from death. The lawyer arguing the case before the supreme court for women’s reproductive rights answered Barrett’s blithe nonsense thus: “Pregnancy itself is unique. It imposes unique physical demands and risks on women and, in fact, has impact on all of their lives, on their ability to care for other children, other family members, on their ability to work. And, in particular, in Mississippi, those risks are alarmingly high. It’s 75 times more dangerous to give birth in Mississippi … than it is to have a pre-viability abortion, and those risks are disproportionately threatening the lives of women of colour.” Or as the supreme court justice Sonia Sotomayor put it, “So when does the life of a woman and putting her at risk enter the calculus?” She knew, we know, that for those who are committed to the punitive violence of forced birth the answer is: never. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist‘I don’t want a lot for Christmas,” whispers Jonas Kaufmann into my ears. “Make my wish come true / All I want for Christmas is you.” I don’t know whether to laugh or hit shuffle. It’s three hours before my interview with the world’s most celebrated singer, a man with a voice as golden as Pavarotti’s but with Hollywood looks, and I’m preparing by listening to a Kaufmann mixtape. The 52-year-old’s peerless voice still in my ears, I stroll through Naples towards Teatro di San Carlo – the world’s oldest continuously active opera house, and where last night he sang Verdi’s Otello. His is a voice built for Italian opera: “I have a German passport,” he once said, “but an Italian voice.” The New Yorker critic Alex Ross described it as having a baritonal strength in the lower register, cleanly struck high notes (including a top C in Otello), a tenderly shimmering mid-range – all laced together in a luxurious legato. But what I’m listening to is a switchback ride from schmaltz to sublime. Sublime? Morgenlich Leuchtend from Wagner’s Die Meistersinger. Schmaltz? The 49 songs of his newly expanded crossover yuletide album, which some will love finding in their stockings, though not the critic who said all he wanted for Christmas was a flux capacitor to send Kaufmann back in time to before he recorded it. At the Gran Caffe Gambrinus opposite Naples’ 18th-century opera house, a genial German in jeans and jumxper greets me. He claims to have put on weight during lockdown, but Kaufmann looks fit and well, strutting like victorious Otello to a table, and ordering a late breakfast in idiomatic Italian. Neither waiters nor customers seem to recognise him – perhaps they’re feigning indifference to the presence of the German who sings their canon better than the natives. We are meeting because Kaufmann had been due to come to London next week to perform Christmas with Jonas Kaufmann at the Royal Albert Hall, but, a fortnight after our meeting, and only a few days before the scheduled concert, increased Covid travel restrictions force its postponement. “I hope to see you for the new date, and wish you all a very happy Christmas”, writes Kaufmann in a message posted online. The last time he was on that stage was when he became the first German to sing Rule, Britannia! at the Last Night of the Proms in 2015 (he waving union jack boxers, fans hurling knickers on to the stage in return). Does he see the contradiction between being the Tom Jones of tenors and a serious artist? “Oh no,” he laughs boomingly enough to make me worry for nearby crockery. “I’m enjoying myself too much to worry about all that. I’ve grown in self-confidence over the years. If you’re afraid of such things, you’ve no business being on stage. If I didn’t like performing in public, why would I do it so much?” That said, on the first night of his performance in Otello at the Teatro di San Carlo the previous week, there were boos. “They weren’t booing me,” he clarifies. “I talked to many people afterwards who complained mostly because Otello is not black. And that was the director’s idea.” Let me get this right: they were booing the director because you’re white? Kaufmann nods. What business does a white German have playing Otello, though? “I know it’s a very hot political topic,” says Kaufmann, unfazed by the question. “I personally see more racism in the idea to forbid people to pretend to be another in our modern society. Because nobody is mocking. Nobody is wearing blackface as they did 50 years ago. “It’s very difficult to see where should we stop and what should we do. If this goes on much further we will soon have to close theatres.” Maybe that’s an exaggeration, but certainly Otello, like much of the canon from which Kaufmann has made his illustrious career, is a minefield of racist and sexist attitudes. “Oh my God, yes! You should have to put warnings everywhere. I’m killing my wife! I mean, come on – is this appropriate for children to watch? But I think even children understand it’s a fairytale and very terrible things can happen in fairytales.” One solution is to detoxify operas by changing their narrative frame. Amélie Neirmeyer attempted as much in her 2019 Bayerische Staatsoper production of Otello in which Kaufmann also sang the role. In it, Desdemona survives. “Many people loved it because it was, as it were, a psychoanalytical session with Desdemona recalling what happened.” Kaufmann sips his coffee, and adds: “It is very difficult to combine the music of Verdi with this idea.” Was the libretto amended to accommodate the plot twist? “ No. She stands up while she sings her last phrases and secretly escapes.” Kaufmann learned early in his career that classical music has a problem with sexual power dynamics off the stage as well as on it. He experienced unwanted sexual advances from a concert promoter. “It was made very clear to me that if I went with this man to a sauna, I would be given a solo recital in one of the big concert halls in my home town, Munich. I was a student in my final year of conservatory. I don’t know if it would have happened if I had gone for the offer.” He laughs ruefully. “But I still see myself in the seat of that Mercedes S class sweating and thinking: ‘What shall I do?’” From Verdi’s tortured title character, Kaufmann next takes on a no less troubling outsider, Britten’s Peter Grimes. He will sing the role for the first time in Vienna’s Staatsoper in January. Very few tenors have the range to go from 19th-century Italian opera to the 20th-century jewel in the English operatic canon. Acclaimed Argentinian tenor José Cura, I tell Kaufmann, once said he was scared of singing Grimes because the score is so tricky and demanding. “I don’t find it so. What I do find difficult is understanding the character. Is he guilty of these crimes? Honestly, I don’t know.” Later, in 2022 – he won’t tell me where or when – he will expand his repertoire further by singing Wagner’s Tannhäuser for the first time. Kaufmann has no desire, however, to take on the risk of singing in new operas. “Most of these compositions are done once and forgotten. There are some exceptions, but the complexity of modern music is just too much for most audiences to go home with a smile or even with a melody. A new opera hits you in your face and it might be very impressive, but the endorphins that you have sometimes when you hear a beautiful aria? They’re not there for sure. That makes it difficult for these pieces to join the repertory.” What if someone wrote a new opera with your voice in mind? He tells me of a fellow singer for whom this happened. “The result was disastrous. It almost broke their voice. No, I’d better stick to my good old Verdis and Puccinis. I’m still not fed up with that.” And he believes that audiences, too, are far from fed up. “The fascinating thing about opera is that is a bit old fashioned, a bit mysterious, a bit different,” he says. It should take a leaf from the Game of Thrones’ playbook. “Series such as this are so successful not because they are modern but because they create a different world in such a fantastic and perfect way that you dive into it and you start to forget it is fake. This is opera! “Having said that we all know that opera can’t stand still. We are not bearers of a museum piece. It has to be alive.” Christmas with the Kaufmanns promises to be as traditional as his take on operas. At the age of eight, he won a prize at a local newspaper for his description of a lavish family Christmas. Now with his second wife, the opera director Christiane Lutz, and their young son, as well as his three children from his first marriage, he hopes to celebrate a family Christmas. “My older boy has been very sick and therefore not vaccinated and can’t travel, so maybe we will be in Germany.” Despite that constraint, he is happy that Germany and also Austria – where he has a home – are clamping down on the unvaccinated. “So many people seem to think of not being vaccinated as to do with freedom. My logic is different. If you live in a city you don’t walk around naked because it would harm somebody, or traumatise a child. Because it’s selfish. The same is true with vaccination and mask wearing. Would you put others in danger by not being vaccinated or wearing a mask? It’s for the community.” Kaufmann’s Christmas season was meant to kick off at the Albert Hall, but speaking to me before the concert’s cancellation, he had already half-anticipated the bad news. “The logistics of the orchestra and me getting PCR tests in time are very tricky indeed.” And this was before the latest government rulings required a negative pre-departure Covid test in order to enter the country. “ I really hope to be there. There are so many English-language carols and Christmas songs I want to sing in London.” Alas. Fingers crossed that next year Kaufmann will get another chance to spend his Christmas – in the nicest possible way – showered in festive undies in London. • It’s Christmas! (Extended Edition) is out now on Sony Classical.The CIA considered him Che Guevara’s successor when it came to igniting new guerrilla movements in Latin America. Brazil’s military dictatorship, whose security agents ambushed and killed him in São Paulo in 1969, called him public enemy No 1. Now, more than five decades after his slaying, the communist revolutionary and poet Carlos Marighella has been reborn as a symbol of political resistance to Jair Bolsonaro’s far-right administration thanks to a new film about his life. When the lights come up at the end of sessions of Marighella, it is common to hear anti-Bolsonaro chants from cinema-goers, inflamed by the film and their anger at Brazil’s dictatorship-admiring president, whom many blame for a Covid disaster that has killed more than 615,000 people. “Marighella is the antagonist supreme when you compare him to Bolsonaro – and this all erupts in the cinema,” said Mário Magalhães, whose biography of the rebel, Marighella: The Guerrilla Who Set the World Alight, inspired the film. One of the founders of the rebel group National Liberation Action (ALN), Marighella was the central exponent of more radical resistance to Brazil’s 1964-85 dictatorship at a time when being a leftist was punishable with death. Today, he is despised by Brazil’s extreme right for his leading role in the armed struggle against its military rulers, who killed at least 434 opponents and tortured thousands more in an effort to silence their opponents. Marighella’s story was little known in and outside of Brazil until 2012, when Magalhães’s biography was published and the subject’s granddaughter gave a copy to the Narcos star Wagner Moura, reportedly telling him: “We’ve got to make a film.” For years the Brazilian actor, who played Pablo Escobar in that Netflix series, tried to do just that, in what became his first film as a director. But in a sign of the increasingly authoritarian political climate that has engulfed Brazil under Bolsonaro, a former army captain who reveres the dictatorship’s generals and torturers, the 155-minute film hit Brazilian screens only last month. The film premiered at the Berlin film festival in early 2019 but its Brazilian debut was repeatedly cancelled by the government film agency Ancine over supposed bureaucratic issues, which the film’s director denounced as “an absolutely clear case of censorship”. “The cries you hear in the cinema are also a political reaction to efforts to censor the film,” said Magalhães, the biographer. “It’s a democratic celebration against intolerance and against an authoritarian government which caused the deaths of millions of people during the pandemic.” Marighella’s producers have emphasized the protagonist’s continued political relevance at a moment when another South American struggle for democracy is under way, as Brazil gears up for a presidential election next year. The film’s Brazilian premiere took place at a camp organized by Brazil’s Landless Rural Workers Movement (MST), in Bahia state, where both Marighella and Moura were born. Lucinéia Durães, an MST director who was among the 3,000-strong audience, said that several days before the screening, masked men had launched an attack on another nearby landless people’s camp, firing shots and burning six vehicles. Durães said such attacks, which she blamed on far-right pro-Bolsonaro groups, were common. “Marighella has again become a symbol because his struggle is our struggle,” Durães said. “We see today’s Brazil when we watch the film, a Brazil in which those who fight are seen as criminals. “Marighella was accused of terrorism. So are we. But all we want to do is democratize the land and for every single Brazilian to be able to eat and have a home,” added Durães, who believed the film’s fundamental message was that “fighters died, but the dream of their struggle lives on”. “We must keep fighting for a democracy that represents Black and indigenous citizens,” she said. Last week the film was shown at the ABC Metalworkers Union in São Paulo, where Bolsonaro’s main rival, the leftist former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, gave a speech beneath a banner reading: “Viva Marighella”. “We must venerate and broadcast the meaning of the struggle of those who, like Marighella, died to ensure that the Brazilian people could live democratically,” said Lula, who polls suggest will defeat Bolsonaro next year. Lula called “companheiro Marighella” part of a long line of Brazilian rebel heroes, including the 17th century anti-slavery resistance leaders Zumbi and Dandara, whose stories had for too long been smothered. “It is up to us to retell a little bit of this country’s history,” Lula told filmgoers.The hack Less a TikTok trend and more a spot of DIY Christmas cheer – but how easy is it to make a bath bomb at home? The promise Bath bombs are a fun, nostalgic way to dial up your bathtime fun. In hot water, the bicarb fizzes and the bomb – which often contains essential oils, colouring and fragrance – dissolves. Lush invented them in the 1980s, and there are now scores of recipes online. The test I feel anxious (at school I routinely made things explode in chemistry lessons), but I get my kit ready like a good scientist and follow the tutorials to the letter. For moulds I’m using silicone ice cube trays, but yoghurt pots work too. I start by mixing 100g of bicarbonate of soda, 50g of citric acid and 25g of cornflour. A quick whisk later, and I’m relieved it hasn’t blown up. In another bowl I mix two tablespoons of olive oil, three drops of lavender essential oil and a couple of drops of pink food colouring. I whisk the oil mix into the dry mix, adding a quarter of a teaspoon of water at the end. I’m left with a semi-mouldable dough, which I press into my tray and leave to dry for four hours. Later I pop them out of the mould, mostly intact. The verdict They totally worked: my bath bombs make for a pleasingly effervescent bath and could be a fun (albeit messy) family activity.Three years before co-founding Bridal Babes – a bridal e-commerce boutique that caters to Black and brown wedding parties – Ashley Young was just another Black bride trying to find the perfect bridesmaid dresses. “My girls were of all shapes and sizes, and they wanted to show off the melanin and show off the curves,” Young, the company’s CEO recalls. “We needed sexy, form-fitting dresses in bold, bright colors.” But traditional bridal shops fell short. Young took her search off the beaten path, eventually finding a strappy, figure-hugging design in a sumptuous coral shade that worked with each of her bridesmaids’ complexions. Young realized then that there was a gap to be filled in the $57bn US wedding industry and, in 2019, Bridal Babes was born. Young and her husband, Charles, completely bootstrapped the business. Their efforts quickly paid off, thanks in part to the brand’s innovative virtual consultation services and remote, online showcases – services that would later become industry standard due to Covid. “I like to brag that we were doing virtual consultations a year before David’s Bridal got with the program and launched theirs,” Young says. Being ahead of the curve gave Bridal Babes its first profitable year in 2020, and Young says that the brand is on track to turn a $1m revenue for 2021. And that’s just the beginning. What do you think is driving the success of Bridal Babes? Young: We found this niche. Women of color and women with curves are often overlooked in the bridal industry. These women are in their twenties and early thirties, sometimes even younger, and they want to show off. I think having people that are thinking of women of color as they’re developing the product selection is vital. In our culture, curves are celebrated; we don’t want to mask them or hide under a big tent. When we’re modeling plus-size clothing we use a real plus-size model, not a size 14. People appreciate that because they want to know what they will look like in the dress. Bridal Babes had its first profitable year during the height of the pandemic. How did you adjust your business to be successful despite all the restrictions of 2020? Young: We have an online network of over 65,000 brides of color who tell us what they want. They were telling us they wanted bridal shower dresses, courthouse dresses, and T-shirts to show off their new status as wives. So even though people weren’t having big weddings, they were still getting married, and they told us how we could still pivot and be profitable. We listened to them and made the shifts in our inventory. What’s your husband’s role in the company? Young: We are co-founders and he quit his job to run the business. People see him and are surprised he’s in bridal, but he definitely manages more of the logistics and operations side as the president and COO. As you can imagine, we get thousands of dresses from our production facility each month, and they have to go out to our customers. So, he manages all the supply chain issues and the inventory issues. What does it mean to you to build this business with your spouse? Young: We want to be an example for Black love and Black families. Many of us in the Black community don’t see entrepreneurship in the way the general public sees it. We haven’t always had models to show us the value of providing jobs for your community and providing jobs for your family, and potentially selling your business or having an IPO that can create millions upon millions of dollars. Growing this business to provide a legacy and generational wealth for our family is important, and helping our community figure out ways to do that for themselves is at the heart of what we’re doing.Evidence has been piling up showing that many everyday items found in US homes contain toxic chemicals that are linked to a whole host of serious health problems. Yet these chemicals are poorly regulated, making it hard for consumers to spot and avoid them. Reporting on the chemical industry for the Guardian has helped me identify red flags I look for when shopping. Last Christmas, for example, my sister gave me a small, water-resistant backpack to carry my laptop on long bike trips. It was a thoughtful gift, but the “waterproof” label on the packaging tipped me to a potential danger. Companies commonly use highly toxic chemicals called PFAS to waterproof products, and a quick search revealed that the bag contained them. I politely explained the situation to my sister, returned the bag and found another that is PFAS-free. Toxic chemicals are ubiquitous and regulators often fail to protect consumers, with loophole-ridden laws or lax enforcement of rules. Companies conceal their use of harmful substances while the EPA hasn’t rejected any new compounds that industry has cooked up in recent years, even when science shows that the chemicals may be dangerous. With the holidays upon us, here are a few rules of thumb that can help consumers avoid buying gifts that may poison a loved one this holiday season. Be wary of waterproof Camping gear, shoes, coats, clothing, umbrellas, car seats, furniture, snow gear, sports accessories, performance textiles and more are commonly waterproofed with PFAS, which serve a similar purpose in makeup and personal care products. The chemicals have been linked to cancer, birth defects, kidney disease, decreased immunity and other serious diseases. When used to waterproof products, PFAS form a water-repellant barrier that looks similar to a shag carpet. But the pieces of “shag” break off over time as the barrier wears off. The chemicals end up in the air or on the ground in dust, and are either breathed in or ingested. PFAS can also be absorbed through skin if they’re on a garment, or when they’re applied via personal care products. It’s difficult to know which items contain PFAS because most companies don’t disclose their use, and the federal government doesn’t regulate them. However, products that contain Gore-Tex and Teflon probably contain PFAS, and customers can call companies to ask for clarification. As the chemicals’ dangers become clearer, more brands are ditching them, and they usually advertise their decision. Look for waterproof products that are labeled “PFAS-free” or “PFC-free”. Beware of those that are advertised as “PFOS-free’’ or “PFOA-free”, as they can still contain other kinds of PFAS. Several consumer groups have pulled together useful lists of retailers selling PFAS-free products. Look out for lead Despite its well-established neurotoxic dangers, lead is still widely used and can be found lurking in crayons, pottery, jewelry, ceramics, dishes, furniture, cookware, some modern toys, many vintage toys, water bottles, coffee mugs and more. Companies still employ the heavy metal as an agent in dyes or glazes to enhance and brighten colors. Avoiding it is difficult because manufacturers typically don’t disclose its use, and the law permits its application with some not-so-stringent stipulations. But there are some basic steps that can be taken to avoid lead, such as finding alternatives to glazed or enameled kitchenware or ceramics. Stainless steel, glass and some kinds of wood are typically safer, though those come with caveats – for example, the glue in many bamboo products contains formaldehyde. In the absence of meaningful lead oversight, a network of blogs have been testing hundreds of products from crayons to pans, and offer troves of helpful guidance. (The Guardian hasn’t independently verified their testing methods.) Go fragrance-free Few words on a label have as broad a definition as “fragrance” – the fragrance industry uses more than 4,000 chemicals to scent products. A consumer group has flagged at least 1,600 of those as potentially harmful, including chemicals that are banned in other countries, carcinogens and endocrine disruptors found to be harmful in small amounts. That can lead to migraines and respiratory problems, and consumer advocates suspect they could be linked to more serious diseases like cancer. Women endure a higher load of fragrance chemicals because of their common use in personal care products. The regulatory black hole leaves consumers guessing, but several helpful guides offer suggestions and tips for finding personal care products that use only non-toxic ingredients. Though essential oils are a safer alternative, some are stored in bins that contain PFAS, and experts fear the oil could be contaminated. The best policy: when possible, buy unscented or fragrance-free personal care products. Say no to nonstick Nonstick coatings like Teflon make meal prep much easier, but they’re often composed of toxic PFAS or other unsavory chemicals. Fortunately, there are abundant safe alternatives. Glass, stainless steel and cast iron cookware all work well with a little olive oil and pose very few risks. While ceramic and glazed kitchenware are also popular and billed as nonstick, they often contain heavy metals. Be skeptical of cookware marketing: Even though a company claims its products are free of dangerous chemicals, they may not be. Look for “PFAS-free” or “PFC-free” items and beware of those labeled PFOS- or PFOA-free as they can still contain other kinds of PFAS. A new generation of “green” nonstick pans use silicone coatings, but those often have aluminum substrates. That can be a problem if silicon surfaces are scratched or deteriorate over time. Avoid plastic Aside from filling the oceans and earth with garbage that takes eons to degrade, a new study this year found plastic is packed with far more toxic chemicals than previously known. While the health effects of some of those are unclear, chemicals commonly found in plastic, like bisphenol-A (BPA) and phthalates are linked to cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cancer and other serious health issues. There’s virtually no oversight to speak of, so the best policy is to avoid it altogether, and doing so is relatively easy and inexpensive. Instead of plastic kitchenware, consider products made of glass, stainless steel or wood. Food items stored in plastic will almost certainly leach some of packaging’s chemicals, so, if possible, buy the brand that uses glass jars. It’s more difficult to avoid plastic toys, but consumer groups offer a few tips. And if you can’t find an alternative to the plastic toy that your child wants, consider that science has found that kids don’t need so many toys.The last haircut I had was in the summer of 1978, done by one of my colleagues at the barbershop in Worcester. I liked it. It was trimmed fairly short on the top, but long on the back and sides. My hair was always long and curly; back then, having long hair was quite an advantage because it was fashionable. People would come into the salon and feel encouraged to see a young barber with a trendy style. Then a month or two later, I got very sick. I caught german measles (rubella) and almost died. I ended up packed in an ice bed in an isolation ward in the local hospital. And when I came home, my hair went pretty thin. From then on, I never felt the need to have it cut again. My hair was much thinner and would break off after it got to a certain length. I have been compared to a spaniel: if you own a long-haired dog, you don’t always have to trim their hair because it can break off naturally. I guess my hair reached that stage as well. As it grew, it didn’t cause me problems and it didn’t get in the way. So for the next 43 years, I couldn’t be bothered to have it cut. I’m quite happy with it the way it is. A lot of people, women especially, seem to like it. I often get waitresses wanting to touch it, because it’s so curly and soft. This annoys my wife, but I don’t mind that too much. She’s not that impressed with my hair, but she’s never given me too much grief about it. My mother hated it. I wouldn’t have thought my story was that surprising. I think most barbers are not that bothered about their hair – at least, not the old guys like me. But when I recently announced my retirement after 51 years, the story of my hair got picked up, first in the local paper. I even went on BBC Radio 5 live to talk about it. My hairstyle was called a mullet, but it is not a mullet, because it has length on the sides. If I had to give it a name I would call it “long”. All the attention was a surprise, but it doesn’t bother me. I’m not that bothered about my hair. If I had been, I might have done more about it over the years. Recently people have been thinking about my hair a lot more than I ever have. Some have called me the UK’s longest-serving barber, but I’m sure there’s somebody older who has done the job for longer. I’d say I’m one of the oldest barbers in Worcestershire. It was a bit of an accident that I became a barber. I was quite ill in my last year of school in Birmingham, and I had six months off. Before I returned, I had to see the headteacher – which meant I had to get a haircut. My usual place in the city was closed, so I had to go with my mother to her hairdresser. While I was waiting for her to get her hair cut, I messed about, washing the girls’ hair. I thought, “This doesn’t seem a bad way to earn a living.” And that’s how I got into it. I have been cutting hair at Skan’s in Worcester for 50 years. The barbershop was set up in 1848, and when I arrived there in the 70s, it was run by the founder’s youngest son. When I got the job I said to him I wasn’t sure how long I’d stay, and he replied: “They die in my shop.” I thought about those words this year when I decided to retire; it was about time. Mr Skan himself died a long time ago (not in the shop, incidentally) and the place closed after I stopped working. We’ve had a good community of customers over the years, though the younger generation prefer trendier places these days. We’ve also had a few celebrity customers. Imran Khan, the prime minister of Pakistan, used to have his hair cut here as a teenager, because his boarding school was nearby, and Neil Fox, the radio DJ, also came here. He was keen on his flat top. I’ve had my fair share of health problems, and things seem to change after I get ill – from deciding to become a barber, to never cutting my hair again, even to growing a beard and a moustache a few years ago after a stomach operation. I shaved those off last year after a child thought I was Father Christmas. I don’t think I’m going to change much in retirement, and I certainly don’t plan on getting a haircut. It’ll probably fall out in the next few years anyway. • As told to Felix Bazalgette Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comInvesting in Lego is more lucrative than gold, art and wine, according to a study. It found that the market for secondhand Lego rises in value by 11% annually, which it says is a faster and better rate of return than gold, stocks, bonds, stamps and wine. Researchers at the Higher School of Economics in Russia said that there could be lucrative gains to be made from investing in “more unusual goods whose purchase might seem less serious”, such as Lego sets, Barbie dolls, superhero mini figures, or model cars and trains. “We are used to thinking that people buy such items as jewellery, antiques or artworks as an investment,” said Victoria Dobrynskaya, an associate professor at the Faculty of Economic Sciences at HSE. “However, there are other options, such as collectible toys. Tens of thousands of deals are made on the secondary Lego market. Even taking into account the small prices of most sets, this is a huge market that is not well known by traditional investors.” The most expensive sets include the Millennium Falcon, Death Star II and Imperial Star Destroyer from Star Wars, as well as the Taj Mahal. The study, which looked at the prices of 2,322 Lego sets from 1987 to 2015, said that factors such as a limited production run, collector special editions and scarcity on the secondhand market have significantly boosted prices over the years. Only sales of new unopened sets were selected. “Sets produced 20-30 years ago make Lego fans nostalgic, and prices for them go through the roof,” Dobrynskaya said. “But despite the high profitability of Lego sets on the secondary market in general, not all sets are equally successful. One must be a real Lego fan to sort out the market nuances and see the investment potential in a particular set.” Last month, Lego, the world’s largest toymaker, awarded its 20,000 staff three extra days holiday and a special bonuses after reporting a bumper year of revenues and profits as its sales soared during the coronavirus pandemic lockdowns.Following their convincing 7-1 victory over Sporting Khalsa in the first round, Wolves faced fellow third-tier side Nottingham Forest in the next round. The teams had met in the Women’s National League – Premier Division North – three months previously with Wolves winning 1-0. Regarding attendance today, it’s an unknown quantity. There have had attendances over 650 earlier this season, but the average has been about 300, something like that. I don’t know about today; with the terrible weather we’ve had recently that may affect it. Hopefully the fact that it’s an FA Cup match, it may be a lot more, you never know. The bar has been very successful this season with the big crowds they’ve had coming in, and it’s also a pleasure to work the bar as some great people come down here, it’s very enjoyable. Wolves used to play here quite a while ago, 2009 I think they used to play. They’ve come back again recently, and the standard has improved dramatically on the pitch and off the pitch, with all the people that are involved in running it now, it’s a major operation and it’s great to be involved with it as a football club ourselves. – Paul Tudor, bar manager at CKW Stadium, home of AFC Wulfrunians The visitors started brightly, pinning Wolves in their own half for much of the opening stage. After going close on two occasions – hitting the side netting and the woodwork – Forest’s Mai Moncaster opened the scoring in the 19th minute, beating the Wolves keeper Becky Thomas at her near post from a tight angle. Wolves chase the game but this leaves holes at the back, which are exploited by Niamh Reynolds in the 66th minute and Katie Middleton in the final minute of the game, to make it 4-0. The final whistle brings a 4-0 victory for Nottingham Forest and a chance for fans to take pictures and get autographs of the players. Forest manager Andy Cook said of their third successive 4-0 victory in all competitions: “It was a fantastic performance and we are really pleased to get through. We would have taken a scruffy 1-0 win or we would have even taken going through on penalties, but to perform like that and score four goals is fantastic. We are delighted.” His side now face Stoke City in the third round of the Cup.If you have ever been to Mollet del Vallés, a small town 25 kilometres outside Barcelona, you will know it lacks the grandeur and splendour of Catalonia’s capital. There is no Gaudí spontaneously popping up as you walk down its streets or stunning Gothic cathedrals looking down on you. But Mollet has something Barcelona cannot compete with – it has the honour of being the home and first training ground of the best female footballer in the world, Alexia Putellas. Born in Mollet del Vallés in 1994, Putellas played her first games in a square next to the town hall, the only girl among all the boys. Her story has always been undeniably linked to Barcelona, the club closest to her heart, but her journey to becoming their most renowned female player has not been straightforward. Putellas, who has finished first in the Guardian’s best female footballers in the world in 2021, first joined Barcelona in 2006 following four seasons at her local club Centre d’Esports Sabadell. But the dream was short-lived. A year later, a club restructuring left Putellas without a team at Can Barça and she was forced to look for options elsewhere. “Of course I thought [I would see her again],” says Xavi Llorens, who at the time was already heavily involved in the development of Barcelona’s women’s side and would eventually become Putellas’s coach years later. “It was just a matter of waiting for the right time.” Like many other players, Putellas joined the ranks of Barcelona’s local rivals, Espanyol, where she played for five years. She made her senior debut at the age of 16 and in her last season with Espanyol she became a full-time member of the first team, gaining experience by playing alongside the Spanish internationals Vero Boquete, Marta Torrejón and Silvia Meseguer, among others. But in 2011, after a long tenure with the periquitas, Putellas decided to move to Valencia and sign with Levante. By then, her reputation preceded her: at a time when women’s football barely made the newspapers, her arrival at her new club attracted some unusual attention. “She had just won a bronze medal with Spain Under-17s and everyone was talking about how we’d signed Alexia,” says Antonio Contreras, her coach at Levante. “She was one of those players that could make a difference,” he adds. “Our dressing room had some pretty big names back then, national team captains, veterans … and we knew we needed to find profiles like Alexia’s.” At Levante, Putellas found an environment that was extremely professional at a time women’s football overall was not – something Contreras believes was key to her development. Putellas played every game that season and scored 15 goals over 34 matches, developing her technical and tactical skills on and off the ball. “When she got here, I told her: ‘You’re going to have to play without the ball,’” remembers Contreras, who is happy to hear Putellas now mentions Sergio Busquets as one of the players she looks up to. “Looking up to Busquets means focusing on how to position oneself on the pitch and how to recover the ball. I like that Alexia looks for that balance between Xavi and Busquets.” Contreras also highlights Putellas’s ability to absorb everything people say to her in her desire to improve her game. “Her boots, they were always clean,” he recalls. “That’s how much class she had.” However, Putellas’s breakthrough season at Levante was overshadowed by the sudden loss of her father, who died when she was just 17. In the summer that followed, Llorens met Putellas to talk about her future and offered her a chance to rejoin Barcelona. Contreras remembers how Putellas’s mum, Eli, called him to share the news. “Obviously, for Levante that was a big loss,” he says. “But I said to her: ‘Listen, Eli, if Alexia leaves, she needs to go to a team that’s top three.’ When they told me it was Barça, there wasn’t really anything for me to say.” Llorens admits Barcelona always kept track of Putellas and, over the years, she became an important piece in his squad. To him, she has always been responsible and committed, but also competitive. “There was a time when I would often sub her off after the 60th or 75th minute,” remembers Llorens. “One day at the Mini, she didn’t come and shake my hand and she kicked a water bottle, she was really angry. I saw it as a positive,” he adds. At Barcelona, Putellas has developed into a mature, confident player. “She’s gained a lot of personality off the football pitch,” explains Llorens, who coached her between 2012 and 2017. “In her play, she’s been learning from her experiences, especially from her losses.” One of those losses was Barcelona’s defeat against Lyon in the 2019 Champions League final. That day, Putellas refused to take off her silver medal, a reminder of how far the team had come and how far they still had to go. “Alexia has no limits, she always wants more,” adds Llorens. There was a time when it seemed the top awards were a distant dream for Putellas. While she has always been a talented player, she often went unnoticed and was overshadowed by some of those goalscorers she frequently assisted with her magical passes. But that time is over: this year Putellas has received pretty much every individual award for her outstanding season with Barcelona, a general consensus often lacking in the women’s game. Now, when Alexia Putellas plays, it is hard to find someone who is not looking her way. Bea Redondo is a freelance journalist based in Barcelona writing about women’s footballJust a few steps away from the horse-drawn carriages that whisk tourists through New York’s Central Park and the opulence of the Plaza Hotel is an unassuming building on a quiet block in midtown Manhattan. The building is marked by an awning that reads “Park Savoy Hotel”. Nestled in between a 24-hour parking structure and an apartment building on a predominantly residential street, the Park Savoy blends in with the other hotels in the neighborhood. A sign on the front window of the building that says “Welcome to the Park Savoy rapid re-housing program” is the only marker that indicates it is a homeless shelter, built in one of the most pricey neighborhoods in New York. One that rich locals fought for years, spending hundreds of thousands of dollars campaigning against the crime and “irreparable injuries” they said it would bring – fears that appear to have been unfounded. The shelter quietly opened its doors in early November. It is designed to house up to 80 men and is known as an “employment shelter” meant for those who are seeking employment or who are actively employed, especially in midtown Manhattan. The shelter has been taking in about five new occupants a week since it opened 8 November, according to a city spokesperson. The men will be neighbors with some of Manhattan’s wealthiest residents: the shelter abuts Billionaires Row, a nickname given to the cluster of super-tall luxury “pencil towers” that were constructed within the last decade. The penthouse of One57, the tower that is directly behind the shelter, was bought by billionaire Michael Dell in 2014 for $100m – the most expensive piece of real estate ever sold in the city at the time. New York City has the highest homeless population in the US with more than 122,000 homeless adults and families – including more than 39,000 children – living in the city’s shelter system in 2020. In 2017, a year before the shelter was supposed to open, de Blasio announced a new initiative to address homelessness in the city which included plans to build about 90 new shelters. “They’ll be in every kind of neighborhood,” de Blasio said. The Park Savoy shelter was slated to open in spring 2018, but the city entered a lengthy legal battle with residents and business owners in the area who vehemently opposed the shelter and formed a group, called the West 58th Street Coalition to block it. An online petition created in 2018 against the hotel, calling it a threat with “an enormous impact on our densely populated, narrow, high pedestrian-traffic street” garnered nearly 3,500 signatures. Members of the coalition argued that the city did not receive community input when starting plans to open the shelter and called the building “a dangerous fire trap”. Suzanne Silverstein, a leader of the coalition, told the New York Times that residents believed that the city was trying to make a statement at their expense. “[Mayor Bill de Blasio] is not sticking it to billionaires, he’s sticking it to people like myself who work 100 hours a week. We’re not bad people. We’re just trying to get ahead,” she said. Determined to stop the shelter, the West 58th Street Coalition filed a lawsuit in 2018 that argued the building was too “unsafe” for occupants and that “crime and loitering” caused by the shelter would lead to “irreparable injuries”. The coalition also spent at least $287,000 toward lobbyists advocating against the shelter, according to non-profit news site The City. They spent another $100,000 on billboards in Iowa meant to prod de Blasio during his brief run for president in 2020. Despite the coalition’s efforts, a state appellate court gave the final green light to the city in May to open the shelter. The group did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment. Steve Banks, commissioner for the city’s Department of Homeless Services, told The City that the campaign against the shelter was “the longest and the most-well-funded litigation” against the opening of any shelter. Battles against homeless shelters have erupted across the city in recent years. Manhattan’s Upper West Side was embroiled in a debate over a luxury hotel that temporarily became an emergency homeless shelter during the pandemic as the city attempted to space out occupants in shelters. Most recently, residents of a neighborhood in Queens have voiced concerns over multiple homeless shelters that have opened within a few blocks of each other. Advocates for the homeless say that fears of homeless shelters are typically overblown, creating a hostile environment for those who need a place to live. “Usually it’s a lot of fears and anxiety that don’t actually materialize once the shelters open,” said Jacquelyn Simone, policy director for the homeless advocacy group Coalition for the Homeless. Simone noted that the court’s ruling in favor of the city shows that the city can prevail in lawsuits against homeless shelters. “One must ask who would have benefited from the Park Savoy shelter if it hadn’t been stalled for this many years,” she said. While many new homeless shelters are met with opposition, some have been met with indifference and even community support. Despite vocal opposition against shelters on the Upper West Side in Manhattan and Kensington in Brooklyn, residents of both neighborhoods organized donation drives for local shelters. On a Tuesday morning almost a month after the Park Savoy shelter opened, the block seemed like any other street in midtown Manhattan, full of fast-walking office workers and groups of tourists heading to Times Square. Despite the legal battle that took place over the Park Savoy, residents of the neighborhood told the Guardian that the shelter’s opening has so far caused no problems. “I was very apprehensive about it for various reasons,” said John, who lives in a neighboring building and wished to be referred to only by his first name. “I had a feeling there would be these real bums moving in, but I’ve seen no problems at all.” “I see one or two people going in, but they look harmless.” One woman walking her dog who moved to the neighborhood a few months ago said she did not realize a homeless shelter had opened. John Sheehan, who lives in the neighborhood and works in advocacy for homeless living on the street, said he hopes the community will eventually embrace the shelter once people realize it will not affect the quality of the neighborhood. “I think the shelter is a statement that says we are willing to give people an opportunity to move on, to improve their lives, and to have a safe place to live,” Sheehan said. “That should be something we should be proud of.”Officials in the US are encouraging eligible adults to get boosters amid a new surge of the Covid-19 pandemic and the discovery of the Omicron variant, but some areas are facing shortages – not of the vaccines, but of pharmacy staff to administer them. More than two in three Covid vaccines are now given at pharmacies, the White House has said, but pharmacies are facing a double bind of increased workloads and staffing shortages and are struggling to keep up with demand for vaccination appointments. “I’m not having trouble getting the vaccines. It’s just the availability for me to be able to give vaccines,” Janice Spinney, the owner and sole pharmacist at Valley Independent Pharmacy in Intervale, New Hampshire, told the Guardian. She’s the only one at her independent pharmacy, located in a rural mountain town, who can administer the vaccines. She offers vaccination appointments every two weeks. “There’s definitely demand, but because of the way that the vaccine comes in multi-dose vials, you have to make sure that you have enough people to fill the slot when you open it, so that you don’t waste it,” Spinney said. She’s still getting requests for the next appointment slot, which she hasn’t even advertised, she said. New Hampshire has the highest rate of new Covid cases in the US, even though 65% of its population – more than the national average – is fully vaccinated. It’s the worst phase of the pandemic for the small New England state, as hospitals are stretched to capacity. Those looking for the added protection of boosters in New Hampshire have seen long wait times, despite a “booster blitz” campaign the state recently launched in response to rising cases. But these delays and shortages aren’t limited to independent pharmacies and hard-hit states. Some large chain pharmacies around the country have shortened their hours and canceled appointments, sometimes without any notice. Walgreens pharmacies in Maine, Colorado, Connecticut and Indiana have reportedly closed unexpectedly or reduced their hours because of worker shortages. In Indianapolis, a CVS pharmacy closed early on Thursday due to worker shortages, and a sign over the counter informed customers of a half-hour closure each day to give the pharmacist a lunch break. While Walgreens has “adjusted pharmacy hours in a limited number of stores to accommodate current staffing needs,” Fraser Engerman, a spokesperson for Walgreens, told the Guardian in an email, “the vast majority of our stores” are operating normally. And, he said, Walgreens administered a record number of Covid-19 vaccines last week. Matt Blanchette, a spokesperson for CVS Health, said that CVS pharmacies “have the inventory to meet Covid-19 vaccine needs”, and stores are ramping up vaccination availability times and hiring new employees. It’s not just pharmacies bearing additional burdens. In Albuquerque, health officials lamented having “trouble securing venues” to offer mass vaccine events like those offered for initial shots earlier in the year. “It’s absolutely incredible that we have the demand we do for boosters, and it is critically important,” Rebecca Snead, executive vice-president of the National Alliance of State Pharmacy Associations (NASPA), told the Guardian. But, like other health care appointments, there may be wait times, she said. “I can’t just go in and get it what I want when I want it. I have to plan for it.” She likened the added demand for boosters to a funnel. “Everybody’s trying to get through the funnel,” she said. “All of healthcare is and has been strained, and the capacity is exceeding the ability.” Like other health care industries, pharmacies were often at capacity even before the pandemic hit. Drugstores are usually busy this time of year with flu vaccines. They are still administering first and second doses of the Covid vaccines, including to children over the age of five who recently became eligible, and they’ve seen a rise in Covid testing – all on top of their usual work, which is being delayed by the influx of work. “To step aside and put that time out for vaccinations, away from the dispensing requirements that you have today – it is a struggle,” Spinney said. Burnout among pharmacists and pharmacy technicians has been “no different” than among other health workers, Snead said. “We’ve been on a treadmill running as fast as we can for a couple of years now.” Unlike the rollout of earlier doses, there are fewer mass vaccination sites for boosters, and many of the volunteers who stepped in to administer vaccines have gone back to their regular jobs. “There are fewer helpers to make it all work,” Snead said. Yet vaccinations – whether for initial doses or for booster shots – are one important element to stopping surges, including from the Omicron variant. Peter McGinn, an analyst in Minnesota, was the first Omicron patient detected in the US. He said the vaccines “absolutely” helped keep his case mild – he got boosted right before his trip to New York, and encouraged others to do the same in order to reduce hospitalizations and deaths. “The exciting news is that we have a booster, we have an adequate supply, we have a workforce that is trying their best to get as many people boosters as possible,” Snead said. “We need people to get motivated to get their booster. We also need them to understand it’s a healthcare service.” She urged people to book their appointments in advance, and to be patient. “To be a health care provider that has provided 70% of a life-saving vaccine to this country – of course there’s pride,” Snead said. “Does everybody appreciate and understand that that has come with a tremendous personal and professional sacrifice every day?”It’s only now, when we have some distance from it, that we can reckon with last winter: five months of gloom, seclusion and burnout in which almost the entire country felt miserable. Against a background of a rising death toll, exhausted health workers and gross governmental incompetence – not to mention a cancelled Christmas – we were tasked with a third go at making the most of a bad situation. I remember the moment it really got to me. It was New Year’s Eve. I’d just had a terrible and prolonged breakup, and a few days earlier had moved out of the London flat I had shared with my ex for five years. House-sitting, alone, was not the kind of New Year bash I’d envisioned, but at least I could take some solace in the thought that no one else was having much fun. Another single friend and I had planned to visit a couple’s home for a tiny – admittedly rule-breaking – dinner, so we wouldn’t be alone as the countdown came. But at 4pm that day, I got the call: one of our party had just watched the viral video of a UCL intensive care doctor speaking on BBC Radio 5 Live. He had said anyone who went out on New Year’s Eve would have blood on their hands. “Sure,” I said, lip quivering like a toddler’s as I was told the dinner was off, “glad we’re doing the right thing.” I put the phone down and realised I was horrified at the prospect of spending the night alone. Lockdown and winter had formed a pernicious partnership. Together they aggravated every other malady in life – overwork, illness, cold, death, loneliness, heartbreak – breathing a frosty wind over any attempts to try to mitigate the misery. A disease that insisted we stay outdoors as much as possible was bound to strike its biggest psychological blows when we felt trapped indoors. As winter returns, you can sense the trepidation. Even if the rules in the UK stay the same, we know that things won’t get back to normal this Christmas. Many offices have decided to cancel or downscale their staff parties, and now there’s the new Omicron variant to contend with. One of the leading spokespeople for the delivery industry, David Jinks of ParcelHero, has described Christmas shortages as “a certainty”. Even Tory MP David Morris has warned that we could be facing a new “winter of discontent”. For many of us, our anxiety about and inability to deal with winter is due to the fact that, despite its inevitability, we seem totally unprepared for it each year. Is there a way to reframe this period as something more positive – or even embrace it? It’s the time of year that people start throwing around the term “Sad”, short for seasonal affective disorder, and purchasing light therapy lamps. “I do think all the focus on the lamps simplifies the treatment in a rather unfortunate way,” says Dr Norman E Rosenthal, whose research on winter depression in the early 1980s led to him coining the term Sad to describe a form of depression that comes and goes in a seasonal pattern, and recommended artificial daylight lamps for those who suffer from it. “People think: ‘Use a lightbox and everything will be fine.’” Rosenthal’s book, Winter Blues, first published in 1993, remains in print and as popular as ever. It estimates that while 5% of people suffer clinically from Sad, a further 15% have some milder version of what he calls the winter blues. “It’s a matter of degrees,” he says. There is a clear difference between the two – the former tends to be manageable, whereas Sad can permeate your entire life and should be taken seriously (the NHS outlines persistent symptoms: low mood, lethargy, irritability, feelings of despair and worthlessness). I’m sure I don’t have either – but there’s still something wobbly about this winter in particular, an unease about the next four months and a struggle to remember what it is like to be cold and happy. Do we need a new term to describe something that’s not a disorder, but could still be described as our dark period? Kari Leibowitz, a health psychologist at Stanford University in California, says part of the problem is that our only framework for thinking about mental health at winter is clinical. She is fully accepting that some people do suffer from acute depression and need specialist help, but the rest of us need a different kind of narrative about the seasons. She calls it “a winter mindset”. In 2014, Leibowitz moved to the town of Trømso in Norway, which is north of the Arctic Circle and where for two months a year the sun never rises. Yet people in Trømso tend to thrive. Years later, this one research project has taken over Leibowitz’s life. “Yes, I suppose I am more in demand around now – I’m like the Mariah Carey of winter psychology,” she tells me. “I thought I’d write one article about it, put a little bow on it and then move on to other things. But now I’m writing a book on winter mindset and running workshops on how to cope with winter. It speaks to how entrenched our negative views of this season are, and how hungry people are for an alternative way to experience it.” The main difference between Trømso and the UK, she says, is that people here don’t prepare for winter. “It’s shocking to me that no workplace or even individual prepares for daylight saving ending. We should all be thinking about taking it a bit easier that week, giving us some space to sleep more and do less. Instead we get mad at ourselves for being more tired, rather than understanding that this is what it means to live in tune with the seasons.” Leibowitz says that although Covid made last winter more difficult, it can also provide some answers for making them more bearable. It may sound glib, but there have been recent mutterings of nostalgia for some of the more positive elements that came out of the first lockdown – bread baking, close community connections and the opportunity to explore hobbies. Leibowitz points out that winter can afford us those same opportunities. “People are nostalgic for that contemplation and slowness – winter is a powerful opportunity for that if we let it be. There are things that are nicer to do when the weather is bad: reading a book, using a hot oven to bake bread, taking time to write or practise music.” Rosenthal tells me about a recent study in Switzerland that says a half-hour walk in the mornings is helpful for those with Sad. “But I’m recommending it widely to all my patients. For those who are susceptible, I recommend another walk in the afternoon too, so you’re sort of mimicking the summer day.” He adds that is also important to be aware of carbohydrate cravings at this time of year, as they can “drive your eating patterns” and have an adverse effect on mental health. Covid also means that many of us are still working from home, at least some of the time, and while it might seem comfy and freeing to stay ensconced in our snoods all day (and even work from our beds), it’s probably not good for us. Getting dressed and taking a walk, regardless of the weather, can also provide a healthier framework. “The more we can make this a collective practice, something you share with your colleagues rather than hide from them, the better it is for everyone,” says Alex Soojung-Kim Pang, a four-day week advocate whose latest book is called Shorter: Work Better, Smarter, and Less. “Work used to be closely tied to the sun, tides and seasons – no more,” says Pang. “The world has trained us to overestimate how connected we need to be. For individuals, even setting aside a couple hours when we turn off email and notifications in favour of deep work can help us be more productive, without cutting us off from bosses or clients.” Leibowitz says walking in the cold is something to look forward to: “People underestimate how pleasurable it feels to go out in bad weather.” In Norway they (obviously) have a word for it, friluftsliv, which is a fondness for open-air living irrespective of season. She adds: “The air is cold but you’re warm and bundled up, you come home and feel invigorated and refreshed. I charge my students to go out on a wintry walk in the dark, and they all come back saying how surprised they were at how nice it was.” In the end, my 2020 New Year’s Eve was rescued. My bubble household – a couple who had been planning to spend the evening having a romantic dinner – invited me over at the last minute. We ate pasta and played board games, and when the clock struck midnight I was grateful not to be alone. The next couple of months were unbearable, but this winter doesn’t have to be the same. In October, as part of a grand scheme not to be ground down by gloom, I moved to New York – where I’m told the winter will be bitterly cold. But, for me at least, it will be more novel. I am looking forward to crisp morning runs, making soup while rewatching Succession, and reading all the books that I took on summer holiday but never got out of my backpack. It’s time to embrace the darkness.Why will I love it? It may look as cute as a bunny but beware: this houseplant stings like a bee. This furry cactus – full name: Opuntia microdasys – has pads that resemble rabbit ears and look soft enough to stroke, but resist. Dotted over the plant’s body are fine spines called glochids that will get into your skin and make you itch. If this happens, put sticky tape over the area and pull it away quickly to lift the stingers out. Light or shade? It loves bright, direct full sunlight. Where should I put it? On a south-facing windowsill in a room with dry air. It’s best to avoid damp bathrooms or kitchens. How do I keep it alive? Water weekly in spring and summer, allowing the compost to dry out between waterings, then reduce to a sprinkle every four to six weeks from mid-autumn to early spring. Use fertiliser only during the spring and summer. It can survive temperatures down to 7C-10C. Did you know… Opuntia is named after the ancient Greek region of Opuntian Locris, the capital city of which was Opus. • This article was amended on 14 December 2021. Opuntia microdasys can survive temperatures down to between 7C and 10C, not to -7C as an earlier version said.Police are investigating the unexplained death of a man who worked on the Trident nuclear submarines at Faslane naval base on the Clyde. Officers were called to HM Naval Base Clyde, 33 miles west of Glasgow, at about 12.30pm on Thursday. A Police Scotland spokesperson said: “A postmortem examination will be carried out to establish the exact cause of death, which is currently being treated as unexplained. A report will be submitted to the procurator fiscal.” Sources indicated the deceased was a junior crew member who worked on a Vanguard-class boat that carry the UK’s Trident missiles, while the body was found in the barracks on the base, away from any vessel. A Royal Navy spokesperson said: “It is with sadness that we can confirm a member of the Royal Navy has died. “Our thoughts and sympathies are with the family and friends at this difficult time and we request their privacy is respected. At this stage, it would be inappropriate to comment further.” Faslane is the base for all the UK’s nuclear submarines, including the four Vanguard-class boats. Also based there are the Astute-class fleet of hunter-killer submarines. There are about 5,000 submariners who crew the vessels, and the identity of the deceased will be well known around the small, relatively closed community at the lochside base. Teams are deployed underwater for several months at a time before returning to base for a similar period for training and to help maintain the boats as necessary. Faslane’s sister base at Coulport, which stores and services Trident missile warheads, faces a series of unrelated one-day strikes by 70 civilian workers with the Unite union.Octopus Energy has raised $300m of investment to value the power supplier at $5bn – despite soaring energy prices that have triggered a wave of collapses among its rivals. The long-term tie-up with Canada Pension Plan (CPP) Investment Board is the second big investment in Octopus Energy since the start of the energy crisis during which dozens of smaller supply rivals have folded. More than 20 UK energy companies have gone bust in a little over 12 weeks after a record rise in energy market prices, including the biggest, Bulb Energy, which was unable to raise funds from investors to keep supplying its 1.7 million customers. The latest equity investment in Octopus backs its founder Greg Jackson’s plan to bring a “digital revolution” to the energy industry, and will help fund the company’s global expansion target of reaching 100 million worldwide customers. The energy startup has reached the $5bn mark a little over 18 months after it first reached “unicorn status” with a $1bn valuation in spring 2020, and five years after it was founded in 2016. Deborah Orida, the global head of real assets at CPP Investments, described the deal as “a perfect example of how investors can work with leading tech-enabled energy companies to digitally disrupt the global energy system and support the evolution to a low-carbon world”. It comes three months after Octopus secured up to $600m (£438m) from an investment fund set up by the former US vice-president Al Gore in September, which valued the company at approximately $4.6bn, to build on the growth driven by its green energy platform. The in-house technology platform, known as Kraken, uses machine learning to manage energy supply and electricity generation data digitally, which helps to unlock a low-cost and efficient use of renewable energy sources. Octopus uses the technology to supply 3 million UK households with energy – as well as customers in Germany, Spain, Italy, New Zealand, Japan and the US – and has licensed the technology to other energy companies including E.ON UK, Good Energy, EDF, Hanwha and Origin Energy. In total Kraken is used to supply 25m customer accounts and manage 3GW of electricity generation. Octopus plans to use Kraken to reach 100 million customers by 2027. Octopus Energy, which is owned by Octopus Group, also took its first steps into renewable energy generation this year by buying its sister company Octopus Renewables in a move that will hand the startup a portfolio of about 300 renewable energy projects, across six different countries, or enough to power more than 1.2m homes. Greg Jackson, Octopus Energy’s founder and chief executive, said CPP’s investment will help to drive further innovation and “accelerate investment into the renewable energy revolution” which is “vital to delivering governments’ net zero goals”.Restaurants suffered a sharp drop in activity, manufacturers reported zero growth, and output in the construction industry collapsed in October at the fastest rate since the first wave of Covid-19 last year. Even before the emergence of the coronavirus Omicron variant, Britain’s economy was displaying worrying signs of weakness that are hard to ignore. According to the latest official figures for October, gross domestic product barely rose on the month, with an unexpectedly sluggish 0.1% growth rate. Suggesting the rapid recovery from lockdown risked stalling entirely amid supply constraints and a dwindling of consumer appetite, activity in the food and beverage sector fell by 7.5%, while construction slumped by 1.8%. Worse is yet to come. With tighter government restrictions and consumers reacting with caution above and beyond the official rules, the big fear is the October growth snapshot might be as good as it gets for several months to come. Hospitality firms are warning of a slew of cancelled Christmas parties and a fall in people eating out since news of the Omicron variant first broke, while tour operators and airlines report a dip in winter holiday bookings. Work from home orders will inevitably lead to a drop in spending in town and city centres, hitting consumer-facing businesses hardest. On the positive side, the latest figures show the economy is within a hair’s breadth of its pre-Covid position, at only 0.5% below February 2020 levels. The new restrictions announced so far remain relatively light-touch, while there are hopes that tougher measures may not be required, thanks to steady progress with the vaccine booster programme. However, pressure is clearly building on an economy that was already struggling for momentum before the new variant emerged, while there is heightened uncertainty over the next stage in a pandemic that is far from over. Faced with these risks, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said he had always acknowledged there would be “bumps on the road” to recovery but the government already had in place an “ongoing £400bn economic support package” to keep the country on track. That’s an odd way to describe a programme that has been largely dismantled over recent months, ostensibly because Sunak believed a return to economic normality was on the cards. The furlough scheme has gone, universal credit has been slashed and several tax breaks have been reversed. Business leaders are stepping up their warnings that failure to provide renewed support measures could squander the progress made in the economy since the easing of lockdown earlier this year; especially in the sectors most exposed to the Omicron wave, such as hospitality, travel and leisure. Despite soaring inflationary pressures exhibited this autumn, it would also be out of step for the Bank of England to raise interest rates next week. Speculation had been that Threadneedle Street would leap into action after bottling a rate rise in November. But with evidence of fading demand in the economy and the heightened uncertainty because of Omicron, waiting until early next year would seem wise. Pressure on household budgets is, however, only likely to intensify early next year. Energy bills are expected to be ratcheted higher come April, inflation is forecast to outstrip wage growth, council tax will go up and the government’s new social care levy will be introduced. Analysts are warning that Britain’s economy is likely to head into reverse this winter. The extent of the setback will depend on how long government restrictions remain in place, how businesses and households react to Omicron risks, and the willingness of the Treasury and the Bank to cushion the blow.If TV quiz fans think Jasamrit Rahala’s face looks familiar, they would be right. The 17-year-old from Slough has reached the knockout finals of Channel 4’s Countdown, having been a fan of the programme since primary school. But for Jasamrit, identified as a maths prodigy aged nine, Countdown is just the latest in a string of gameshow endeavours, having become the youngest finalist on Child Genius aged 10 and competed in Britain’s Brightest Family. Now studying double maths, physics and computer science A-levels at Eton College, after winning a prestigious king’s scholarship which covers his fees, Jasamrit has his eye on University Challenge and Mastermind. “I’ve always watched Countdown, since I was six or seven. And I noticed I would get the teatime teasers and decided as soon as I could I would apply,” he said. He applied on his 16th birthday – the age limit for the show – but the pandemic meant he did not appear until he was 17. He was among the series’ top scorers, earning a place in the finals. “I like computer science and maths, and I guess it’s pattern recognition,” said the schoolboy, whose next game will air on 17 December. Jasamrit was identified as a gifted pupil in year 3 and achieved a maximum 162 Mensa IQ score at 11, but his talent has occasionally proved challenging for his parents. When not at Eton he lives with his father Santokh, mother Sardeep, a part-time NHS healthcare assistant, and sister Tania, 12, in a two-up, two-down in Slough. His father said he was embarrassed to admit he didn’t spot his son’s potential early on. “I was working every hour to make ends meet, long hours, and travelling to and from work,” said Santokh, 55, now a work coach for the Department for Work and Pensions after being made redundant from a 20-year job as a buyer for a food and drink company during the pandemic. When he realised Jasamrit was very smart, “we just didn’t know what to do. There is no roadmap. Parents don’t know what to do when they have a clever child, and nor do schools.” With money tight, Santokh scoured charity shops and car boot sales “finding old books wherever I could find them,” to encourage his son’s talent. “Our family motto is: poor books, rich words,” he said. Jasamrit scored top marks in the 11-plus and passed entrance exams for five fee-paying private schools. But owing to the family’s finances he went to Herschel grammar school, within walking distance of home. At 13 he was accepted at Eton, and he now hopes to attend a top university studying computer science. He puts his success down to a good balance of “work, rest and play”. He plays the violin, rows, plays badminton and hockey, has volunteered at his local Sikh temple and tutors online. “When I applied to Countdown, the only thing going through my mind was not to get knocked out in the first round. I do these things just for the fun of it. If it goes wrong, it goes wrong, and if it doesn’t it’s a nice experience,” he said. It doesn’t always go right. He, his father and his cousin Parvon were knocked out in the first round of ITV’s Britain’s Brightest Family. “We don’t talk about that one,” he laughed. Now he is trying to muster a team for the BBC Two show Only Connect. “I don’t know who he gets it from. Must be his mother,” said Santokh, who said his children were encouraged to spend one hour a day on maths and another on English in addition to their school homework. “We are just super proud of him.”It’s the most wonderful time of the year: list season! You have probably already dived headlong into the Guardian’s best TV, music and films of 2021 (although you’ll have to log on next week to find out our top fives for each of those), and everyone from Pitchfork to the Telegraph has followed suit with their own rundowns. And in a couple of weeks time the Guide newsletter will be sharing your cultural highlights of the year. (Thanks to those of you who have already sent yours; for everyone else, do get involved – further info at the bottom of this newsletter.) I love list season, as it offers not only the chance to discover new things, but also to whinge about which of my favourite films, TV shows or albums have been outrageously overlooked by the biased mainstream media. Still, in these strange times, it does seem like some of these lists are missing something: namely all the good stuff that didn’t come out in 2021 but we devoured anyway. As with 2020, this year we had a preposterous amount of time on our hands, a dearth (at least in the first half of the year) of entertainment options beyond our front doors, and a host streaming services crammed full of decades’ worth of films, albums and TV shows at our fingertips. So, with that in mind, I thought I would share some of the best new old culture I encountered this year … TV While I enjoyed season two of Tim Robinson’s gonzo Netflix sketch show I Think You Should Leave, it slightly lacked some of the spontaneous “Where on Earth did they get that idea from?” magic of its first season – and it wasn’t the best Robinson-related show I binged through in 2021. No, that was Detroiters (available in full on Now), which Guardian writer Stuart Heritage has long raved about, but which I’d only watched in fits and starts until recently. Unlike ITYSL it’s an actual sitcom with plots and everything (it follows the travails of two inept but likable ad execs), but like ITSYL it possesses a sort of dream comedy logic, where the joke almost certainly goes in the opposite direction to the one you expect. And for something completely, drastically, different, can I recommend the 1972 travelogue Nairn Across Britain (available in full on iPlayer), in which late, great writer and critic Ian Nairn travels across the country by A-road, train and barge, delivering some absolutely savage put-downs of the state of British architecture in the process. They don’t make them like this any more. FILM I’ve droned on about my love of The Rewatchables podcast, which analyses older films that merit repeat viewings, enough on here already – but as well as being a great listen in its own right, it has prompted me to catch a few classics that I had inexplicably never seen before. So I burned through David Fincher’s shaggy dog thriller The Game (audacious, preposterous and strangely timely given our surfeit of “deadly game”-themed culture this year); Michael Mann’s tobacco industry drama The Insider (utterly riveting and strangely overlooked in conversations about the best films of the late 90s); and Oliver Stone’s American Football epic Any Given Sunday (steroidal, daft, occasionally brilliant, frequently unintentionally funny). For something a little more this century, check out Les Misérables (Netflix), a lit fuse of a French thriller set in the banlieues that was slightly overlooked when it was released last autumn. It’s La Haine but somehow even more stomach-knottingly tense. MUSIC Earlier this year, the Guardian music desk published a great piece about that strange period in the 90s where seemingly any song that appeared on a Levi’s advert –Spaceman, Flat Beat etc – became a hit. One of the tracks I vaguely remember from that era was A Nanny in Manhattan, a slice of catchy 60s British invasion-style pop from a Washington DC band called Lilys who I had assumed were one-hit wonders. Wrong! It turns out they actually have had a fascinating, varied career, first as a shogazey lo-fi indie band (check out the vaguely Teenage Fanclub-y Ginger), then later as oddball 60s revivalists. Their apex is 1999 album The 3 Way, which sounds like a lost chamber-pop classic with added experimental garage psych and almost math rock-like flourishes. There’s one song on it – the seven-minute epic Socs Hip – that has more ideas on it than most albums. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Monday Last Christmas was probably the worst my wife and I had spent together in all the years we have been together. We had long since accepted there was no chance of our daughter coming over from the US but the final straw was when the Covid guidelines were changed and we were unable even to see our son and his girlfriend for the day. So we glumly ate a small chicken and watched TV before sneaking off to bed round about 9pm. Now it’s looking as if we were mugs for sticking to the rules as those inside No 10 were ignoring them by holding a series of after-work parties. So far the government has not tried to deny that these gatherings took place – other than to say whatever happened was not a party – and its lines of defence have become increasingly ropey. First we have had Boris Johnson saying no one cared what happened a year ago and that an investigation wasn’t in the public interest. This was a line pursued by Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, on the Marr programme when he said the police didn’t bother to investigate crimes that had happened in the past – news for watchers of Silent Witness and Unforgotten. Though possibly Raab is under the impression the only crimes worth solving are those that have yet to be committed. Then on today’s media round, we had Kit Malthouse, the policing minister, saying he had been assured that even if a party had taken place – which he couldn’t confirm as he hadn’t been there – it definitely took place within the guidelines because the music had been very quiet and someone had opened the windows. Or something. Despite the fact that any gatherings were banned. No 10 just doesn’t seem to get how angry everyone is about this. Nor how many will think twice about breaking the rules if they are changed again before Xmas. Tuesday For reasons I don’t fully understand, my powers of concentration for reading have fallen off a cliff since the first lockdown. Before the pandemic I could easily manage one book a week, but now I can barely manage one every month or so. And the only books I seem to be able to read are nonfiction. The only fiction I have read since March 2020 has been a not very thrilling Scandi-noir thriller whose title I can’t even remember. It’s quite possible it was a great book and the problem was me. Just recently I have been forcing myself to make more time for reading, mostly about the coronavirus. Two books I have particularly enjoyed are Michael Lewis’s The Premonition – the story of the US scientists who tried to get the state to take the pandemic seriously – and Hilary Cooper and Simon Szreter’s After the Virus, an historical analysis, which begins with the introduction of the first poor laws in 1601 that enabled Britain to handle plagues, crop failures and recessions better than anywhere else in Europe for 200 years, moves on through the individualism of the 19th and early 20th century, the re-emergence of the welfare state post-second world war and the subsequent slide into neoliberalism, and looks at why the UK was initially the worst hit country in Europe. Their call for a return to a greater influence of the state is heartfelt. But I think it’s time to give myself a break from Covid so this Christmas, I am determined to branch out. I’m normally a sucker for political diaries, but I rate my chances of getting through the 1,000 pages-plus of the full Henry ‘“Chips” Channon diaries as nil. So it will have to be Jane Ridley’s biography of George V and the new, posthumously published, John le Carré. What better novel with which to dip my toes back into fiction? Wednesday Durham University has got itself into an entirely predictable mess after Prof Tim Luckhurst, the principal of one of its colleges, failed to tell students he had invited Rod Liddle to give the after-dinner speech before getting them to fork out £10 each for the privilege of attending the Christmas gala. Needless to say Liddle raced through his favourite topics of sex workers, trans rights and institutional racism and got exactly the response he had been hoping for. Some students walked out, some heckled and some refused to applaud, while Luckhurst yelled out, calling them pathetic and woke for being unwilling to tolerate views that did not agree with their own. Luckhurst has since been asked to apologise for his actions and it’s not yet clear if the university will take any further sanctions against him. My sympathies are with the students. After all, I’d have been a bit pissed off to discover Liddle was the guest speaker after forking out for the ticket. And it wasn’t as if the college was offering everyone the chance to get their money back when they found out. It’s not that I’m against students having their views challenged, it’s just that you would have hoped the college principal could have found someone with more academic credibility to do so. Liddle is at heart just a provocateur: all he wants is a reaction and he got just the one he wanted. Maybe future audiences could play it a little cannier. Either by sitting out the entire speech in silence or, better still, by carrying on talking while he is speaking. Liddle would hate that. Thursday The Downing Street parties-that-never-happened story has become increasingly surreal. Following the leak of footage from the Downing Street “Lying Room” – the £2.6m briefing room used by No 10 to practise lying to the country – and the subsequent resignation of Allegra Stratton for joking about breaking the Covid guidelines, Johnson has continued to insist the parties, reports of which are increasing faster than the Omicron variant, never took place. Despite this, Johnson has instructed Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, to investigate the parties for which he claims to have been given cast-iron assurances that they never took place. Let’s hope Case wasn’t the person who gave the prime minister those assurances. And if the cabinet secretary finds it hard to distinguish between people who were too pissed to know if they were there or not and those who merely imagined the whole thing, he could do worse than interview Dilyn the Dog, on the off-chance he was one of the canine superbrains identified by academics at Dalhousie University in Canada that can identify 215 words. Case could take Dilyn around various rooms in Downing Street to see if he reacts to “Who’s taken my Secret Santa?” and “Don’t chuck wine over the new wallpaper”. There again, Dilyn could be a Doggy Dunce, like my own Herbert Hound who can only identify 15 words. Friday The chaos in Westminster continues with Johnson now reported to have misled Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministers’ interests, about when he discovered Lord Brownlow – we all need a man like the deep-pocketed Brownlow in our lives – was paying for the expensive refurb of his Downing Street flat. There is surprise from some quarters that Johnson has been found out to be lying again, but lying is what sociopathic narcissists do. The real surprise would be for Johnson to be caught out telling the truth. He had intended this week to be “crime week”, in which he reset the dial after some bumpy headlines with some popular law and order announcements to please the rank and file of the Tory party. All he’s done is given the police more potential crimes to investigate. As for me, even though I’ve yet to buy half my presents, Christmas can’t come a moment too soon. This year, it’s all about having the family all together for the first time in two and a half years. Fingers crossed. Next Saturday, our daughter Anna and her husband are due to arrive from the US to be with us for nearly three weeks, and in the following week our son and his girlfriend will also be coming to stay, even though my wife has converted his bedroom into her pottery studio. So I could do without the government having to rapidly change the Covid regulations – is there anything dafter than being encouraged to work from home while also being urged to go out and get trashed with your friends at an office party? – just to distract from more wrongdoing. Is that too much to ask? I’m just keeping my head down and hoping to avoid the Omicron variant. So a happy and safe Xmas to everyone, thank you for the support so many of you gave me when I was severely depressed earlier in the year and see you on the other side in 2022. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply Digested week, digested: Crime weekPerhaps it has had its time, but a staple of cricket commentary used to be nominating which player you would like to bat for your life. For those of my vintage, it was always Steve Waugh. Chewing gum, trudging, plonking his bundle of baggy green rags on his head, Waugh would rake his flat stare over a pitch and an opposing team as if he would literally rather die than give them his wicket. He kept his average above 50 by sheer force of will. He came across as the ultimate obdurate bastard, the man who broke Jason Gillespie’s leg with his own face. If you were playing the Bat For Your Life sweepstakes, a player you would be terrified to draw would be Travis Head. A one-way ticket out of the Hunger Games for you. If Waugh epitomised obduracy, Head has epitomised looseness, constantly fiddling around off stump like a teenager who has just discovered the habit. He has hopped and chopped and prodded. Even his strike rotation to length balls uses an angled bat, risk where none is needed. He may not be the only player caught twice in a Test match off a top edge at deep third man, but they could probably fit in one carriage on a Ferris wheel. That has never meant, curiously, that Head has strings of total failures. He goes after the ball immediately, and so he starts to score. He has a good enough eye that he gets some shots away. So even when his looseness has undone him, he has almost always had some runs to his name before that happens. Only twice in his 32 innings – including his first – has he been out for nought. Only three other times has he been out in single figures. Most players make these sort of scores between a quarter and a third of the time. Head has passed 20, 30, 50, even on the days when he hasn’t gone big. The upshot of this is that he has been more influential at times than his numbers suggest. He has been half of a number of important partnerships for Australia in matches when things weren’t going well. He has broken up stagnating innings, assisted teammates in getting moving. He has left matches changed, without leaving scorecards crowded. He has played second fiddle where required, without ever becoming too sotto voce. In this first Ashes Test in Brisbane, he had the chance for a dramatic solo. This time, he held the stage for the entire performance. He played his innings exactly as you would expect. He didn’t put away a single shot for the duration. And it kept working. Every time his tally of balls faced got close to his runs scored, he kicked away again. It wasn’t that this was an entirely streaky innings. There were slices and edges, and they were interspersed with sound clouts down the ground for six. Airborne drives either side of grounded ones. It was more that Head chose the positive option, the aggressive option, every time it was a possibility, and was willing to take chances. In part, he was lucky. In part he made that luck. By the time his century arrived on the second evening, it came from 85 balls. Of Australians, only Adam Gilchrist, David Warner, Jack Gregory and Matthew Hayden have managed to do so in fewer. His was the third-fastest Ashes century of all time. Head resumed on 112 on the third morning with the bottom three in the Australia order for company. He carried on, thumping Ben Stokes for a straight six from the bowler’s second ball. He swept Jack Leach for yet another four. His audacious flick for six from the express pace of Mark Wood, walking across the line of the ball, was all the more entertaining given Head had just missed an identical attempt and nearly lost his stumps. By the time Wood finally did claim his timber, last man out for 154, Head had faced 148 deliveries. A normal Travis Head innings is something like 30 runs from 30-odd deliveries, assembled by not holding back until the final mistake arrives. This century was basically five Travis Head innings stitched together. He had played exactly as he wanted, and he had made it work. At the time, with 425 on the board and a lead of 278, that innings would have felt to his teammates like the climax at the end of their two-day crescendo. Yet by the end of the third day, with that lead whittled all the way down to a slender 58 and only two English wickets taken, they would have been wishing there had been a couple more partnerships, a couple of 30s or 40s from the players who didn’t provide them. That would have taken Australia past 500, on to a different plane of dominance. In short, Travis Head would have been greatly aided by someone playing the role of Travis Head. Instead, one Travis Head had to do.Florida wildlife officials will undertake a manatee feeding and rescue operation involving hand-feeding the mammals romaine lettuce, amid unprecedented mortality among the gentle aquatic creatures affectionately known as “sea cows”. Typically, manatees return to warm water winter feeding grounds, where they feast on plentiful seagrass. But algal blooms from polluted waters have devastated seagrass beds, and thereby wiped out the important food source for the manatees. Algal blooms and manatee deaths have been especially pronounced along Florida’s Atlantic coast, leading to record-breaking mortality. “Our agencies and Unified Command partners carefully considered all aspects of a short-term feeding trial,” said Shannon Estenoz, assistant secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks with the federal Department of Interior, in a release. “It is critical we help manatees in the short term with actions that are compatible with their long-term wellbeing and resilience.” Normally slow-moving and plump, manatees along Florida’s east coast have shown signs of starvation, and appeared emaciated with protruding ribs. Manatee deaths have overwhelmed local rescue groups and even the ecosystem. Hundreds of manatee carcasses have had to be towed to remote islands, where they have been left to rot, the Palm Beach Post reported. “They are starving, and I see it in person,” Paul Fafeita, president of the Clean Water Coalition of Indian River county, told local television station CBS12 in Palm Beach. “I’m out there all the time. I’m witnessing it. It’s heart wrenching.” As a result, Florida and federal government wildlife officials said they would begin an operation to hand-feed manatees romaine lettuce, among other efforts. A temporary field response station is also expected to be set up in the Indian River Lagoon, on the coast near Orlando, where many deaths have occurred. The Florida state legislature increased an annual stipend for manatee rescue to $8m. Initial 2021 manatee mortality data from the state’s conservation department showed more than 1,000 manatees have died. Manatees are an endangered species. The most recent aerial survey of Florida manatee populations found only about 5,700 in Florida, according to Save the Manatee. In the last five years, an average of 500 manatees have died. By comparison in 2001, just 325 manatees were found dead, with boats among their biggest killers.A determined reader can, it is said, power through Tolstoy’s mammoth tale of love and war in a week. But the audio version cannot be easily hurried, as narrators go at their own pace; that is, if you don’t cheat and crank up the speed. Clocking in at more than 60 hours in length, this rerecorded, unabridged version is not for the faint-hearted, but those able to put in the time will be rewarded. War and Peace opens in St Petersburg in 1805 where there is handwringing in upper-class drawing rooms over the advance of Bonaparte. The narrator Thandiwe Newton rises to the challenge of voicing the scores of aristocrats who gossip and meddle in each other’s lives while bemoaning the state of Europe. Among the main players are Pierre Bezukhov, the illegitimate son of a count who wants a slice of his father’s riches; Prince Andrei Bolkonsky, who goes off to fight in the war; and Natasha, the beautiful daughter of a nobleman, with whom both men are enamoured. The book has its challenges, some of which even Newton, with her impressive range of voices, cannot overcome. New characters arrive thick and fast, many of them related to one another, and it can be hard to keep on top of them without the help of a whiteboard and pen. The unhappily married Pierre’s excursions into freemasonry also test the patience. But the battles and bear hunts are exciting and there is the singular satisfaction of having got to the end and conquered this most intimidating classic. If the thought of reading Tolstoy makes you feel tired, this is surely the ideal way in. • War and Peace by Leo Tolstoy is available from Audible, 60hr 54min The best of the rest A Little Devil in America Hanif Abdurraqib, Penguin, 9hr 38min Illuminating essays on Black life and artistry by the critic and poet, narrated by JD Jackson, features illuminating essays on black life and artistry. Subjects include Josephine Baker, Aretha Franklin, Dave Chappelle and Michael Jackson. The Eye of the World Robert Jordan, Macmillan Audio, 30hr 2min The first in the Wheel of Time fantasy series, recorded by Rosamund Pike, who also stars in the TV adaptation.Bridget Riley gave abstract art the neurological impact of a mind-altering substance six decades ago when she started painting black-and-white spirals, waves and folds that confuse perception. A new exhibition to mark her 90th birthday earlier this year is called Pleasures of Sight, but the happiness she provokes in us is really in our brains. The delight of Riley’s art comes from the way she can make the mind see mountains and valleys, vertigo-inducing swoops and sudden movements that are not there. She is the only British painter to change the history of abstract art. In the 1950s, the most exciting art in the world came from New York. Jackson Pollock, whose work made a huge impression on Riley when she saw his famous show at London’s Whitechapel Gallery in 1958, made painting feel like a living “action” instead of a framed picture: he and the other American action painters created art on an embracing scale, one that you could fall into. Riley felt its power yet changed its nature. Since the start of the 60s she has painted on that same big, open, potentially limitless scale yet with a scientific realism. Instead of relying on woozy romantic feeling, she aims for quantifiable, physical results. Riley trained in a postwar Britain where “proper” art meant an accurate picture. She was a good student whose early portraits and life studies remain impressive. As a teenager she painted a copy of Jan van Eyck’s Portrait of a Man in a Red Turban in the National Gallery. She dived deep into the folds and shadows of the red headgear the man is wearing: like the 15th-century master, she was interested in the way paint can weave illusions of depth and solidity on a flat surface. Van Eyck was one of the first artists to paint convincing illusions of space. Perspective, the technique of doing this, is at the heart of Riley’s illusions. She, too, paints carefully calculated spatial fictions – but instead of convincing us we are looking at folded cloth or into a room, she makes us see bulbous projections and sublime chasms that break the veil between art and us, outer and inner experience. For all her science, she is a romantic at heart. Like her contemporaries who took LSD, she uses the brain’s chemistry to get at transcendental experiences. The mysticism in Riley’s modernism became increasingly apparent. In the later 1960s she moved away from the black-and-white “op art” she had become famous for, partly because she was disgusted to see her style copied in ads and department store windows. She began to paint equally rigorous but more subtle sweeps of alternating colour. 19th-century painter Georges Seurat is another of her influences: in 1960 she painted her own masterpiece of pixelated colour, a captivating Tuscan view called Pink Landscape. In her colour abstractions she creates magical, sizzling effects by setting greens, reds and purples side by side. How do Riley’s grand, intellectual developments over more than 60 years relate to the joys and vicissitudes of a life? Who knows. Without being reclusive, she has calmly rejected all the cliches of artistic fame, creating art that can seem utterly impersonal but always spiritually intense. The emotional highs and lows (mostly highs) are yours as you move through a room where her art hangs, feeling elated, liberated, and occasionally even seasick. She offers, not an introspective expressionist self-portrait, but a shared, universal music. An Ode to Joy. • Bridget Riley: Pleasures of Sight is at The Lightbox, Woking, 18 December to 10 April New perspectives: four works by Bridget Riley Movement in Squares, 1961 If there was ever an artist whose work you need to experience in its full glory in a physical space, it’s Riley. Yet Tthe eye-boggling psychedelic power of Movement in Squares is so infectious it even works on small scale in print or on screen. Your mind splits open as you gaze on this chessboard pattern that collapses into a diving chasm. Op – short for optical – was the glib name given to Riley’s shocks to perception. She became a star but this thinking persont, unwillingly sucked into pop culture, she lamented that: “It will take at least 20 years before anyone looks at my paintings seriously again.” It has been 60 years and Movement in Squares remains a masterpiece of modern art. Song of Orpheus IV, 1978 Your eyes get a slightly softer ride from these rivers and curls of green and pink. When Riley broke with her iconic black-and-white radicalism, she allowed new emotional dimensions into her painted cosmos. The unlikely colour combination here creates an almost folksy mood, a poignant delicacy, a mistiness. Then you follow the sinuous curves of those adjacent lines and enter a world that is just as perceptually odd as her earlier works. Ethereal and undulating, this is a piping, pastoral theme that could easily have been played to the animals by Orpheus in some Arcadian meadow. Ecclesia, 1985 It might seem that, since rejecting her early pop star fame, Riley has worked in isolation from her times. When she painted Ecclesia, she was a trustee of the National Gallery, and selected a show there of great colourists of the past, from Titian and Veronese, to Rubens and Poussin. Riley has recently reaffirmed her commitment to the old masters with a wall painting in the National Gallery’s lobby. Yet Ecclesia is nothing if not modern – and it seems rawly, brashly of its time, pulsing with the vulgar capitalist energy of 1980s Manhattan or London. You could play early electro-dance music against these vertical bars of merciless colour. Fête, 1989, top The artist who shook the swinging 60s is as sharp, new and relentless as ever as she enters another phase of pure abstraction. Riley’s life of looking at art and the world is in this cascading restless progress of coloured lozenges. Fête is a distillation of the nature of art itself: colour and movement flit through it as powerfully as they do in a huge oil painting of frolicking wine harvesters or a fresco of lovemaking gods. Riley’s deep knowledge of art, and deeper appetite for life, pulse within it.The Christmas Department Store by Maudie Powell-Tuck and Hoang Giang (Little Tiger, £11.99) Money is tight, and Benji’s family are a little sad – but when Benji visits the enchanted Christmas Department Store, he finds the perfect presents, full of laughter and delight. A warm, golden picture book about treasuring joyful feelings and the people closest to you. The Christmas Pine by Julia Donaldson and Victoria Sandøy (Alison Green, £12.99) A simple, sweetly festive story from picture-book legend Donaldson and Norwegian illustrator Sandøy, celebrating the pine tree sent from Oslo to London every year, and following its journey from seed to splendour. The Fire Fox by Alexandra Page and Stef Murphy (Two Hoots, £12.99) Mum and Freya are staying in a cosy little cabin – but Freya feels empty now that Dad is no longer with them. When she finds a white fox in the snow, however, she follows her new friend out into a world of magic … Inspired by the Finnish Sami legend of the “fox fires” which form the northern lights, this moving, glowing tale is bewitching to read. We All Celebrate! by Chitra Soundar and Jenny Bloomfield (Tiny Owl, £12.99) For five-plus, a stunning, colourful guide to celebrations around the globe, from Hogmanay and the lunar new year to the Day of the Dead, Hanukah and Christmas. Delectable details of food, sweets and costume are interwoven with thoughtful historical observations – and the dancers holding hands on the endpapers are particularly fabulous. Clarice Bean: Think Like an Elf by Lauren Child (HarperCollins, £14.99) The beloved heroine returns in an odyssey of yuletide misadventure to delight six-plus readers, during which the spirit of the season is repeatedly mislaid – and found again. A hilarious, warm, child’s-eye view of the runup to Christmas, with characteristically gorgeous collaged illustrations. Black and British: An Illustrated History by David Olusoga, illustrated by Jake Alexander and Melleny Taylor (Macmillan, £16.99) Olusoga’s celebrated title is now available in a beautiful and absorbing illustrated format that invites readers from seven and up to pore over its pages. Maps and portrait galleries effortlessly convey how Black and British history have been woven together since the Roman invasion. The Very Merry Murder Club, edited by Serena Patel and Robin Stevens, illustrated by Harry Woodgate (Farshore, £12.99) For eight-plus readers, a seasonal compendium of lighthearted murder mysteries from authors including Patrice Lawrence, Maisie Chan, Elle McNicoll, Sharna Jackson and Benjamin Dean, with Woodgate’s black-and-white illustrations throughout. Peanut Jones and the Illustrated City by Rob Biddulph (Macmillan, £12.99) Peanut Jones’s dad is missing, and everyone seems to have given up looking – but when Peanut finds a very special pencil, she’s drawn (literally) into a parallel world, where imagination is under threat. Can Peanut, her little sister, and her science-minded friend save Chroma’s creativity from being erased – and find her dad, too? Rob Biddulph’s first book for nine-plus is a vividly illustrated, immersive romp that will leave readers desperate for the next instalment. Fledgling by Lucy Hope (Nosy Crow, £7.99) In a bizarre house in the Bavarian mountains, a curious creature crash-lands in Cassie’s bedroom – a creature that seems to be a cherub. Cassie can’t expect much from her self-centred opera singer mother, or her father, who is obsessed with taxidermy, but will her best friend, Raphael, help keep the creature safe from the sinister forces hunting it? A quirky, adventurous fantasy debut with a wonderful setting and a numinous hint of David Almond’s Skellig. You’ll be the Death of Me by Karen McManus (Penguin, £7.99) For 14-plus, the teen thriller queen returns with a high-octane take on Ferris Bueller’s Day Off. Ivy, Cal and Mateo cut school together on a day none of them can face. But when they discover the body of Ivy’s rival for class president, they’re drawn into a desperate search for answers – and a drug theft with a long tail of terrifying consequences. A treat to gulp down in one sitting. Stay Another Day by Juno Dawson (Quercus, £7.99) In their Edinburgh family home, three siblings prepare for an idyllic traditional Christmas … or possibly not. Fern wants everything perfect for her new boyfriend, but Rowan just wants to go out on the pull, while the prospect of Christmas indulgence terrifies Willow. Hilarious, mordant, moving and rude, a yuletide delight from the author of Meat Market. Terciel and Elinor by Garth Nix (Hot Key, £16.99) After a long wait, Nix returns to the land of the Abhorsens in this superb prequel. Unconventional, gifted Elinor lives a secluded life – until the forces of the dead attack her quiet home, and tangle her fate with that of Terciel the Abhorsen-in-Waiting, skilled in Charter magic and in fighting back the dead. Exhilarating, fast-paced, fierce and funny, it introduces the parents of Nix’s later heroine Sabriel in a standalone that will please both newcomers and devoted fans. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Six by Nico was the busiest restaurant on Charlotte Street in London on a recent Saturday night, and the people at the front desk – you couldn’t really call them receptionists or even a maître d’, because the vibe here is much, much less structured than that – were fobbing off hopeful walk-ins by the dozen. Those who had already been disappointed stood outside in huddles, hungry and seemingly without a plan. Still, the fact that this street is hectic again after the past 18 months is a good news story. In the very nadir of last winter’s lockdown, Charlotte Street became a name I thought carefully about bringing up whenever I was discussing “the state of where we are” with food industry sorts. The truth was too brutal. Many of them hadn’t witnessed first-hand how this once-twinkly, charming thoroughfare, popular with Londoners as well as tourists, was now desolate, boarded-up, bin bag-laden and a sort of Spaghetti Junction for Fitzrovia’s foxes. In this light, the much-loved, now closed Elena’s L’Etoile didn’t feel so much like another era, but almost fictitious. This hospitality institution and shameless celeb haunt lived at number 30, in various guises, for almost 100 years, and the tiny yet mighty Elena Salvoni ran the floor with abundant old-school dignity. I’m not entirely sure anyone ate at Elena’s solely for the food, although signed photos of the likes of Gene Wilder and Ella Fitzgerald pointed towards the fact that they’d been made to feel special and valued. Earlier this year, however, as Charlotte Street sat punch-drunk, shutters down and tables up, it felt as if we’d never see those heady days again. So it was cheering, 10 months later, to find Six By Nico almost directly opposite the old Elena’s site not just open, but way oversubscribed. The less fortunate news, which I’d realise over the ensuing 70 minutes, was that I actually had a reservation. If this is the future of hospitality, I’m going to retrain as a plumber. Chef Nico Simeone’s “concept” – a themed set six-course 30-something-quid menu that changes every six weeks – has been a huge hit in several cities since it launched in Glasgow in 2017; there are now eight branches across Liverpool, Edinburgh, Belfast, Manchester, London and, most recently, Dublin. Those themed menus so far have featured the likes of “The Mad Hatter’s Tea Party”, “Guilty Pleasures”, “The Orient Express” and, on the week I visited, “Paris”, apparently (next week sees them launch the latest theme, “A Miracle on … ”). But apart from writing the word “Paris” on the menu, there seemed to have been no further thought put into delivering any sort of Parisian experience. Six By Nico is a hangar-sized, terrifically noisy bun fight in what feels a bit like a neglected All Bar One, with the occasional haphazard attempts at small-plates fine dining being thrust on your table without fanfare. On top of that, the area around the table we were placed at smelled distinctly unpleasant, the downstairs bathrooms reminded me of those in a 2am nightclub, as did the noise levels in the place as a whole. It’s easy to work out why diners are attracted here, because this is fine dining at Pizza Express prices for a generation raised on nonstop MasterChef and other television cookery shows. Why anyone would return a second time is less obvious. The smell and the shouting aside, the “Paris” menu ranged from quite decent to posh aeroplane food, and with small portions, so at least you could be done and get back out into the fresh air mercifully sharpish. First up, caramelised French onion with a comté foam, then a meaningful glimpse of beef tartare with cured egg yolk, leading on to a squirrel’s bellyful of chestnut velouté with celeriac. All three of these courses shoved together would not have covered a child’s plate. Hake with coco beans and saffron rouille was overcooked and the sauce gelatinous, while the breast of duck was minute, but at least prettily plated on a truffle and puy lentil fricassée with a parsley root puree. Pudding was baked savarin on some pear. Even so, every single table was full, and a queue of wannabe diners trailed out of the door, eager to throw money in Nico’s general direction. For me, mystified is not quite the word. My coat, when I put it back on, drunk on the prospect of freedom, had a wet arm where it had been trailing off the back of my chair. “Please tell me it’s water,” I said to Charles as we walked to the tube sad and hungry. “It could be wine,” he said helpfully, “but I’m not sure – it’s quite, er, smelly.” I didn’t ask any more questions. I had experienced the new, relaxed, groovy, rule-free, careless face of fine dining, and my main feeling is do it properly, or don’t bother. • Six by Nico 41 Charlotte Street, London W1, 020-7580 8143. Open all week, noon-9.45pm (last orders). Six-course tasting menu only £37 (matching wine menu £33), plus drinks and service. • Episode eight of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 14 December. Listen here or wherever you get your podcasts.Dune reminds us what a Hollywood blockbuster can be. Implicitly, the message of Denis Villeneuve’s fantasy epic, written again and again in the sand, is that big-budget spectaculars don’t have to be dumb or hyperactive, that it’s possible to allow the odd quiet passage. Adapted from Frank Herbert’s 60s opus, Dune is dense, moody and quite often sublime – the missing link between the multiplex and the arthouse. Encountering it was like stumbling across some fabulous lost tribe, or a breakaway branch of America’s founding fathers who laid out the template for a different and better new world. Timothée Chalamet plays Paul Atreides, your archetypal hero, unsure of his powers and questioning the merits of the mountainous task before him. His father, the Duke (Oscar Isaac), has been handed stewardship of the desert planet Arrakis, source of a magical substance called “spice” that extends life and fuels space travel – all the good stuff. But Arrakis, though sandy, is not entirely deserted. It is home to vast worms that can rise up with little warning, and an oppressed people – the Fremen – who see the spice harvesters as exploiters. The drama is played out with relish by an ensemble cast (Stellan Skarsgård, Josh Brolin, Rebecca Ferguson, Charlotte Rampling, Jason Momoa), and Villeneuve is confident enough to let the temperature slowly build before the big, operatic set-pieces eventually break cover. He constructs an entire world for us here, thick with myth and mystery, stripped of narrative signposts or even much in the way of handy exposition. He has handed us a movie to map out at our leisure and figure out on the run: apparently spitting on someone is a gesture of respect on Arrakis, while walking sideways like a crab is the safest way to proceed. After that we’re on our own, wandering in the desert, wonderfully immersed. It’s a film of discovery; an invitation to get lost.Mike Bartlett wrote Mrs Delgado during lockdown, after a period of struggling to put pen to paper, and it has the gleeful glow of someone returning to what they love. The story and characters tumble out fully formed. The jokes feel effortless, the passion instinctive. It’s a heartfelt rallying cry for the importance of community, performed in one of the micro-communities that Bartlett most cherishes: the theatre. Ellen Robertson – who appeared in Bartlett’s 2018 Christmas play, Snowflake – has had to step into this one-woman play at the last minute and performs sitting at a stool with script in hand. As Robertson reads the play aloud, occasionally drinking from a mug decorated with unicorns, a subtle sense of magic emerges. It’s as if we’re all kids again, gathered at the library to listen to a story. Robertson narrates as Helen, a young woman who becomes bizarrely fixated on her 80-something neighbour, Mrs Delgado, as lockdown takes its toll. It’s August 2020 but “Mrs D” (a nod to Woolf’s Dalloway?) is refusing to play by the rules. She’s inviting visitors inside, chatting to anyone who’ll listen and even hugging the Amazon delivery man. Mrs Delgado must be stopped. For her own good. You can almost hear Bartlett chuckling as he brings Mrs Delgado into being. With just a few careful observations and, in Robertson, a very funny and charismatic actor, Mrs Delgado bursts off the page. She sunbathes on a table. She stares up at the ceiling for a full four minutes. She wears red flowing dresses, bakes frozen-pea fruitcakes and dances in the street. Director Clare Lizzimore is careful not to overplay the script. As Helen’s eyes turn away from her closed world of Netflix, Tinder and Zoom, and turn towards the life that thrives just beyond her pulled-down blinds, Robertson brings an entire street to life. The conjuring of these characters never feels virtuosic. Instead, it feels effortless – a palpable demonstration of just how easy it is to create a community, given half a chance. • At the Old Fire Station, Oxford, until 21 December. Livestreamed on 11 and 14 December.You may not have noticed, owing to all the noise about the party-that-wasn’t, but on Wednesday the foreign secretary, Liz Truss – a potential successor to Boris Johnson should he ever, heaven forfend, lose the confidence of the Tory Party – warned us all about the future of the world. Democrats were losing ground, she said, in a speech at the Chatham House thinktank in London. Those who believed in freedom must stand up and be counted if they were to ensure “democracies don’t just survive, they thrive”. In this, she is right: democracy is under attack everywhere, with kleptocrats such as Vladimir Putin amassing ever more wealth, power and influence while western governments squabble over things such as inshore fishing rights. As such, her speech was an important warning, except for one startling omission: Britain is a primary enabler of the autocrats she is so worried about; we are butler to the world’s worst people. Our shell companies hide their money, our private schools educate their children, our lawyers defend their reputations, our financial markets fund their companies, and our banks launder their money. It’s absurd to talk about the threat that dictators pose to our democracy without acknowledging how without our assistance they wouldn’t be a threat at all. It’s like condemning a war without mentioning you supplied the weapons, or criticising a party that took place in your own house. She boasted of Britain’s place in Nato, of its development aid, of its “cyber-security partnerships”, yet all of the problems that these interventions are supposed to solve are worsened by the unregulated financial system centred on the City. The Russian kleptocrats whom Nato is opposing keep most of their wealth offshore, with houses in London their favourite assets and City lawyers their tireless defenders. The aid payments that go to help the crises in Nigeria, South Sudan or Libya are just sticking plasters over wounds worsened by entrenched corruption, again enabled through the UK. Hackers who defraud people of billions of pounds a year launder their money through our poorly regulated economy. Of course, Britain is not the only place that moves this money or serves these criminals, but this government is increasingly an outlier in its failure to acknowledge our role. This week, Joe Biden’s White House published a lengthy, thoughtful and impressive strategy on tackling corruption, which it has identified as a security priority, since kleptocracy empowers the nation’s enemies and weakens its friends. “Corrupt actors hide their money in the United States all the time. We can no longer provide them a shadow under which to operate,” wrote the treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, and the USAID administrator Samantha Power in an article announcing the strategy. “Combating corruption abroad, therefore, begins at home, and our first step must be to expose the owners of shell companies and other illicit funds.” In contrast to that, Truss failed to satisfactorily answer a question from the audience on the British role in laundering money after her speech at Chatham House, choosing instead to talk about how we shouldn’t talk about the empire. If she’d only hung around until after lunch, however, she would have realised quite how colossal her omission was, since on Wednesday Chatham House also hosted the launch of a major report by a group of academics that forensically dissected Britain’s role in enabling corruption, and came to conclusions that were all the more alarming for the sober language they were described in. “The UK has a kleptocracy problem,” they wrote. “The country’s international reputation has already been undermined by the inflow of suspect capital from the servicing of post-Soviet elites. Beyond this question of image, there are serious questions to consider of the integrity of the UK’s public institutions and the equitability of its laws.” This isn’t just one problem, though: it is a whole ecosystem, with each aspect sustaining the others in an interconnected and impenetrable web. Ferocious lawyers protect the kleptocrats’ dirty money from scrutiny by underfunded police officers by hiding it in crooked banks behind impenetrable shell companies from offshore territories so it can be spent in prestigious establishments on luxury goods to be stored in top-end property. Meanwhile, when amoral reputation managers threaten nosy journalists with ruinous lawsuits, leading institutions accept it and label their generous donors “philanthropists”, and light-fingered politicians do nothing to upend this whole profitable system. Truss boasted of Britain’s soft power – “from the Beatles to Sarah Gilbert to Tim Berners-Lee” – but our most significant influence on the world right now lies in our world-class enablers, who protect anyone willing to pay their fees from the consequences of their actions, and leave everyone else behind. Looked at globally, Britain’s primary role is not as a champion of democracy, helping ensure that everyone is equal before the law and has a say in how those laws are created, but a genuine threat to it. What is depressing is that not much more than five years ago the British government seemed to understand this. It convened a major anti-corruption summit in London, and wrote draft laws that would actually help drive dirty money out of the country. It is only under Boris Johnson that it has lost interest in the matter. If Truss actually wants to do something for democracy, she could pick up those bills – one reforming Companies House, the other exposing the real people behind the 100,000-odd UK properties owned by shell companies – and get them turned into law. There is plenty more that needs doing, from adequately funding our law enforcement agencies to overhauling our convoluted anti-money laundering regulators, but that would be a step towards driving kleptocratic cash out of the country, and turning Britain into a genuine champion of liberty. Oliver Bullough is the author of Moneyland: Why Thieves and Crooks Now Rule the World and How to Take It BackGood morning. Two Democratic senators have resisted Joe Biden’s vaccine-or-test mandate for large businesses despite having the support of scientists and public health experts. The US Senate on Wednesday evening voted to overturn the mandate as new cases and hospitalisations continue to rise in the country. The West Virginia senator Joe Manchin, who co-sponsored the bill, and Montana’s senator, Jon Tester, crossed Democratic party lines to vote yes and join 50 Republicans in their opposition to the public health policy, illustrating problems the US president faces even within a faction of his own party. The bill is seen as a largely symbolic gesture, since it would also need to pass the Democratic-led House and would probably be vetoed by Biden. Why did they co-sign the bill? Manchin, who is vaccinated and boosted, said the rule represents federal overreach. “It is not the place of the federal government to tell private business owners how to protect their employees from Covid-19,” he said. Court rules Trump cannot block release of documents to Capitol attack panel Donald Trump, the former US president, suffered a defeat on Thursday when a federal appeals court ruled against his effort to block the release of documents related to the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Trump is expected to appeal to the supreme court. A select committee in the House of Representatives is investigating the events on and surrounding 6 January, when a pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol in an attempt to disrupt the certification of Joe Biden’s election win. Amid scenes of violence that shocked the US and the world, five people eventually died and scores were injured. Trump and a clique of his close advisers have repeatedly engaged in legal action over the committee’s investigations, including refusing to cooperate with it. What did the court decide? In a 3-0 decision, the US court of appeals for the District of Columbia said there was a “unique legislative need” for documents that the committee has requested. What did the judge say? In a 68-page ruling, Judge Patricia Ann Millett wrote: “On the record before us, former President Trump has provided no basis for this court to override President Biden’s judgment.” Jussie Smollett found guilty of faking hate crime against himself A jury has found the Empire actor Jussie Smollett guilty of faking a hate crime against himself to raise his celebrity profile. The Chicago jury, which deliberated for more than nine hours, found Smollett guilty of five charges of disorderly conduct. He was acquitted on a sixth count, of lying to a detective in mid-February, weeks after Smollett said he was attacked. The charges against Smollett, who is Black and gay, had become a touchstone in the US’s culture wars at the intersection of culture, racism, politics and celebrity. Many fellow stars initially rushed to support Smollett when he first made the accusations in January 2019. What did Smollett say happened to him? Smollett told police he had been assaulted on a dark street by two masked men who yelled racist and homophobic slurs. He later denied any wrongdoing. What actually happened? Two brothers testified that Smollett had recruited them to fake an attack on him and paid them $3,500. Prosecutors described the evidence against Smollett as “overwhelming”. In other news … A cargo truck jammed with more than 100 people thought to be migrants from Central America has rolled over and crashed into a pedestrian bridge in southern Mexico, killing at least 53 people and injuring dozens more. Julian Assange can be extradited to the US, the high court has ruled as it overturned a judgment earlier this year. The decision deals a major blow to the WikiLeaks co-founder’s efforts to prevent his extradition to the US to face espionage charges, although options to appeal remain open to his legal team. A Manhattan hotel has reopened as a homeless shelter despite protest from Billionaires Row residents. The residents spent more than $300,000 in lawsuits claiming “crime and loitering” by the occupants would lead to “irreparable injuries”. Joe Biden has phoned the leaders of Ukraine and nine eastern European Nato states promising support if Russia attacks Ukraine. He also reassured the leaders that nothing would be agreed with Russia about the region behind the backs of its countries. Ghislaine Maxwell’s New York sex-trafficking trial was unexpectedly adjourned early Thursday because an attorney needed medical care. The mid-morning adjournment meant that prosecutors were not able to rest their case against Maxwell yesterday. Stat of the day: unemployment claims dropped to 184,000, the lowest level in 52 years The number of Americans applying for unemployment benefits plunged last week to the lowest level in 52 years, more evidence that the US job market is recovering from last year’s coronavirus recession. Unemployment claims dropped by 43,000 to 184,000 last week, the lowest since September 1969, the labor department said on Thursday. The four-week moving average fell below 219,000, the lowest since the pandemic hit the US in March 2020. Don’t miss this: when Amazon expands, these communities pay the price Last year, with little warning, a new Amazon delivery station brought the rumble of semi-trailer trucks and delivery vans to Chicago’s Gage Park neighbourhood. The warehouse is located in a residential area within 1,500 feet of five schools. The neighbourhood is one of hundreds across the US where Amazon’s dramatic expansion has set in motion huge commercial operations. A joint investigation with Consumer Reports has found people of color and low-income residents are disproportionately affected. … or this: South Korea cuts human interaction in push to build ‘untact’ society Introduced in 2020, “Untact” is a South Korean government policy that aims to spur economic growth by removing layers of human interaction from society. It gathered pace during the pandemic and is expanding rapidly across sectors from healthcare, to business and entertainment. The push to create contactless services is designed to increase productivity and cut bureaucracy but has also fuelled concerns over the potential social consequences. Climate check: frosts, heatwaves and wildfires hit the wine industry hard Grapes are among the most sensitive crops to climate changes. For some producers, warming temperatures have been advantageous, at least in the short term. Changing rain patterns, earlier springs and droughts are starting to push wine production towards the poles. However, for many wine growers the climate crisis is making life much harder. As the crisis intensifies, growers around the world are scrambling to find solutions. Last Thing: otters attack British man in Singapore park, biting him 26 times in 10 seconds A man attacked by a pack of otters in a Singapore park has said he thought he was going to die during the ordeal. Graham George Spencer, a British citizen living in Singapore, said he had been chased, pinned down and bitten “26 times in 10 seconds” by a family of otters while out for an early morning walk in the botanic gardens. He said they had lunged at him, biting his ankles, legs and buttocks and causing him to fall over. “I actually thought I was going to die – they were going to kill me,” he said.Kirill Karabits has been chief conductor of the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra since 2008 but, as far as London concert-goers are concerned, he remains something of an unknown quantity. While he has regularly brought the Bournemouth orchestra to the Proms, he has otherwise made disappointingly few guest appearances with the capital’s orchestras. But with Simon Rattle isolating in Berlin after testing positive for Covid-19, Karabits stepped in for the series of concerts with the London Symphony Orchestra that Rattle was due to conduct this month, leaving the scheduled programmes unchanged, including this pairing of works by Hungarian expatriates, Bartók’s Concerto for Orchestra and the violin concerto by Miklós Rózsa. Rózsa is best remembered now for his film scores – nearly 100 of them, including the music for Ivanhoe, Ben-Hur and El Cid – but he made a point of spending three months of every year writing for the concert hall, and composed his violin concerto in 1953 for Jascha Heifetz. It’s a hefty, half-hour work, vividly scored, with immense technical challenges for the soloist – never profound music, but always dazzlingly effective, and a perfect showcase for Heifetz’s virtuosity. The themes have a distinctly Hungarian flavour: the opening echoes that of Bartók’s second violin concerto, and passages in the finale recall Zoltán Kodály’s orchestral music. The soloist was the LSO’s leader, Roman Simović, who apparently had been introduced to the work by Rattle. Simović had obviously taken to the piece – his performance had all the gutsy intensity and soaring lyricism that anyone could possibly want. If it was hard to imagine a better performance of Rózsa’s concerto, then Karabits’ account of Bartók’s all-too-familiar Concerto for Orchestra was pretty exceptional as well. There was real drama and tension in the opening movement, edgy playfulness in the duetting of the second, moody bleakness in the central elegy, and a finale that steadily ratcheted up the excitement. The orchestral playing was consistently brilliant; Karabits should be a regular visitor to the LSO from now on.“I remember thinking: if we make it out alive, how and where are we going to start all over again?” said Vanessa Nieuwenhuizen, who dragged her children to safety through rapidly rising flood waters in Samoa. Others in the Guardian’s interviews with people with personal experience of the climate emergency also talked vividly of the bewilderment and grief caused by wildfires, flooding and drought, of livelihoods lost and lives turned upside down. “Every tree, every bush, every flower was burned and the whole ecosystem was wiped out,” recalled Antonis Vakos, a beekeeper from the island of Evia in Greece. For some the impact of extreme weather was sudden and catastrophic. For others it meant slow environmental degradation: entire ways of life gradually disappearing amid climate volatility, rising seas, and melting snow and ice. As Daharu Isah, a Nigerian farmer, expressed it: “The weather keeps playing tricks on me.” In a year in which the real, human and ecological impact of global heating has been brought home to ever more of us – and when the choices facing a world teetering on the edge of irreparable climate disaster were starkly framed at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow – it seemed timely and right that we put the environment at the heart of the 2021 Guardian and Observer charity appeal. The thread running through our appeal is climate injustice. The stark truth is that the world’s developing countries have seen the vast majority of the death and destruction caused by climate-induced disasters, and yet they are responsible for a tiny fraction of global emissions. The richest countries pollute most but it is in the poorest where climate change is most harshly felt, through extreme poverty, food and water insecurity and the displacement of millions of people from their homes. Tackling such monumental injustice is an existential issue for the entire world, and a pressing moral obligation for the wealthiest countries. Set beside the vast and bold systemic and behavioural changes we urgently require, a charity appeal might seem relatively insignificant. As ever, however, we see the appeal as a statement of intent, a sign of our commitment to a fairer society; a show of solidarity with the victims of climate injustice; and an ovation for those who fight that injustice. This year we are supporting four fantastic charities, which in their different ways show how we can start to make a difference: Practical Action delivers locally run and sustainable plans to help communities adapt to climate change, from flood early warning systems to the introduction of climate-smart regenerative agricultural practices. The Environmental Justice Foundation puts human rights at the centre of its work securing protection for climate refugees – people displaced from their homes by extreme weather – and highlighting injustices such as illegal fishing and deforestation. The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew is best known for its gardens in west London. Your donations will help fund its work protecting biodiversity and restoring denuded land on the island of Madagascar, which the World Food Programme reported is suffering from a famine linked to climate change. Global Greengrants Fund UK will work with international partners such as CLIMA Fund to regrant its share of your donations to grassroots projects at the sharp end of climate change in the global south. Since 2015, Guardian and Observer readers have raised just under £10m through our annual appeals. We’ve supported refugees, funded youth homelessness projects, and helped charities fighting Windrush immigration injustices. Last year we raised an incredible £1.4m for charities working with disadvantaged young people in the UK. In the coming weeks our journalism will highlight the inspiring work of our 2021 charity partners. We hope we can in turn inspire you to give generously. Donations can be made online by credit card, debit card or PayPal, or by phone on 0151 284 1126. We are unable to accept cheques.James Hunt v Niki Lauda: Japan 1976 A season characterised by controversy, off-track politics and the appalling Nürburgring crash that nearly killed Niki Lauda would end in bizarre circumstances. Having bravely returned, heavily bandaged, to racing six weeks after his accident, Lauda of Ferrari led the drivers’ championship by three points from James Hunt before the final race, at Fuji Speedway. Torrential rain made the circuit particularly treacherous and Lauda retired after two laps, reportedly saying: “My life is worth more than a title.” Hunt finished third in his McLaren to become champion by one point. Alain Prost v Nigel Mansell v Nelson Piquet: Australia 1986 The era of Ayrton Senna, Alain Prost and Nigel Mansell was one of Formula One’s most memorable. It was not the great Senna but another Brazilian, Nelson Piquet, in contention in 1986 before the final grand prix in Adelaide, along with his Williams-Honda teammate Mansell and Prost of McLaren. Mansell needed to finish third to ensure overall victory but after starting on pole a spectacular rear tyre blowout ended his race, with Murray Walker in disbelief alongside Hunt on commentary. Prost took the title by two points. Ayrton Senna v Alain Prost: Japan 1990 A 1989 crash at Suzuka between the Brazilian and the Frenchman, teammates at McLaren, ultimately led to Prost taking the title after Senna’s eventual disqualification. Tension was at an all-time high before the penultimate race the following season, with Senna on pole but on the right-hand, dirty side of the track. Prost, having moved teams to Ferrari, edged ahead into the first corner. Senna kept his foot down and the predictable collision allowed him to win his second drivers’ title by seven points. Jacques Villeneuve v Michael Schumacher: European GP 1997 Michael Schumacher for Ferrari led Jacques Villeneuve in the Williams by a point before the final grand prix in Jerez. Ferrari had been waiting 18 years for a drivers’ title, since Jody Scheckter’s success in 1979. When Villeneuve attempted to pass Schumacher on the inside the German turned in on his rival, apparently aiming to take both cars out and settle the drivers’ championship on the spot. Schumacher succeeded only in ending his own race, with Villeneuve steering his damaged car home in third to take the title. Schumacher, who three years earlier had crashed into Damon Hill in Australia and thereby won the title for Benetton, was subsequently disqualified from the championship and faced widespread condemnation. Lewis Hamilton v Felipe Massa: Brazil 2008 Hamilton’s first title arrived through one of the most dramatic denouements in Formula One. Then 23, the Briton approached the Interlagos season finale knowing fifth in his McLaren would be enough for the drivers’ crown, even if Felipe Massa, on pole, triumphed in his home race for Ferrari. Hamilton seemed on course until the late arrival of rain, at which point all the leaders bar Timo Glock changed tyres. A slip by Hamilton enabled Sebastian Vettel to move him down to sixth and Massa delivered victory, sparking celebrations among team members, friends and family, who believed he had taken the title with the chequered flag. But the rain grew heavier and Glock began losing pace on his dry tyres, enabling Hamilton to pass the Toyota in the closing corners and sensationally clinch the title by a point. Sebastian Vettel v Lewis Hamilton v Fernando Alonso v Mark Webber: Abu Dhabi 2010 Two years later Vettel set a new mark for youngest champion by five months, with Hamilton, Fernando Alonso and Mark Webber remarkably also having a shot at the title going into the final race at Yas Marina. There had been eight changes of leader in the drivers’ championship that season – but the final day would be the first time Vettel, then aged 23 and four months, topped the standings. A flawless drive saw him lead from pole to flag, sparking a run of four straight drivers’ titles for Red Bull.I’ve been trying to work out why, having never been a suit wearer, they are suddenly all I want to wear. Over the years, I have dressed for the office in trousers and shirts, or dresses and blazers, or skirts and sweaters – pretty much any combination of clothes. Except that I’ve never worn a matching jacket and trousers, or matching jacket and skirt. I would no more have worn a suit to the office than I would have put on a hard hat, or chef’s whites, or scrubs. A suit felt like a school uniform: if you have to wear it, you wear it, but if it’s not mandated, it’s not a getup you adopt for fun. That would be odd. My mum bought me a skirt suit – plum colour, nubbly wool, from Hobbs – for my university interviews. I still remember how I felt wearing it, waiting nervously in stuffy corridors, conscientiously play-acting calm and competent adulthood. Until 2021, I had never bought a suit. Going back to the office this year has felt a little bit like conscientiously play-acting competent adulthood again. After I’d spent months quietly pouring words into a laptop at home, the theatre of office life, with its swipecards, strip lights, printer noises and hydraulic chairs that wheeze up and down, feels like a lo-fi, slow-motion fairground. In the form of actual human beings, colleagues expect more interaction and constructive feedback than the dog, who is thrilled with a pat on the head and the odd snack. The shenanigans of getting a canteen coffee is cacophonous compared with the slippered shuffle to the kettle. A suit is the ultimate going-to-work cosplay, and that feels like just what I need, so I’ve started wearing a trouser suit. Strictly, it’s not a suit, just a pair of flecked wool tailored trousers from Jigsaw that I realised were almost the exact same shade of grey as an unstructured Cos blazer in my wardrobe. Putting the two together was a baby-steps approach to suit wearing, like letting the air out of swimming armbands little by little. Suits are back in vogue, just when you might think they’d be falling out of favour – which makes no sense, except that it is exactly how fashion works. Marks &amp; Spencer has announced it is axing men’s suits from half of its larger stores, in response to the casualisation of our wardrobes. Meanwhile, I am seeing more suits at fashion shows – on both men and women, on the catwalk, and on the front row – than ever before. There were trouser suits all over the London catwalks; Paris was packed with peppy miniskirt suits. The very fact of the suit becoming optional, of no longer being rigidly synonymous with a certain kind of office discipline, is giving it a new lease of life. So, the big news is that I’ve discovered a suit is a brilliant formula for smart daywear. Who knew? Ah yes, good point – probably the tens of millions of people who have been wearing suits to work for decades. But not me. I don’t tend to wear my suit-that-isn’t-a-suit with a traditional shirt, because I quickly feel crumpled, but I’m a scruff. The suit is brilliant with buttoned-up polo shirts, with a ribbed cardigan tucked in, or – now that it’s cooler – with a chunky funnel-neck knit. My next stop is a skirt suit. I have in mind a skirt that’s not too short, with an oversized jacket, probably double-breasted. I’m thinking tights, and probably loafers. I don’t think I’ve ever lusted over a more conventional look in my life. And I don’t think I’ve ever felt more of a maverick.Each year, McDonald’s buys as much as 1.9bn lb of beef that it packs into patties for millions of Happy Meals, Quarter Pounders, Big Macs, Triple Cheeseburgers and other popular beefy sandwiches served across the globe. The staggering volume of meat requires the company and its suppliers to slaughter north of 7 million cattle, according to some estimations, and that comes at a steep cost to the environment: the more than 53m metric tons of greenhouse gas McDonald’s produced in 2019 exceeds several European nations’ emissions. In recent years, the company announced big sustainability initiatives but climate experts who reviewed McDonald’s plans and data say the fast-food company is largely dodging the one bold step it must take to slash emissions: dramatically reducing the amount of beef it serves. “The naked truth is McDonald’s is in a business that is fundamentally at odds with the Earth’s integrity,” said Gidon Eshel, an environmental and urban studies research professor at Bard College. “No fig leaf, however persuasive or covering it is, can change that fact.” McDonald’s announced its most recent plan in October amid mounting pressure on companies to act. Investment funds managing more than $29tn in assets in late September called on the world’s 1,600 largest polluters to cut emissions in line with climate science. And a recent study found the world’s food system accounts for about one-third of greenhouse gas emissions, with the beef industry comprising as much as 25% of that figure. Beef is particularly problematic because cows release high levels of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, in their burps and manure. The amount of feed, water and land that cows require to produce a pound of meat is much higher than other animals, and that inflates their carbon footprint. Raising cows exacts a “multidimensional burden” on the Earth, Eshel said, because the industry also pollutes, consumes water and spurs deforestation. McDonald’s announcements suggest it’s already well on its way to reducing emissions. Its 2018 sustainability plan pledged by 2030 to reduce total emissions from its restaurants and offices by 36% and to reduce “emissions intensity” across its supply chain by 31% compared with 2015 levels. In October the company announced a commitment to “net zero” emissions by 2050 and included an optimistic progress report on the 2018 emissions reductions goals. But climate scientists have called into question the math behind McDonald’s 2018 plans, and a closer look at its 2021 progress report finds that little headway has been made. The new “net zero” plan has also drawn criticism from environmental groups over its lack of specifics and long timeline. More important are the plans’ absence of menu changes needed to significantly reduce beef production and emissions, said Jennifer Molidor, a senior food campaigner with the Center for Biological Diversity. “When it comes to the most meaningful solution for the climate crisis – serving far less beef and shifting toward low-carbon options right now – we don’t see the action on menus that we need from this megacorporation,” she said. “Not moving boldly on their menus suggests motivations might not be to mitigate climate change but to manage investors.” In a statement, a McDonald’s spokesperson didn’t address specific questions about emissions or its plans, but said the company has been “pursuing ambitious actions to help address climate change in areas where we have the biggest opportunities for impact”, including reducing packaging waste and improving livestock management. It labeled criticisms of its plans “opinion-based”. McMath Molidor said you have to be a “climate nerd” to understand the story that McDonald’s complex numbers and insider terminology really tells, and that alone is a red flag. “One of the main signs that something is ‘greenwashing’ is that it’s not clear or transparent,” she added. McDonald’s October press release boasts an “8.5% reduction in the absolute emissions of our restaurants and offices from the 2015 baseline”. But restaurants and offices account for a very small portion of McDonald’s emissions, which means the 8.5% slice is much smaller than marketing makes it appear. The drop mostly comes from McDonald’s switching to more energy efficient lightbulbs at its nearly 40,000 restaurants, said Dexter Galvin, global director of corporations and supply chains for CDP. The environmental transparency non-profit works with McDonald’s and other big corporations to implement and assess progress on companies’ climate plans. Galvin called it a good first step but said it’s not “a material reduction”. That will need to come from changes to the company’s beef operation, he added, and the press release highlights McDonald’s progress on that front: “A 5.9% decrease in supply chain emissions intensity from the 2015 baseline.” However, emissions are still increasing, just slightly slower than they once were. “Emissions intensity” describes the amount of emissions per unit of product. If the company grows, as McDonald’s has, then its emissions can also increase. Emissions from the beef production and supply chain for the company jumped by about 30% from 2017 to 2019, according to data disclosed to CDP. Galvin said McDonald’s is “building the systems and processes” it needs to reduce the greenhouse gas emitted by its beef operation and supply chains, but added, “they need to really start showing significant reductions, and I think there will be a point where they need to diversify what’s being offered on their menus”. McDonald’s has not released its full net zero plan and would not say what specific measures will be in it, but such plans have been criticized because they can allow polluters to continue emitting high levels of greenhouse gases over the next decades. To offset emissions that companies continue to produce, “net zero” programs often rely on carbon offset schemes – which have been the subject of multiple investigations pointing to flawed carbon calculations and uncertain impacts – as well as carbon capture technology, which is expensive and not yet operating at scale. Though McDonald’s plans and metrics are complex and controversial, they hold high marketing value because they give the appearance to the layperson of real progress, Molidor said. “McDonald’s is taking advantage of people who don’t understand this kind of math,” she added. ‘Companies could make it cool to eat a smaller burger’ Last year, Burger King rolled out beef made from cows that it says burp and fart less due to the addition of lemongrass to their diets, while researchers in Germany developed a “potty training” strategy for cows that they say will reduce greenhouse gas emissions. While some argue that consumption reduction is the only meaningful approach, the beef industry’s contribution to the climate crisis demands “a whole food system approach”, said Mario Herrero, a Cornell University sustainable food systems professor. That includes imaginative solutions to improving animal care, reducing waste, fine-tuning management practices and more, but he said that McDonald’s low prices and accessibility drive its popularity and emissions. One important aspect is for the public to understand better the health, environmental and economic toll of beef production and for beef to be consumed and priced accordingly, he said. “If McDonald’s or any producer is serious about tackling the issue, it will provide a message of moderating consumption and include the true costs of beef,” Herrero said. Governments could tax beef, impose regulations or slash massive industry subsidies that maintain low prices. A 2015 analysis found the cost of a US Big Mac would jump from $5 to $13 if $38bn in meat subsidies were eliminated. However, Donald Trump and the right have already made beef consumption a culture war flashpoint, and any such moves would be “a touchy political issue”, Herrero acknowledged. Absent the political will, it’s up to corporations to lead, and McDonald’s has been years behind competitors like White Castle, Burger King and more in fully introducing plant-based burger options. McDonald’s only began to test its McPlant in a small number of European countries and five American stores this year, though it tested a plant-based burger in Canada in 2019 before scrapping the trial. Galvin said McDonald’s spends $40bn on procurements annually, and it must use that as leverage to quickly persuade its suppliers to use more sustainable practices. “They need to use that influence in their supply chain to massively reduce emissions and they are quickly running out of time,” he said. McDonald’s said in a statement that it’s a small part of the world’s food system and added “beef and animal protein consumption are a part of people’s lives and livelihoods all over the world and will continue to be for decades to come”. Though McDonald’s has said it offers what consumers want, Molidor said the company doesn’t meet demand – it drives it. In choosing to wield its $650m annual marketing budget largely to sell low cost beef products on its menus, it directly increases consumption, she said. “People don’t eat what’s not on the menu,” Molidor added. “Companies could make it cool to eat a smaller burger, a salad without chicken, more wraps, they could redefine what American fast food looks like. Instead, they’re making a triple cheeseburger.” While McDonald’s plays an outsize role in “perpetuating the culture of beef in the US”, said Eshel, consumers ultimately have to weigh the consequences before their next Big Mac. “The culture of beef is not consistent with Earth’s wellbeing, and we have to choose: do you eat beef and let Earth incinerate, or do you forgo beef and give Earth a fighting chance?” • This article was amended on 16 December 2021 to clarify information about McDonald’s net zero plan. Also, the emissions data disclosed to CDP covered the period from 2017-19, not 2017-20, and amounted to 30%, not 40%; and McDonald’s emissions were 53 million tonnes in 2019, not 2020.Climate justice is the theme of the Guardian and Observer’s 2021 charity appeal. We are supporting four charities that fight to protect the rights and livelihoods of communities hit by extreme weather events caused by the climate emergency. Practical Action Big change starts small is Practical Action’s approach to tackling the impact of the climate emergency and environmental degradation. As its name suggests, this UK-based charity specialises in hands-on, pragmatic ways of helping communities adapt to the challenge of extreme weather. It works with people in Africa, Asia, and Latin America to develop ingenious, lasting and locally owned solutions for those whose lives and livelihoods have been devastated by the climate crisis, helping to increase resilience through climate-smart, regenerative agriculture, waste management and access to clean energy. These solutions include introducing technology and mobilising communities to help local volunteers provide early warning of imminent flooding; providing irrigation and tree-planting to repair damage to forest and pastureland, and helping farmers adapt to the changing climate by supplying climate-resilient seeds and developing new practices. Practical Action was established in 1966, after an article was published in the Observer by the radical green economist EF Schumacher (of Small Is Beautiful fame). He argued that economic development should be based around the holistic needs, skills and resources of local communities. “Our work remains grounded in the realities of people living in poverty, who face even more challenges from the devastating impacts of climate change, even though they have been the lowest contributors to the problem. We support communities so that they can thrive, rather than just survive. And we work with governments and businesses to ensure these changes are sustained and scaled,” said Sarah Roberts, chief executive of Practical Action. Environmental Justice Foundation At the core of Environmental Justice Foundation’s mission is the belief that the climate crisis is a human rights concern, and that protecting the natural world is not just a question of “quality of life” but, for too many people, a matter of life and death. The UK-based charity has pioneered campaigning for climate refugees, giving voice to some of the planet’s most vulnerable people, and working to secure legal protection for communities for whom the climate crisis has destroyed their homes and livelihoods. Its investigative films and reports have highlighted a range of climate injustices and prompted local policy changes in areas from defending marine environments and tackling illegal fishing, to uncovering the ruinous impact of rising global demand for soy, palm oil and beef. “Whether working with local peoples to raise the alarm over destructive wildfires and illegal logging in Brazil; empowering coastal communities to rid their waters of illegal fishing in Liberia; or telling the stories of those who have lost their homes to the climate crisis in Bangladesh, our goal is the same: we take local fights for environmental justice and make them global; reaching the centre of governments and business, to drive action for people and planet,” said Steve Trent, its chief executive. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew The Indian Ocean island of Madagascar is one of the world’s biodiversity hotspots, famed for its natural wonders and yet facing acute challenges. Its unique plants, animals and fungi, and the 28 million people who live there, are increasingly threatened by drought and wildfires, famine and deforestation, driven by the climate crisis. Madagascar’s plight was highlighted at the recent Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow, which heard how climate-induced famine in the south of the island had forced people to move west and north, putting natural resources there under strain. The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (RBG Kew), a UK-based science and conservation charity known for its famous gardens in south-west London, is helping tackle this. It has had a large research presence on the island for nearly 40 years, and is at the forefront of initiatives there and globally to catalogue, understand and protect biodiversity. With many Malagasy people dependent on natural resources such as rosewood, yams, rice and vanilla for their livelihoods, the Kew Madagascar Conservation Centre has been working with local communities to develop resilient agricultural systems, restore denuded land, and protect the island’s abundant biodiversity. “Using our unique expertise in halting biodiversity loss and protecting precious habitats in Madagascar, we will use funding from the Guardian and Observer appeal to support and enhance the benefits of biodiversity to rural people, through projects planned and delivered in partnership with local communities,” said Paul Wilkin, head of ecosystem stewardship at RBG Kew. “We believe these projects have the potential to transform lives whilst protecting the country’s precious diversity.” Global Greengrants Fund UK The approach successfully championed by Global Greengrants Fund UK is to help people and communities at the sharp end of the climate crisis to find their own solutions to the challenges of extreme weather and environmental degradation. Using its share of donations to this year’s Guardian and Observer appeal, Global Greengrants Fund UK will work in collaboration with the US-based non-profit CLIMA Fund to identify and award financial micro-grants to grassroots climate projects across Africa, Asia and South America. These will include projects that develop community-led resilience to climate impacts, protect the human rights of indigenous groups, address climate injustice and promote environmental initiatives, including water capture, tree-planting and the sustainable methods of agriculture. Global Greengrants Fund UK was a partner in the Guardian and Observer 2019 charitable appeal, when it regranted its £250,000 share of donations to support local rainforest protection groups in the Amazon basin. “Answers to the climate crisis exist. They are led by those who are most impacted by but least responsible for climate change: Indigenous peoples, women, youth, and rural communities. Together with our partners in the CLIMA Fund and our donors we are supporting these forces for change to protect our shared planet and call for climate justice,” said Eva Rehse, the UK executive director of Global Greengrants Fund. • Donations can be made online by credit card, debit card or PayPal, or by phone on 0151 284 1126. We are unable to accept cheques.The soul singer Beverley Knight has lambasted raucous theatregoers who she said disrupted a performance of the West End musical she is starring in. In a tweet posted on Thursday evening after the show, The Drifters Girl, Knight said: “Ok. If your intention is to come to the theatre, get rat-arsed, make a scene, disrupt the show thus causing a show-stop? “My advice is stay your ass at home. People pay to come to the theatre to be entertained, not to endure your foolishness. Done.” She added that she had been “fuming”, and that it was the second night in a row that audience members had caused disruption. Responding to Knight’s post, a member of Thursday’s audience tweeted that “people were drinking throughout, so by the second half they were joining in with the singing &amp; drowning the cast out. There was a lot of lurching in the interval. Perhaps limit the amount of drinks sold &amp; not allow people to bring bottles in from outside?” Another person tweeted: “I went to the show and wasn’t too far from the person that disrupted the show which she should be ashamed of. I didn’t think the audience drowned out the cast at all some people sang along and was just enjoying the brilliant show.” A spokesperson for production said: “Last night at the Garrick theatre, two audience members had to be escorted out of the building by theatre staff for loud and abusive behaviour during the performance of The Drifters Girl. The cast left the stage whilst this happened, before resuming and completing the performance. “This is an isolated incident, however both The Drifters Girl and Nimax Theatres would ask all patrons to behave in a responsible, respectful manner when attending a performance.” The Drifters Girl, at the Garrick theatre in London’s West End, is about the female manager of the all-male vocal group, The Drifters. Knight plays Faye Treadwell, who was one of the first prominent African American women in music management. The Guardian’s review said of the show: “The music in the show is a triumph – how could it not be with Beverley Knight’s almighty voice? …. Knight blows us away with each number and there is a particularly inventive rendition of Ben E King’s Stand By Me. Her character squares up to a sexist industry that puts her down and pats her bottom.” Knight, often described as the queen of British soul, was awarded an MBE in 2006 in recognition of her contribution to British music. Her hit singles include Shoulda Woulda Coulda and Come As You Are. On the long thread below her Twitter post, one person said there had been: “Lots of drunk folk getting up and down during the show when we came last week.” Another contributor who had seen the show recently said: “Ours and others enjoyment was impacted by the selfishness of 2 audience members who spoke at volume and argued with people when asked to quieten down.” In response to suggestions that theatres stop selling alcohol, Knight said: “Thing is they rely on the revenue that the bar receives. It’s tricky. Most folk who come along are not utter idiots.” Complaints about audience behaviour are not uncommon, with mobile phones, coughing, chatting and eating among the offences. In 2018, the actor Mark Rylance said disruptive audiences were the fault of actors not “telling the story well enough”. “Surely they [audiences] should be allowed to do what they want – if they’re making noise then you’re not holding them. You’re not telling the story well enough. But to complain about them, that can’t be right,” he said in a speech.US actor Jussie Smollett, known for his role on the TV show Empire, will return to court in Chicago in late January for a post-trial hearing and will learn at a later date whether he is going to prison after being found guilty late Thursday of faking a hate crime against himself to raise his celebrity profile. Despite a gaggle of reporters and photographers at the courthouse clamoring for comment and pictures, Smollett strode past them without a word, despite other players in his three-year legal saga stopping to give interviews. The Chicago jury, which deliberated for more than nine hours, convicted Smollett on five charges of disorderly conduct. He was acquitted on a sixth count, of lying to a detective in mid-February 2019, weeks after Smollett said he was attacked. The charges against Smollett, who is Black and gay and said he was drawn to the role of a Black gay man in Empire because it was still relatively rare to see such a character onscreen, had become a touchstone in America’s culture wars at the intersection of culture, racism, politics and celebrity. Many fellow stars initially rushed to support Smollett when he first made the accusations in January 2019 that he had been attacked in Chicago in the early hours as he walked home by people shouting “This is Maga country,” a reference to Donald Trump’s trademark political slogan “Make America Great Again”. Smollett told police that he had been assaulted on a darkened street by two masked men. According to Smollett, his assailants put a noose around his neck and poured chemicals on him while yelling racist and homophobic slurs and expressing their support for Trump. But a month later police arrested Smollett himself, accusing the actor of paying two brothers $3,500 to stage the assault in a ploy to get public sympathy and boost his show-business profile. Prosecutors had described the evidence against Smollett as “overwhelming”, saying what he did in January 2019 caused Chicago police to unduly spend enormous amounts of time and resources. “Besides being against the law, it is just plain wrong to outright denigrate something as serious as real hate crime and then make sure it involved words and symbols that have such historical significance in our country,” special prosecutor Dan Webb told the jury in his closing arguments. The verdict came after a roughly one-week trial in which two brothers testified that Smollett recruited them to fake an attack on him near his home in downtown Chicago in January 2019. Smollett repeatedly denied the claims. The brothers, Abimbola Osundairo and Olabinjo Osundairo, said Smollett orchestrated the hoax, telling them to put a noose around his neck and rough him up in view of a surveillance camera, and that he said he wanted video of the hoax made public via social media. Abimbola Osundairo, who worked with Smollett on the Chicago set of Empire, and his brother also testified that Smollett paid them $3,500 for faking the attack. Smollett called the brothers “liars” and said their account was “100% false”. He testified over two days about being the victim of what he said was a hate crime, telling the jury “there was no hoax”. Smollett said he wrote the $3,500 check to Abimbola Osundairo for nutrition and training advice. Asked by his defense attorney if he gave Osundairo payment for some kind of hoax, Smollett replied: “Never.” Under cross-examination on Tuesday, Smollett said that a few days before the alleged attack, he picked up Abimbola Osundairo in his car to go work out and that Osundairo’s brother, Olabinjo, came along. Smollett denied the brothers’ earlier testimony that they drove around together – circling the area where the alleged attack occurred three times – as part of a “dry run” for the fake assault. Smollett said the money allegedly paid for the attack was in fact for meal and workout plans that Abimbola Osundairo was providing so the actor could be more toned for upcoming performances. The 29 January assault was reported to police, prompting a massive investigation that a lead detective said included some two-dozen officers and 3,000 staff hours. The investigation which included video from surveillance cameras, GPS and taxi and rideshare records led police to the Osundairo brothers, who told detectives Smollett had staged the alleged hate crime. Smollett’s defense attorneys argued that the brothers attacked the actor who is gay and Black because they were homophobic and didn’t like “who he was”. They also alleged the brothers made up the story about the attack being staged to get money from Smollett, and that they told him they wouldn’t testify against him if he paid them each $1m. Disorderly conduct is a class 4 felony that carries a prison sentence of up to three years, but experts have said Smollett is more likely to be placed on probation and ordered to perform community service. The damage to his personal and professional life may be more severe. Smollett lost his role on Empire after prosecutors said the alleged attack was a hoax, and he told jurors earlier this week: “I’ve lost my livelihood”.The prime minister’s now director of communications addressed staff and handed out awards at a party in Downing Street last Christmas that is currently under investigation, it has been reported. Jack Doyle, who was then deputy director of communications at No 10, addressed up to 50 people at the gathering on 18 December 2020, ITV News reported. Doyle spoke to the press office to thank them for their work, as he did every week, and presented some awards to mark the team’s efforts, it has been claimed. A Downing Street spokesperson said: “There is an ongoing review, and we won’t be commenting further while that is the case.” Political commentators have said Doyle’s presence at the party would be significant because as director of communications he would have been behind the government’s confused messaging since the revelations of the party surfaced in the Daily Mirror. Ministers have repeatedly told reporters they did not know what happened or if a party took place – but were sure no rules were broken. Boris Johnson announced on Wednesday that an internal investigation led by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, would look into reports of a staff gathering held in Downing Street just days before Christmas, when London was under tier 3 Covid restrictions. The investigation was subsequently widened to include another festive celebration and a reported staff leaving do. After it emerged that Doyle had reportedly spoken at the event, the Labour deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said: “The government’s internal investigation has been exposed as the sham it is. The investigation has only just published its terms of reference, and we are already seeing more details from the media than the Cabinet Office about the parties.” Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that those who had allegedly broken the rules by holding gatherings all had one thing in common – the prime minister. “In the end, I’m sure Boris Johnson is busy planning who he is going to throw under the bus next. We’ve had the resignation of Allegra Stratton; there are questions now about the prime minister’s communications director,” he said. Alongside the alleged party on 18 December, Case will include in his review a confirmed gathering at the Department for Education’s Whitehall headquarters on 10 December last year, and a reported leaving event for a No 10 aide – allegedly attended by Johnson – on 27 November. The terms of reference for the investigation, published on Thursday, said “where there are credible allegations relating to other gatherings, these may be investigated”. The two alleged events in December coincide with when mixing between households in London was restricted, with England in a month-long lockdown in November. Case’s inquiry was ordered by the prime minister after a leaked video emerged showing Downing Street aides laughing about a “fictional” party at No 10 in December 2020.Think of the world’s most stylish people and, until recently, the likes of David Beckham, Rihanna or Kate Moss might have been mooted. But in 2021, according to Google’s Year in Search report, they have been trumped by an unlikely name: Adam Sandler. The 55-year-old actor, known for the 90s comedies Happy Gilmore and The Waterboy as well as 2019’s Uncut Gems, beat Harry Styles, Lizzo, Melania Trump and Britney Spears to the top spot. If these other names put serious effort into what they wear, Sandler’s style is significantly more relaxed. He combines long basketball shorts with XXXL T-shirts, boxy trainers, Ugg boots and wraparound shades. He has worn slippers and shorts to film premieres. The comedian and actor Pete Davidson named Sandler his favourite fashion icon in 2020, while Justin Bieber’s signature baggy shorts have been likened to Sandler’s. On TikTok, Sandler’s look is popular. More than 330,000 videos have used the “sandlercore” hashtag to discuss the actor’s look. It is precisely his lack of style direction that has enabled Sandler to become an unwitting fashion star. Input magazine even published an article headlined: “Adam Sandler hates fashion, which makes him a pandemic style icon”. Ashley Ogawa Clarke, the deputy editor of Mr Porter, says the Covid pandemic has been a crucial factor in the popularity of the actor’s look. “I had been working from home for just over a year, and I’d gotten used to being comfortable. When I saw Adam Sandler stuff on TikTok, it was refreshing,” he says. “People were getting excited because he goes against what you would consider well dressed.” Sandler’s new style status is part a wider trend for “slob-ebrities” that includes Jonah Hill, Larry David, Davidson and Bieber. If David’s oversized blazers and khakis made him an icon for the intentionally unremarkable normcore trend that emerged in 2014, Sandler takes things further. He is, as Ogawa Clarke puts it, “taking-the-bins out-core”. Coming to prominence in the late 90s and early noughties means Sandler also fits into Gen Z’s favourite Y2K trend. Tom Barker, a style writer at Highsnobiety, thinks this is key to his popularity now. “People would have first found his look by looking at early 2000s’ images,” he says. Barker believes there is an intentional irony from those in their 20s dressing in Sandler’s “embarrassing dad” outfits. But the actor’s couldn’t-care-less look is also genuinely fascinating to a generation who grew up in the glare of social media, where constructing a look is part of the culture. “He’s a multimillionaire how many times over, and he’s dressed like the least cool kid,” Barker says. “He is unashamedly himself in the way he dresses.” Ogawa Clarke says Sandler’s popularity demonstrates how menswear has changed: “It is not one thing any more. It can be a big mess sometimes. Sandler being voted best dressed is so unexpected. “And I think that is the word I would use for what good menswear looks like right now: it’s unexpected. What does a well-dressed man look like in 2021? That is the million-dollar question because it could be absolutely anything, and I love that. It’s like a terrifying kind of freedom.”And on the third day, some hope. The game changed as that 159-run partnership between Joe Root and Dawid Malan stretched on through the afternoon, the miseries for England of the first two innings receded, replaced by the promise of a better contest ahead. Root’s 86 was a vital sign that his duck in the first innings was an aberration, while Malan’s 80 was, in a way, even more important. England won’t win anything if Root doesn’t score runs, but the truth is, they don’t necessarily win much when he does, either. He peeled off a flawless 180 not out against India at Lord’s in August and they were still beaten by 151 runs. Just after tea at the Gabba, Root hit his 1,482nd run of 2021. It is a record for the most runs scored by an Englishman in a single year of Test cricket. On screen they showed the top five in the list. There was Michael Vaughan, of course, in 2002, Jonny Bairstow in 2016 and Root himself, in 2015 and 2016. It’s interesting, flicking through them, to see how well their teammates played around them at the time. In 2002, every member of England’s top six scored at least 500 runs; in 2015, so did Alastair Cook, Ben Stokes, Ian Bell and Moeen Ali; in 2016, Cook, Moeen and Stokes did it again, and so did Alex Hales. This time around, no one has. In fact, while everyone’s been watching Root close in on one record, his teammates have been threatening another. This year the next-best batsman is Rory Burns, who has scored 492 runs. The last time England’s second-leading run scorer made so few was back in 1999, when England lost to New Zealand at home and slipped to the bottom of the world rankings. In the long history of English cricket, it’s never happened that their leading batsman has scored more than 1,000 runs while the next best of his teammates has scored fewer than 500. The closest comparison is 1963, when Ken Barrington made 1,015 and Ted Dexter 583. All of which is another way of saying that the man who may be England’s greatest-ever batsman is playing in what is probably England’s weakest-ever batting line-up. They have put on 32 fifty-run partnerships this year, Root has been involved in 20 of them. They’ve put on 10 hundred-run partnerships, and Root has been involved in eight of those. He has scored six centuries, his 24 teammates have managed one. The business of captaincy, selecting teams, switching bowlers, picking out fields, managing people and handling the press is enough of a burden without the back-breaking load of carrying such a deadweight batting unit. The men around him owe him more. Which is why Malan’s innings mattered. It wasn’t perfect, he said himself: “I did get away with it a bit.” There was a miscued pull that landed in front of Marcus Harris at square leg, an edge off Josh Hazlewood that flew over the slips, another off Pat Cummins that fell just short of Alex Carey, and an unsuccessful review for a catch behind which, he said later, he didn’t hit. He was beaten inside and out, played and missed almost 20 deliveries. And in among it, he hit some glorious cricket shots, crisp drives, swishy pulls, stylish glances. As the afternoon wore on, it got easier for him, then, as the bowlers changed and he started to cramp, it became harder again. But he persisted. That was what England needed. The irony is when England started planning for this series a year ago, Malan wasn’t part of their thinking. He’s only here because Zak Crawley’s form was so poor the selectors were compelled to look elsewhere. And here he was, a guy who had put together scores of 56, 140, 54 and 62 against these very same bowlers, on these very same grounds, on tour four years previously. England, in the meantime, had apparently decided they were so flush with batting talent they could do without him. The decision to drop him didn’t make that much sense at the time. “It may be that his game is better suited to overseas conditions,” said Ed Smith, who was chair of selectors. Malan, 34, comes across as a little insecure. He has spoken openly about how he was convinced that none of his teammates thought he was good enough to be playing Test cricket even after he scored that century in Perth in December 2017, and you can imagine how Smith’s words compounded that. Now here he was, making the most of his second chance he had long since given up on getting. After stumps he spoke about a moment midway through the afternoon: “I actually said to Rooty when we were both on 40 or 50, or similar scores, and the Barmy Army were singing, I said to him, ‘I’ve really missed this, someone trying to blow my head off, and the adrenaline going playing against the best bowlers’.” Anyone who can go through that and come out laughing and smiling about it has a dash of what England need right now.Jurors were not asked to consider if prejudice, homophobia or discrimination contributed to the deaths of Stephen Port’s victims after the Metropolitan police “fought tooth and nail” to keep the hotly disputed issue out of the inquests, despite relatives feeling police had written off their loved ones as “gay druggies”. Though the coroner judge Sarah Munro QC ruled as a matter of law jurors could not consider those issues as possible factors, the charge of “homophobia” was levelled against officers by family and friends as one explanation for the disturbing incompetence seen in all four investigations. As John Pape, a friend of Gabriel Kovari, put it, police didn’t feel it was “worth keeping an open mind and being curious about them”. He told the inquests he believed police were guilty of “institutional homophobia”. Anthony Walgate’s mother, Sarah Sak, told the Guardian she was “really bitterly disappointed” jurors were not asked to consider the question of homophobia. “The Met had fought tooth and nail to keep the homophobia question out,” she said. “It was clearly the case. Anthony’s investigation was shut down after two weeks. I said to police at the time, if it had been a 23-year-old woman found dumped outside a bin, if four young women had been found so close together, there would have been uproar.” Walgate, 23, a fashion student who very occasionally supplemented his student finances through carefully selected escort work, was summed up as a “male prostitute” by one officer, which left Sak “really, really angry”. Another officer believed Kovari, 22, and Jack Taylor, 25, could be drug users because they were “skinny”, the inquest heard. Taylor’s father, Colin, believed because they treated his son as a drug addict “the police didn’t look any further”. A Barking police family liaison officer recorded Port’s first three victims as “all gay and they were using dating websites to meet men and also attending parties that had been organised where it appeared there were drugs actively being used and sexual activity happened”. None of that was true, but it was the false narrative Port had posted under an alias after befriending Kovari’s former partner on Facebook after his death. Officers denied Ricky Waumsley, Whitworth’s live-in partner of four years, access to his supposed “suicide note”. They dismissed him “in every single way”, Waumsley said, “because we were a gay, unmarried couple”. When Whitworth’s father, Adam, and stepmother, Mandy, asked police what the drug GHB was, they were told to “Ask, Ricky, they know about this stuff,” he said. Waumsley had never heard of GHB. By “they”, the officer said under questioning, she meant as Whitworth’s partner, not as a gay man. Postmortem injuries on Whitworth’s body were attributed to possibly being a result of “rough sex”, though there was no forensic basis for such inference. When his body was found in the Barking churchyard where two others were also dumped, the duty inspector described the location in an email as a “haven for gay sex (even dogging) and rough sleepers”, implying Whitworth was there for sex. Sean Wilson, Barking’s deputy borough commander, admitted police failed to proactively engage with the LGBT+ community, but individual Barking officers vehemently denied unconscious bias. The Met’s lawyers, addressing the coroner in the absence of the jury, argued the claim of prejudice should not be an issue left to the jury to decide. The mistakes by individual officers could be explained by “forgetfulness, indolence, lack of training, stress, overwork or inadequate supervision and management”. Lack of resources, and management structure failings, were valid explanations, rather than prejudice. Pape, who was Kovari’s landlord until Port offered the Slovakian student free accommodation at his Barking flat days before he died, said mistakes were made because police “just didn’t value those four young men”. “To my mind, the only thing that makes any sense of how disturbingly incompetent this investigation was is prejudice: conscious and unconscious. And, in my opinion, I think if that means the lives and deaths of young gay and bi men are not treated with significance and respect, I think that amounts to institutional homophobia,” he told jurors. Pape said the inquest had exposed underfunding as a factor, and officers were “overstretched”. “But, consequently, they ‘prioritised’ in ways that exposed their prejudice. It led to incompetence and unequal treatment.” “What disturbs me now, is knowing how the Met actively shut down anything that challenged their incorrect assumption, that the victims willingly took a date rape drug… “They discriminated against Ricky, Daniel’s partner of four years, by not allowing him to see his boyfriend’s supposed suicide note. They didn’t even take a statement from Gabriel’s partner when he was giving them leads on a plate that would have led to Port. They ignored multiple emails from me, with information I had, about older men drugging younger men. “The definition of institutional racism in the Macpherson report states: ‘It can be detected in processes, attitudes and behaviour which amount to discrimination through unwitting prejudice, ignorance, thoughtlessness and stereotyping.’ Without acknowledging the core problem as underfunding and prejudice combined, the Met inhibit change and leave open the possibility of this happening again,” Pape said.Across 9 planetary PLANE/T 
<a>RY 10 yield Y(ankee) + (l)I(b)E(l)L(e)D 11 academe AC  E 12 leonine Leo IX 13 hated wHAT EDition (hidden) 14 reclusion NO. 1’S ULCER (rev) 16 once in a blue moon A NINE OUNCE BLOOM (anag) 19 necessary N  ARY 21 carat C  </a> 
<a>AT 22 aurorae AU(gold)/RO  E [Royal Academy] 23 Gagarin GA/GA/R(uns)/IN 24 range RA  GE 25 epicurean E(nglish)/PIC(t)URE/A/N(orthern) Down 1 splashdown SPLASH + (Co) DOWN 2 galactic GALA/C(ri)TIC [Rhode Island] 3 Nereid N(ovember)  ID [ID papers} 4 mare double def 5 cyclically CY(N/Cl)ICALLY 6 cynosure COY NURSE (anag) 7 Gemini G  I [Tracey Emin] 8 edge changED GEar (hidden) 14 reawakened WE ARE NAKED (anag) 15 ninety-nine almost 100/99 ice cream 17 inserted RESIDENT (anag) 18 orreries ERROR (anag) + I  S 20 corona double def 21 Cygnus C(raz)Y/GNUS 22 airy (h)AIRY 23 Gaia G(r)A(v)I(t)A(s)     </a>Anthony Martial is intent on departing Manchester United in January in pursuit of more game time, his agent has said. The forward, signed in 2015 for £36m rising to a possible £55m, has started only three Premier League or Champions League matches this season. “Anthony wishes to leave the club in January,” Philippe Lamboley told Sky Sports News. “He just needs to play. He doesn’t want to stay in January and I will speak to the club soon.” Martial’s contract runs to June 2024 and has an option for a further year. He has not made an appearance under the interim manager, Ralf Rangnick. Rangnick, while not discussing Martial specifically, said on Friday that he would speak to unsettled players with regard to potential loans in January. Whether Martial would accept a temporary move is unclear. Rangnick said of his squad: “I got to know them better this week. I saw most of them play in two games and four or five training sessions but it’s still too early to talk about what might happen in the winter transfer window [but] if I look at the number of players we have it’s still a big squad … We also need to make sure that players want to stay here. If they are still not getting enough game time here it might make sense to speak individually with the players and see if a loan might make sense.” Paul Pogba’s United future remains in the balance. The injured midfielder’s terms expire in the close season and he can agree a pre-contract deal next month. Rangnick spoke to him by phone on Tuesday and they will talk in person on Sunday. Mino Raiola, Pogba’s agent, indicated the player was open to a move, but only to clubs offering comparable wages. “We have many offers for him, including a contract extension,” he told the German TV channel Sport1. “We’ll see what’s best for him.” Asked about Bayern Munich he said: “Even they can’t get to Paul’s salary. Germans are at the bottom of the international salary pyramid.”Day by day, the UK’s police service is being hit by scandals that dominate the front pages of every newspaper. Today it is the failure to protect London’s gay community and to stop the serial killer Stephen Port. But that’s part of what is now an awful litany: think about the other terrible police failures of recent times: the missing person inquiry failures; the photos shared by ghoulish police officers of the sisters Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman after they were murdered in north London, officers who have now received prison sentences of two years and nine months respectively ; the serving Metropolitan police officer who kidnapped and murdered Sarah Everard and then the five police officers from four forces now facing disciplinary procedures into social media messages related to that murder. Think of what we now know about failures and the swirl of corruption that infected the investigation into the death of the private investigator Daniel Morgan. And now this, another egregious betrayal of public trust, the failure – as outlined by the just concluded inquest – to arrest and stop Port who murdered four young men Anthony Walgate, 23, Gabriel Kovari, 22, Daniel Whitworth, 21, and Jack Taylor, 25. Despite the bodies being found outside Port’s flat and a local cemetery, despite the murderer’s use of the same modus operandi. On their own, each of these failures is a tragedy for loved ones and disaster for confidence in policing, but together they also tell a story involving political interference, a stunning lack of effectiveness in pursuing criminal investigations and a failure to accord sufficient priority to cases involving violence against women. Many involved with the Port case, grieving relatives and activists, are today citing homophobia. True, in the Port inquest, the coroner directed the jury that as a matter of law they could not “find that prejudice or homophobia or discrimination on the part of the police made any contribution to the deaths”. But certainly that perception must be addressed. Clues were missed, loved ones neglected. Why, for example, was Port’s third victim Daniel Whitworth’s partner of four years not allowed to see the fake suicide note written by the murderer? Is it conceivable that police would not allow the partner of a straight person to see a suicide note and say whether or not it was written by their loved one? This failure alone left Port to murder again. And what is the reaction of those of us who served and have given so much to these forces? I feel embarrassed when I read about the litany of failures in policing. But in the face of criticism, I also offer a caution. We need to distinguish between the hierarchy of leaders and the ordinary, rank and file officers who are trying their best – and doing their best – with one hand tied behind their backs. I feel for them as a retired officer, but now a civilian, I also feel for the public. The root of many of these failings stems from the macabre dance between police and politicians. Forces have been seen by successive home secretaries and prime minsters as an easy target for cuts. There is no coherent strategy, just expedience. When the inevitable increase in crime occurs, the same politicians and senior officers who pruned to disastrous effect then champion extra police resources. The failure of senior police officers to challenge cuts, to stop the dance, or at least denounce it, does not go unnoticed by the rank and file. These officers are left to pick up the pieces, seeking to keep investigations going with limited resources, skills and knowledge. These deficiencies are not lost on those who try unsuccessfully to report a crime, or face great difficulty doing so. We want policing. What we get is crisis management. More restructuring, the formation of specialist squads – not in itself a disbenefit, but organised so they denude frontline policing. As a local commander it was not unusual to be told you were losing your best officers to central squads overnight. I recall objecting to the continuous cuts in police officers, police staff and police stations and being told by a senior manager that I was not a team player and it had not gone unnoticed at the Yard. I understood, knowing how things work at the Met, that my days as a chief superintendent were numbered. I decided that, hand on heart, I could not deliver effective policing and it was time to go, even though I loved being a police officer. The cuts were far too deep. Then there is the culture of impunity within forces. There are reports indicating that UK police forces have received more than 800 allegations of domestic abuse against officers and staff over the past five years. Additional resources have been given to the investigation of allegations and reviews of previous decisions made by police who were left to investigate other police officers. But my own experience was that sexually predatory officers were protected. I was distraught during my service when an officer who had made sexual advances to another officer was provided with a safe police posting elsewhere, ignoring my expectation – and that of the complainant – that he would be disciplined. I remember the pointless police operations that targeted consenting gay men meeting in deserted parks and how fellow officers who were gay men and lesbians supported their Black and Asian police colleagues, including me. Sadly homophobic slurs were common and were rarely challenged. Racism is also stubborn within the police. A recording of comments by past members of Hampshire police’s elite serious and organised crime unit prompted the chief constable, Olivia Pinkney, to declare that the “catalogue of sexist, racist, homophobic and ableist language and commentary … has rightly shocked us all”. But I am afraid it did not shock me. It was sadly predictable. The surprising thing was the emergence of a recording. Still today, the botched investigation into the Stephen Port murders feels like a new low point, for the victims and for their families. Think of Jack Taylor, the last of Port’s victims, whose sisters launched their own investigation when the Met failed do so. What could be more poignant for us? He had his heart set on being a police officer. This must be a turning point. We need to stop politicians using policing for their own ends and senior officers flitting around like butterflies: restructuring, pruning, acquiescing and leaving behind systems that don’t solve crimes, and don’t help victims. We need a police force that is free from the restraints of sexism, homophobia and racism, so that it better reflects and serves our communities. But first we need to assert that policing is important and both rank and file officers, and the public, deserve much better. Dal Babu is a former chief superintendent in the Metropolitan policeThe International Energy Agency is facing calls to make the national energy data it collects from governments publicly available. This would aid independent research, which in turn could help to accelerate the global transition to low-carbon energy. More than 30 international academics have written to the global energy watchdog to call for it to drop its paywalls for national energy datasets, which are collected using public funds, to avoid making climate action “more costly and less effective”. The IEA publishes a number of influential reports on global energy systems, based in large part on the national energy data provided by the governments that it counts among its members. However, much of the data that underpins these reports is inaccessible to independent researchers. The academics said that putting datasets behind paywalls makes it more difficult for independent energy system analysts, and the interested public, to investigate and better understand the path to net zero. Instead, the “high-quality data” required to create effective and low-cost pathways to net zero societies should be available under suitable open licences, according to the academics. “High-quality datasets already exist: they are published by the IEA but remain behind paywalls. And despite the IEA being a publicly funded institution, researchers and other interested third parties have to normally pay and consent to non‐disclosure to access the IEA data,” said the open letter to the IEA’s executive director, Fatih Birol. “Ultimately, a lack of data availability will lead to net zero transition pathways that are both more costly and less effective than they should have been,” the letter added. The IEA was set up following the 1970s oil crisis to monitor global energy markets and provide independent global assessments that can be used to inform the decisions of policymakers and financiers. It is funded by member countries and other organisations but also generates revenue by selling data via paywalls. A spokesperson for the IEA said the agency was “committed to enhancing and expanding data access” and has in recent years set a new policy to make more and more data and analysis available without charge. “However, our data sales form an essential part of our operational budget, allowing the IEA to deliver on its essential mandates. The bulk of these sales are to private energy companies, financial institutions and consultancies,” the spokesperson said. The academics argue that the IEA could bring in a small increase in its membership fees to cover the lost revenue from selling its data to the private sector. The modest rise in costs for members would be more than offset by the lower cost of energy solutions that would be possible if the data were more freely available, the academics said.Kanye West and Drake’s live-streamed benefit gig has attracted a great deal of excited pre-publicity. Not merely because of the causes behind it – it aims to free Larry Hoover, a Chicago gang leader who has been in prison since a 1973 murder conviction, and raise money for nonprofit organisations dealing with former convicts and prisoners’ rights – but because it represents the squashing of the long-running and occasionally incomprehensible beef between two of pop’s biggest stars. The prospect of reconciliation between Drake and West notwithstanding, it’s hard not to feel a certain trepidation during the lengthy run-up to the performance, beamed live around the world via the gaming platform Twitch. West is an erratic live performer. He can be fantastic, but things can go desperately awry, often in the form of extempore on-stage lectures. Tonight’s show feels particularly high-stakes: if it goes wrong, what price its objectives and good causes? But after a lengthy opening performance by a gospel choir – they perform a version of Carl Orff’s O Fortuna with lyrics altered to reflect West’s evangelical faith and a cover of his Ultralight Beam as well as Adele’s seldom-played Easy on Me – it quickly becomes apparent any fears are unfounded. West pummels the audience with one hit after another: Jesus Walks, Gold Digger, Touch the Sky, Stronger, Flashing Lights, N****s in Paris and a ferocious Black Skinhead. The staging manages to be both extravagant and minimal – it’s just West, swathed in clouds of dry-ice, performing on top of a giant white structure that looks like an upturned smoke alarm – and his performance is surprisingly compelling. Clad in an enormous pair of boots that one suspects are of his own design, he stalks the huge stage, bent almost double as he raps. Occasionally, he follows the camera operator around, performing directly into the lens, eyes blazing. It’s an hour-long reminder of how great West can be, of the high standard set by the music so often overshadowed by his erratic behaviour or idiotic transgressions. Even his appeal to ex-wife Kim Kardashian West to take him back is nestled, with relative subtlety, into a new verse on Runaway (“I need you to run right back to me / More specifically, Kimberly.”) His set ends with a version of Drake’s Forever, performed as a duet – “FREE THE MANDEM” reads Drake’s hoodie – the two staring each other down as they perform. When he’s alone on stage, Drake addresses the audience. “I just want to say I appreciate Kanye for having me tonight,” he says, going on to laud his former nemesis for running through “one of the best catalogues in music, period”. Then: “I hope you don’t mind if I do my thing for a bit.” It’s an apparently humble remark that, as it turns out, comes with a hint of “uh-oh” attached. After an opening cover of West’s 24, Drake’s set is almost entirely drawn from his recent album Certified Lover Boy and its preceding EP, Scary Hours 2. He performs Girls Want Girls, Way 2 Sexy, No Friends in the Industry, In the Bible. “I came to do some new shit for y’all tonight,” he exclaims. A risky strategy at the best of times, but riskier still when your new shit is as so-so and more-of-the-same as Drake’s. It’s music trapped in an lucrative holding pattern; he is content to switch on the Auto-Tune and burble away in an injured tone about slights, arguments and sundry other crimes against his person. In fairness, the streaming stats are as nuts as ever – this album bested West’s Donda on Spotify – but tonight, with the contents of West’s patchy recent album tactfully ignored in favour of nailed-on smashes, it feels like a letdown. It also doesn’t help that a lot of the tracks he performs feature appearances from guests who aren’t present – their parts are on the recorded track – so what we get is a man gesticulating while his new album plays in the background. West returns for a final performance of God’s Plan but the most telling moment comes earlier in Drake’s set, when the camera switches to West, in the crowd, beaming with delight. At the raised profile for Hoover’s cause? At the money raised for worthwhile charities? At the squashing of the longstanding beef? At the fact he has emerged from the evening triumphant? It’s hard to tell.Residents of Rome have been urged to curtail their use of Christmas wrapping paper as authorities in the Italian capital struggle with the perennial problem of waste collection. The city’s new leaders are under pressure to fulfil their promise to clean up the streets by Christmas and, alongside the wrapping paper appeal, are paying rubbish collectors a bonus to head off seasonal absenteeism. Sabrina Alfonsi, councillor for the environment, told Il Messaggero that the issue of wrapping paper and packaging was “no joke”. “As an administration we have taken all the possible actions to improve [waste] collection and to find new outlets for the rubbish that is produced in Rome,” she said. “Christmas is a particularly complicated period, especially for parcels. The production of waste is growing, when instead it must decrease.” Alfonsi stressed that reducing the use of wrapping paper did not mean giving fewer gifts, but said citizens needed to play their part in helping to keep the city clean. The councillor was forced to clarify her comments after they generated some criticism on social media, with some people saying her suggestion was a simplistic way of trying to resolve Rome’s rubbish problems and that having fewer Christmas parcels wouldn’t make a difference. “There is no initiative on behalf of the council to reduce Christmas parcels,” she told the news agency Ansa. “This is a problem that concerns packaging, which is a problem not only for Rome but the whole of Europe.” She said packaging mostly concerns companies and distribution and that reducing its use was a key component in the city’s overall waste management plan, which included building new waste disposal plants. Rome’s mayor, Roberto Gualtieri, pledged an “extraordinary clean-up” of the city after winning elections in October, setting a goal of Christmas, “if not sooner”. He said: “We will remove the heaps of rubbish; we will sweep and clean the streets; we will mow the grass and we will clean the drains.” In November, he announced that €40m (£34m) had been earmarked for the project. However, there are few visible signs so far of the goal having much impact, with overflowing bins still a regular sight. In order to combat the issue of absenteeism among workers at the municipal waste collection firm, Ama, during the Christmas and New Year period, about €3m of the funds will be used to pay rubbish collectors a €360 bonus to encourage them to turn up to work. Meanwhile, Ama on Thursday announced its staff would go on strike on Monday, and would only remove waste from Rome’s hospitals.Jürgen Klopp believes Steven Gerrard is destined to manage Liverpool and will find it strange to confront his former club with Aston Villa. Gerrard returns to Anfield on Saturday for the first time in a competitive fixture since leaving Liverpool in 2015. The Villa manager, who has won three of his opening four matches, has dismissed the idea that his first Premier League job could be a stepping stone back to the club where he made 710 appearances, started his coaching career and enjoys legendary status. But the current occupant of the Liverpool manager’s seat believes there is an inevitability about Gerrard’s future. “Yes, I think, absolutely,” Klopp said. “The only problem is when is the right moment for that? We saw it with Frank [Lampard] at Chelsea. He [Gerrard] is doing really well but is very young from a manager’s point of view. When is the right moment to take the manager’s job? Not because he’s not able to do it but how long do you want to do it? Is it the last job you want to do? The second job? Those are questions I can’t answer. But yes, I think it will definitely happen – and that is good for everybody.” Klopp, who has three years remaining on his contract, claims he is unlikely to be involved in appointing his successor and that trophies with Villa were not a prerequisite for Gerrard getting the job. “It’s not for me to make the decision,” he said. “I don’t know what you have to do before you become Liverpool manager. I know people say you have to win things but I’m not sure about that. It is more important you win things when you are here. You don’t have to win things in the past with all this ‘proven winner’ rubbish. You can win things in the past and never win things again. “The most important thing for each manager is that the club is in a stable moment, then you have a good chance to improve things. Everything what he did so far looks good and he’s going in absolutely the right direction – but what does that mean? I can’t see a scenario where I will be involved in that decision but who knows what the future brings. We will see.” Although Klopp shares Gerrard’s view that there will be no sentiment once Saturday’s game kicks off, he believes the former Liverpool captain will find the occasion unusual. He said: “I had it in a similar way the first time I went back to Mainz and the first time I went with Liverpool back to Dortmund. It’s strange, you pretty much like all the people you meet when you step into the stadium and that’s pretty much not normally the case. “I remember when we scored for Dortmund at Mainz I forgot all about my story at Mainz and celebrated like a crazy devil. He is allowed to do that as well. I just hope he has no reason for it. “It just feels strange from the first second when you think about the game until the last second after you have played it and you are at home. That’s the truth, but it doesn’t change the 95 minutes. In this, you have a fight. I actually had a fight with the Mainz bench in another game and my old physio had to hold me back.” Nat Phillips is facing several weeks out with a fractured cheekbone sustained against Milan on Tuesday but Klopp said Liverpool remained open to a possible move for the defender in January. “I’m very happy that Nat is here but we will not block anything,” he said.James Graham specialises in pivotal political moments. This House recreated the parliamentary divisions leading to the Thatcher premiership in 1979, and Ink previewed the electoral significance of Rupert Murdoch’s 1969 takeover of the Sun newspaper. Best of Enemies examines another end-of-decade cusp: the TV debates on the ABC network during the 1968 US presidential nominating conventions, between mutually detesting American essayists: on the New Right, William F Buckley Jr and, on the New Left, Gore Vidal. In a play inspired by Morgan Neville and Robert Gordon’s 2015 documentary about the encounters, Graham suggests that these ideological antler-locking head-to-heads were influential on multiple levels – popularising bitter, unbridgeable gulfs between conservative and liberal America that still endure; making TV, rather than legislatures, the national debating chamber; and, through ABC’s Buckley-Vidal ratings triumph, creating a US peak-time triopoly – with NBC and CBS – lasting until the protagonist of Ink launched Fox News. At one very enjoyable level, Best of Enemies is – in the line of earlier Graham work and Peter Morgan’s Frost/Nixon – historical karaoke, recreating verbatim choice ideas and insults from the studio duels. The roar of complex thoughts and challenges to orthodoxy is so enthralling that it makes Radio 4’s Today programme sound like CBeebies. But Graham and director Jeremy Herrin (with characteristic pace and clarity) crucially give this media archaeology a contemporary framing. The most striking modernity is casting. Charles Edwards’ Vidal delivers a near-perfect soundalike and acceptable lookalike, while Buckley, who can be seen as the epitome of a privileged white right-winger, is portrayed by the black British actor David Harewood. He exactly captures every aspect – drawl, lolling posture, facial tics – of the Republican’s awkward broadcasting persona, except for one element in the room. As a means of equalising opportunity for actors, there is no reasonable argument against racially fluid casting. But in plays that aim elsewhere for photo-realism – the show’s Andy Warhol, Aretha Franklin and Bobby Kennedy reliably match the archives – audiences are asked to make an adjustment in how they visually read a production. When Buckley and the novelist James Baldwin are on stage together, white racism and African-American pride are simultaneously being represented by actors of colour. Apart from Harewood’s electrifying stage presence, a justification for this pictorial revisionism is that Buckley did experience a form of prejudice and institutional isolation; in a Republican party of entitled white Protestants, he was Roman Catholic. Vidal throws one jibe about the Vatican, but Graham might have made more of how the Democrat’s haughty disdain for his rival came from viewing him as a social and religious inferior and establishment interloper. Each man was, by the standards of the time, in the “wrong” party for his background: a political trend that has continued. As has another. A time-jumping epilogue suggests that the 1968 debates may have made televisual visibility such an asset to candidates that it led to hosts of Have I Got News for You? and the US version of The Apprentice running major democracies. Parts of the second half, set at the Democrat convention in Chicago, may seem over-familiar to viewers of Aaron Sorkin’s film The Trial of the Chicago 7, but Graham proves that he stands with Sorkin as our best dramatic interpreters of the interplay of media and politics. • At the Young Vic, London, until 22 January. • This article was amended on 13 December 2021 to correct Robert Gordon’s name, given earlier as Robert Morgan.I’m sure I’m not the only one who’s faced this difficulty this year. One of my family members, who’s in his 40s, has consistently refused to be vaccinated against Covid and will not be moved from his position. He will not explain his reasons for rejecting the vaccine, whether it is ideological or simply rebellion against the so-called “nanny state”. He has already been (politely but firmly) excluded from one family get-together as a result of his intransigence. We have explained that he is not being rejected personally, but there are concerns within the family about his vulnerability to catching the virus and transmitting the infection to the children and their grandparents. Before Covid, we used to get together with grandchildren and in-laws for Christmas. Last year we all celebrated separately as Covid made it impossible to gather. None of us dares broach the subject of a family gathering this year, and everyone, except the person in question is too polite and kind to tackle the dilemma head-on. I suspect we’ll just repeat last year’s plan, but it annoys me that this vaccine-refuser has spoiled a family tradition. Does it really matter about a lost Christmas? It does for the older members of the family, who treasure any time with their kids. It is difficult to know what his priority is, although so far it seems to be his own needs. In a sense, what his priority is isn’t really the point here. What’s yours? What’s important to you? You’ve already excluded him from one gathering, why not another? If the rest of you all feel the same, I think the best thing to do is face this head-on and just explain that, because of his stance on vaccination and the fact he doesn’t want to get vaccinated, you’ll have to go ahead without him. If you need some facts and figures, try these from David Spiegelhalter, who is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge University and author of The Art of Statistics. He quoted a recent government report that “shows that having the vaccine reduces the risk of someone getting infected by 65-80%, and, if they do happen to catch it, it reduces the risk of passing it on by 35-65%, as they tend to get a milder disease. So, overall, the risk of someone else catching it from them, if they are unvaccinated, is perhaps about eight times the risk compared with if they were vaccinated. Of course the risk is zero if they are absolutely sure they have not got it, but otherwise not being vaccinated is greatly raising the risk for anyone who is vulnerable and close to them.” Spiegelhalter and I wondered if your relative having a lateral flow test before coming, and on arrival, is an option. These tests, he says, “are meant to be very good (90% effective) at picking up people who are infectious.” But there are a few things to think about first. You mention grandchildren but not their ages. If they haven’t been vaccinated, because the government programme doesn’t include them yet, (currently in the UK, only ages 12 and up are offered the vaccine) they too pose a risk, possibly more than your refusenik family member if they are at school, and he doesn’t go out much. Of course, this all depends on whether you actually want your relative to come or not. If you don’t, his refusal of the vaccine is a useful get-out; if you do, you may be able to find a way to minimise the risk of him coming if he takes a test. It strikes me that unless none of you ever goes out, you may be sitting next to someone unvaccinated on the bus, in the GP surgery, in church or in a restaurant. I believe it’s a real shame for a Christmas get-together not to happen at all, just because of this one family member; we’ve all missed out on quite a lot already. So I think the option I’d go for is to do it, but without him. You can’t force him to get vaccinated, but he can’t force you to spend time with him. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. If you would like advice on a family matter, email ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. See gu.com/letters-terms for terms and conditions Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here.Exhibition of the week Kehinde Wiley Barack Obama’s official portraitist responds to the National Gallery’s landscape paintings with video art and five new canvases. • National Gallery, London, until 18 April Also showing Prix Pictet Christian Marclay, Sally Mann, Carla Rippey and more show photographs on the theme of fire. • V&amp;A, London from 16 December to 9 January Josef Albers The early works of this legendary abstract artist show him as an expressionist of the human figure. • Cristea Roberts Gallery, London from 10 December to 22 January Suzanne Lacy Socially engaged art on themes from young people to older women’s work prospects in Manchester. • Whitworth, Manchester until 10 April Zadok Ben-David An installation with more than 17,000 hand-painted flowers features in this exhibition about our relationship with nature. • Shirley Sherwood Gallery of Botanical Art, Kew Gardens, London until 27 March Image of the week American conceptual artist Lawrence Weiner has died aged 79 of cancer. Weiner had an overriding contempt for commercialism, and used words as his chief material. Read the full story here. What we learned Conceptual art pioneer Lawrence Weiner has died aged 79 MC Escher gave no satisfaction to Mick Jagger, but did help a Nobel laureate with his theory of the cosmos A hidden sketch by Rembrandt has been discovered underneath the paint of his most famous work The statue that drew deadly protests to Charlottesville, Virginia, will be melted down for a new piece of public art An exhibition showcasing three Asian American artists was acclaimed as a revelation An American billionaire has surrendered 180 looted and illegally smuggled antiquities valued at $70m A 29-year-old Midlands artist is inviting visitors to her show to experience the present moment in vivid burst of colour How René Magritte’s high-lo sensibility transformed the world’s understanding of images Sudanese artists are battling to maintain their freedom of expression after the recent coup RIBA’s royal gold medal went to India’s most acclaimed architect Balkrishna Doshi A Manchester exhibition is honouring the multifarious, contradictory talents of Derek Jarman For the first time, a split decision saw three artists win Australia’s richest art prize Moscow’s answer to Tate Modern opened with a painstaking recreation of American soap opera Santa Barbara Portraits of North Omaha’s people reveal the impact of white supremacy on the lives of Black people … … and the work of forgotten Japanese American photographers is receiving long overdue recognition Masterpiece of the week Rembrandt’s Adoration of the Shepherds, c1652 Has any Nativity painting ever been as expressive and moving as this miraculous etching? The cosy stable scene has given way to a much harsher and starker reality. A humble and deferential group of shepherds emerge from the night to salute a Christ child cuddled under blankets by a mother who looks homeless. Rembrandt makes free with black ink to create shades and depths of nocturnal mystery. The figures emerge in rough-etched lumpen humanity from this gloom. A lantern seems to truly glow, simply by contrast. Each face, in shadow or light, holds your heart in as marvellous a portrayal of fragile humanity as exists in art. • British Museum, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comI think most of us feel that we ought to wheel out a special wine at Christmas, or at least splash out a bit more than we normally do. But if you’re more used to spending £5-10 than £10-15, what should it be? The danger is going for something based on its reputation, rather than its quality, and that you may not even enjoy. In that category, I would put barolo and barbaresco (both often too woody and stripped of fruit), saint-émilion (there’s better bordeaux out there, and at a much keener price) and that habitual culprit, big-name champagne, which, despite the much-touted discounts, still costs more than you’d dream of spending on a bottle of wine. This applies even to the discounters, whose top wines are sometimes not significantly cheaper than those at an indie and almost always not as good, while if you’re going to buy more expensive wines at a supermarket, you’re generally better off opting for their own-label bottlings such as the gold medal-winning amarone from Morrisons in today’s pick. There are exceptions, though. I used to warn against buying châteauneuf-du-pape on the grounds that it wasn’t much better than a decent côtes du rhône, but it’s one of the few wines whose quality has improved while its price has remained reasonably stable. (At £36, the 14.5% Marks &amp; Spencer magnum I mentioned in my gift recommendations last month is a really decent buy.) The same applies to sauternes and chablis – the latter is pretty consistently reliable, even if the price has crept up a quid or two (the Brocard chablis in my pick this week is a good case in point). Nonetheless, it’s worth looking out for special offers such as Waitrose’s current “Fine Wines at £10” selection which I mentioned last week. (In addition to the wines I recommended then, I also like the 14.5% Les Clos du Matin Pouilly-Fumé 2020, which is a great buy at a tenner.) The Co-op also has a good pouilly-fumé, Domaine Les Chaumes 2020 (14.5%) at £13.75. Sauvignon still goes down well, too, and is surprisingly good with smoked salmon. When choosing your Christmas wine, I definitely wouldn’t want you to forget the independents, though. Their strength is that they stock wines such as jurançon sec that the supermarkets regard as too hard to sell, as well as wines in small quantities, such as the fabulous Pasotismo Moristel below) made by a young British couple in Spain. There’s still time to order online, so do include them in your shopping plans. Six special wines to drink over Christmas Pasotismo Moristel 76 2020 £17.95 Tanners, paso-primero.com, 13.5%. Gloriously bright and fruity, this unusual Spanish red from a rare grape variety is one of the most joyous wines I’ve tasted this year. Morrisons The Best Amarone 2017 £14 (on offer), 14.5%. There’s something splendidly festive about amarone, and this lush, gold medal-winning example is a bargain. Perfect for the stilton. Jurançon Sec L’Estela 2020 £12.99 Cambridge Wine Merchants, £13.95 Caviste, 13.5%. A really appealing, crisp white, made from the obscure gros manseng, petit manseng and petit courbu, that ticks the box for seafood and salads. Domaines Brocard Chablis 2019 £90 for six Marks &amp; Spencer online (ie, £15 a bottle), 12.5%. Classic chablis made by the ever-reliable Brocard family from organically grown vines. Given an extra year’s ageing, too, so a bit of a bargain. Château Montaiguillon Montagne Saint-Émilion 2017 £19.50 (or £17.50 by the case) Lea &amp; Sandeman, 13.5%. This deliciously supple wine from one of the Saint-Émilion villages is streets better than any you’ll find at a supermarket. Perfect for roast beef. Ulysse Sauternes Bordeaux £18 The Wine Society, 14%. This simply sensational sauternes is, unusually, a blend of three vintages (2014, 2015 and 2016) and described by buyer Tim Sykes as “the best-value wine I have come across in my 10 years as a Wine Society buyer”. Snap it up, if there’s any left. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comDonald Trump lost Michigan by more than 150,000 votes in the 2020 presidential election. But the state still featured prominently in the false claims of election fraud pushed by Trump and his allies. Two days after the election, Trump addressed the nation and delivered a litany of inaccurate allegations about vote-counting in Michigan. “We were way up in Michigan, won the state, and that got whittled down,” Trump said. Without evidence, Trump accused Michigan poll workers of “duplicating ballots”, producing illegal “batches” of votes at 4am, and tallying “more votes than you had voters”. On 19 November 2020, the Associated Press reported, Trump “summoned Michigan’s Republican legislative leaders to the White House for an extraordinary meeting” as part of a “GOP push to subvert the democratic process”. Trump also filed lawsuits and personally lobbied two Republican officials in Michigan’s Wayne county to refuse to certify the results. While Trump’s claims lacked factual support, he had plenty of political support from Michigan legislators. On 16 November 2020, 41 Republican members of the Michigan legislature signed a letter to Michigan’s secretary of state demanding “a full, independent audit of the recent election prior to the certification of results” due to “serious allegations ... which cannot and should not be ignored”. The letter regurgitates a laundry list of Trump’s baseless claims, including allegations that election officials “counted ineligible ballots; counted the same batches of ballots multiple times; instructed poll workers to backdate absentee ballots; counted late ballots after illicitly pre-dating them; [and] used false information to process ballots”. On 4 January 2021, 11 Republican members of the Michigan legislature wrote a letter demanding “the United States Congress and federal law enforcement, to the extent of their ability by law, conduct an objective and transparent investigation into credible allegations of misconduct in the 2020 election”. Of course, there were no credible allegations and Trump’s effort to overturn the election result failed. But, at Trump’s urging, his allies in the Michigan legislature introduced dozens of bills to restrict voting in future elections. Several of these bills were sent to the desk of the democratic governor, Gretchen Whitmer. She vetoed them all. But Trump’s allies in Michigan have not given up. Members of the state legislature are now seeking to impose several new restrictions on voting through an obscure process that would not be subject to veto by Whitmer. These members are backed by millions in corporate campaign contributions, including from corporations who claim to oppose Republican efforts to restrict voting in Michigan. How to bypass Whitmer and Michigan voters To sidestep Whitmer’s opposition to voter restriction laws, the conservative activist group Secure MI Vote is proposing a ballot measure to restrict voting. While Michigan already requires an ID to vote, the Secure MI Vote initiative would eliminate the ability of those who can’t present an ID to sign an affidavit. The proposal also restricts how absentee ballots can be sent. Under the initiative, election officials will be prohibited from sending absentee voter applications or ballots to those who did not request them. In Michigan, citizens can introduce an initiative on a ballot if they collect a certain threshold of signatures – at least “8% of votes cast for governor in the last gubernatorial election”. For 2022, “340,047 valid signatures are required” before the proposal can appear on the Michigan ballot. But even if those signatures are collected, the initiative is not likely to appear on any ballot. The state legislature is able to pass the proposed initiative with a simple majority before a public vote occurs. And legislation passed in this fashion is not subject to a veto by the governor. That is the strategy that Secure MI Vote is pursuing. In the last 58 years, only nine initiatives have become law this way. In March, the Michigan GOP chairman, Ron Weiser, said that he planned to take the voting restriction bills that did not become law and collect “the signatures necessary for a legislative initiative so it can become law without Gretchen Whitmer’s signature”. Currently, Weiser is the “primary funder” of the ballot drive. NBC reports that these endeavors can range “from $3m to more than $16m.” ••• Of the 11 legislators who signed the letter to Congress in January asking for an investigation into election fraud, 10 have also sponsored new voter suppression bills throughout Michigan. Based on data provided by the MI Defend Black Voters Coalition, Popular Information found that these 10 legislators have received $1,375,585 in corporate donations since 2018. Twenty-four of the 41 legislators who called for an independent audit into election fraud in November 2020 have gone on to sponsor new voter suppression bills in Michigan. A Popular Information analysis found that these 24 lawmakers have received $2,199,455 in corporate donations since 2018. Many of the top corporate donors to these legislators have publicly defended voting rights in Michigan and other states. Jim Farley, CEO of Ford, signed a statement in April that opposed “Republican-sponsored election bills that would make it harder to vote”. “Government must support equitable access to the ballot to ensure that all eligible voters can exercise their rights,” the statement said. “Government must avoid actions that reduce participation in elections – particularly among historically disenfranchised communities, persons with disabilities, older adults, racial minorities and low-income voters.” A Popular Information analysis found that Ford donated $64,600 since 2018 to 48 Michigan legislators who have sponsored voter suppression bills after the 2020 election, including $12,000 to legislators who signed letters promoting fraud allegations. Ford declined to say whether it supported the ballot initiative or whether it would continue to contribute to Michigan legislators seeking to restrict voting. But the company sent Popular Information the following statement: When it comes to voting rights, Ford’s position is clear: we believe that equitable access to voting rights for all people is the bedrock of a democratic society … We continue to urge elected officials across the country to work together in a bipartisan way to protect and enhance the right to vote. Our employee Pac makes bipartisan contributions based on a variety of considerations important to customers, our team and our company … Mary Barra, CEO of General Motors, also signed the letter opposing voter suppression bills in Michigan and other states. Popular Information found that GM has donated $40,100 since 2018 to 34 legislators who both signed the letters promoting fraud allegations and are now pushing voter suppression bills. GM has donated a total of $83,950 since 2018 to 48 lawmakers who sponsored bills that would make it more difficult to vote in Michigan. When asked about the company’s support, a GM spokesperson pointed to a separate statement that Barra posted in April that “urged state lawmakers across the US to protect and enhance ‘the right for all eligible voters to have their voices included in a fair, free and equitable manner’”. GM did not comment on its donations to Michigan legislators that are backing voter suppression bills. Last week, the MI Defend Black Voters Coalition, a coalition of activist groups working to stop voter suppression, released a pledge that called on corporations in Michigan to “commit to cut off all forms of financial support to legislators supporting voter suppression”. “These businesses have made statements supporting Black Lives Matter or opposing voter suppression,” Jennifer Disla, Defend Black Voters Coalition co-chair, told Michigan Advance. “Yet behind closed doors, those very same corporations are chasing tax breaks and anti-work legislation by contributing hundreds of thousands of dollars to the elected officials working to suppress the Black vote. Money speaks louder than words.” Judd Legum is the founder and author of Popular Information, an independent newsletter dedicated to accountability journalism, where this post originally appearedThe US inflation rate rose to 6.8% over the last year to its highest point since 1982, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Friday morning. The consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) rose by 0.8% in November after rising 0.9% in October. Price increases were seen across many sectors, including gas, food and housing. This was the sixth month in a row of price increases. Gasoline prices rose by 58.1% in November – the largest increase over 12 months since 1980. Within the food index, grocery store prices increased across the board for a third month in a row. Meat, poultry, fish and eggs saw a 0.9% increase in November while cereals and bakery products saw price increases of 0.8%. The price index that does not include food and energy rose 0.5% in November after a 0.6% increase in October. The prices of used and new cars, household furnishings, apparel and airline fares all notably rose last month. Ahead of Friday’s data release, Joe Biden released a statement saying that the inflation rate “does not reflect today’s reality”. “It does not reflect the expected price decreases in the weeks and months ahead, such as in the auto market,” Biden said in the statement. As inflation has become a line of attack from the administration’s critics over the last few months, the White House has maintained that today’s inflation is “transitory”, or a temporary rise in prices, because of the pandemic. The Federal Reserve last month took its first step to curb some of its pandemic assistance after pressure from critics around inflation. The central bank in November ended some of its stimulus programs, in which it bought bonds to stimulate the economy. But the Fed held off from adjusting interest rates – its main tool to control rising prices. Rising prices tend to be a political sore spot for the party in power, though its causes are complex. Republicans are already blaming Biden for Friday’s number, with the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, criticizing Democrats on Twitter for responding to inflation “by ramming through another massive socialist spending package”, referring to the $1.75tn social and climate spending bill that is in negotiations. While economists have been divided over the concern the federal government should have over inflation, some have pointed out that while inflation has been rising, the unemployment rate has remained low and wages have been increasing. And while consumer confidence has dropped because of inflation, spending has been strong with retail sales rising in October. • The article was amended on 17 December 2021 to clarify in the headline and text that the annualised inflation rate rose to 6.8%, not by 6.8%.Ralf Rangnick has made a positive start at Manchester United and things could look a lot better by the end of 2021. A trip to Norwich is followed by matches against Brentford, Brighton, Newcastle and Burnley. Dean Smith’s honeymoon at Carrow Road came to an abrupt end last weekend in the 3-0 defeat to Tottenham and Norwich’s upcoming fixtures do not look quite so friendly with the visit of United followed games against West Ham and Arsenal over the festive period. Smith could also be without up to four players against United due to Covid and unspecified injuries. Stephen Hollis Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Carrow Road Last season n/a Referee Darren England This season G5 Y29 R1 6 cards/game Odds H 33-5 A 1-2 D 4-1 NORWICH Subs from Gunn, Dowell, Tzolis, Sørensen, Idah, Placheta, Dowell, Omobamidele, Rupp, Cantwell Doubtful None Injured Normann (pelvis, 1 week), Rashica (groin, 4 weeks), Zimmermann (ankle, unknown), Williams (ineligible) Suspended None Discipline Y28 R1 Form LWWDDL Leading scorer Pukki 5 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Matic, Mata, Hannibal, Mengi, Lingard, Elanga, Jones, Wan-Bissaka, Lindelöf, Rashford, Van de Beek, Bailly Doubtful Matic (hamstring), Wan-Bissaka (match fitness) Injured Cavani (tendon, 1 week), Varane (hamstring, 1 week), Pogba (thigh, 3 months), Martial (knee, 1-2 weeks) Suspended None Discipline Y35 R2 Form WLLDWW Leading scorer Ronaldo 6Taylor Swift will face a jury trial over accusations that she plagiarised lyrics for her 2014 hit Shake It Off from another song. A US judge refused Swift’s request for the case to be dismissed on the grounds that a jury could find that the song copied Playas Gon’ Play, a song released by girl group 3LW in 2001. Both songs feature variations on the lines “players gonna play” and “haters gonna hate”. Reached by the Guardian, representatives for Swift declined to comment. District judge Michael W Fitzgerald had originally dismissed the lawsuit in 2018, saying that the lyrics were too “banal” to be copyrighted, citing 13 songs – by the likes of Fleetwood Mac and the Notorious BIG – that featured similar phrasing. But Playas Gon’ Play songwriters Sean Hall and Nathan Butler appealed the ruling, seeking a jury trial and unspecified damages, and a federal court reversed the decision in October 2019. In response, a representative for Swift said: “These men are not the originators, or creators, of the common phrases ‘players’ or ‘haters’ or combinations of them. They did not invent these common phrases nor are they the first to use them in a song.” They expressed their confidence that the “true writers of Shake It Off” – namely Swift and co-producers Max Martin and Shellback – “will prevail again. [Hall and Butler’s] claim is not a crusade for all creatives, it is a crusade for Mr Hall’s bank account.” On 9 December, Fitzgerald refused Swift’s request for a summary judgment, which would have immediately ruled that she did not breach copyright. Fitzgerald wrote: “Even though there are some noticeable differences between the works, there are also significant similarities in word usage and sequence/structure,” adding that “the court cannot presently determine that no reasonable juror could find substantial similarity of lyrical phrasing, word arrangement, or poetic structure between the two works”. He said experts put forward by Swift made “persuasive arguments” but that it wasn’t enough for her to escape the case. Lawyers for Hall and Butler said that the court “did the right thing”. “Our clients are finally moving closer to the justice they so richly deserve,” said lawyer Marina Bogorad. “The opinion … is especially gratifying to them because it reinforces the idea that their creativity and unique expression cannot be misappropriated without any retribution.” 3LW’s song charted at No 21 in the UK and No 81 in the US. Swift’s Shake It Off reached No 2 in the UK and No 1 in the US and is the biggest selling single of her career. This is not the first copyright case Swift has encountered with Shake It Off. In November 2015, R&amp;B singer Jessie Braham alleged that the song plagiarised his 2013 song Haters Gonna Hate. He demanded $42m in damages from Swift and distributor Sony, but his lawsuit was dismissed based on a lack of factual evidence. A date for the new trial has yet to be announced. Its outcome could become a reputational issue for Swift, who has made a point of campaigning for artists’ rights in recent years and of pursuing parties who she believes have infringed her copyright. And these are not unfamiliar scenarios for Swift on either side of the divide. She gave British pop band Right Said Fred a writing credit on her 2017 single Look What You Made Me Do, which interpolated the melody of their 1992 song I’m Too Sexy. This year, she received a co-writing credit on teenage pop star Olivia Rodrigo’s song Deja Vu in acknowledgment of its similarities to her 2019 song Cruel Summer, written with Jack Antonoff and St Vincent AKA Annie Clark. In 2016, she revealed that she was a co-writer of This Is What You Came For, a song performed by Rihanna and written by Swift’s ex-boyfriend, Calvin Harris. She was previously credited under a pseudonym, Nils Sjöberg. Spotify recently named Swift the second most-streamed musician in the world in 2021. She was pipped to the top spot by Puerto Rican star Bad Bunny.Workers in one Starbucks store, in Buffalo, New York, made history on Thursday by becoming Starbuck’s first unionized workplace in the US. It’s a watershed for the biggest coffee seller in the world, which operates 8,953 stores in the United States — and which has done everything in its power to keep its workers from forming a union. The vote itself was tiny. There were 19 baristas and shift supervisors who voted in favor of unionizing, 8 voted against. But it marked a huge victory, nonetheless. Starbucks had waged a massive anti-union campaign in Buffalo — sending out-of-town managers and even executives into stores to discourage unionizing, closing down some stores, and packing remaining stores with new employees in order to dilute pro-union employees’ voting power. For years, Starbucks workers have complained about the company’s labor practices, claiming that chronic understaffing has created a chaotic work environment, unpredictable hours, and difficulty in taking sick days. Despite episodic commitments by Starbucks management to change, the complaints have continued. They intensified during the pandemic when overstretched Starbucks employees had to deal with new health risks and safety protocols. The union election marks one of the highest-profile union wins in memory for US restaurant workers, who are among the least unionized in the country and whose pay and benefits are among the lowest in all of corporate America. It’s certain to encourage more unionizing efforts among workers in restaurant chains. What occurred on Thursday at one Starbucks store is part of a much larger pattern — a surge in strikes and labor actions across America. Kellogg’s striking workers are still holding the line and refusing to allow the company to separate employees into tiers (with newer workers getting lower pay and benefits). Amazon warehouse workers in Bessemer, Alabama will get another chance to unionize (the National Labor Relations Board found that Amazon used unfair labor practices in the recent election there). And 3,000 student workers at Columbia University have been on strike for six weeks to demand better pay and health care (on Monday, at least 100 members of the Columbia faculty joined them on the picket line). What’s going on? Partly, low-wage workers have more bargaining leverage now than they’ve had in years. As the pandemic recedes (let’s hope it continues to), consumers are spending at a higher rate than they have in over twenty months. To respond to this surge in pent-up demand, employers are seeking workers. At the same time, workers across America are taking a fresh look at their jobs. Record-high “quit” rates and near record low rates of labor-participation suggest that a significant number are asking themselves if they want to go back to their old jobs — and are answering “no.” Part of the “no” is an unwillingness to settle for their former wages and working conditions — especially in big companies (like Starbucks, Amazon, and Kelloggs) whose profits have been sky-high. (Or even in richly-endowed universities like Columbia.) That “no” is also reverberating across America in the form of strikes. Many of these workers were on the front lines in the pandemic, and now feel it’s time for their efforts to be rewarded. At a deeper level, I suspect the pandemic itself has caused many people to reevaluate what they’re doing with their lives and to set different priorities for themselves. For years, many big corporations like Starbucks have sold themselves as “socially-responsible” — offering consumers the soothing reassurance that in buying their products they’re somehow advancing the common good. That was always bullshit. Corporations exist only to make money. Corporate social responsibility is a jejune form of public relations. Starbucks’s aggressively marketed “socially responsible” business model turns out to be no different. When corporations like Starbucks fight their workers’ legal right to form a union, the PR veil is lifted for all to see what’s really going on. Starbucks calls its workers “partners,” but they’re not in fact partners. They don’t share in the firm’s profits. Between January and September of this year, Starbucks’s revenue soared to $20.9bn — compared to $17.3bn in the same period last year. Its president and chief executive officer, Kevin Johnson, made $14,665,575 in total compensation last year and is on the way to getting a far larger package this year. Yet current average hourly pay at Starbucks is $14, or $28,000 a year. It’s all about power — the power of workers to join together to gain the bargaining clout they need for better pay and working conditions, up against corporate power to keep wages so low that shareholders and executives can make even more. The victory at one Starbucks store in Buffalo, New York, is a small step on the long road toward rebalancing such power. • This article was amended on 11 December 2021 to clarify that Buffalo was Starbucks’ first unionized workplace in the US, not worldwide. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comMary, Queen of Scots used a complicated “letterlocking” process to conceal the secrets of the last letter she wrote before she was beheaded, researchers have discovered. Written in French on 8 February 1587 to Henry III, king of France from her prison cell, the letter sees Mary write that she has “been advised of my sentence: I am to be executed like a criminal at eight in the morning. “I have asked for my papers, which they have taken away, in order that I might make my will, but I have been unable to recover anything of use to me, or even get leave either to make my will freely or to have my body conveyed after my death, as I would wish, to your kingdom where I had the honour to be queen, your sister and old ally,” writes Mary, in a translation provided by the National Library of Scotland, where the letter is held. Now an international team of researchers have found that Mary used a delicate folding process to seal the letter, ensuring that any tampering would be immediately obvious to its recipient. The researchers, from universities including King’s College London, MIT and Glasgow, are part of the Unlocking History group, and have been exploring the historical process of “letterlocking”, in which letters were folded to become their own envelopes, before envelopes were invented. Earlier this year, they managed to read an unopened letter written in 1697 without breaking its seal, using X-rays to see inside the document slice by slice, and create a 3D image. Now, as part of research that has seen them look at 250,000 letters, they have discovered the technique of the “spiral lock”, which was used by Elizabeth I as well as her executed cousin Mary, along with politicians, ambassadors and a correspondent of Sir Francis Walsingham, Elizabeth’s spymaster. “One of the most spectacular examples of spiral locking … is Mary’s last letter,” they write in an article which was published on Friday in the Electronic British Library Journal. “The letter’s contents are powerful and moving: written on the eve of her execution, it acts not only as a letter – a document intended to be sent to and read by someone at distance – but also a last will and testament and a bid for martyrdom. It is sometimes said that writing the letter was Mary’s last act; in fact, after she wrote it, the letter had to be folded and secured shut. After writing her last message, Mary used letterlocking to prepare it for delivery.” The academics, who include Jana Dambrogio of MIT Libraries and Daniel Starza Smith from KCL, write of how challenging it is to explore the process of letterlocking, because the letter packets are “designed to be broken” by their recipients. The spiral lock requires more than 30 steps to complete, a mix of folding and slits and sometimes adhesive, to prevent unwanted readings. It is, they say, “a highly intricate technique that required time, patience and great skill: one wrong move and your locking mechanism could break and you would have to start the letter again. “The mechanics of this lock force the person opening the letter to tear the lock apart in order to access the contents,” write the academics. “Because the lock breaks in multiple places, it is impossible to piece back together in a way that would allow it to pass through the slits again; if someone thought their correspondence had been tampered with, it would be relatively simple to detect.” The article identifies the folds and slits that show that Mary’s last letter was locked, adding that “because it is written in Mary’s own hand from her prison cell, we have reasonable grounds to believe she locked it herself”. Dambrogio said: “Mary’s last letter is a document of enormous national importance in Scotland and its contents are well known. But working with it in person and figuring out its unique spiral lock was thrilling as a researcher – and a real a-ha! moment in the study of letterlocking,” “The letter is a powerful and moving document written on the eve of Mary’s execution, not only a letter but also a last will and testament of sorts. But our big discovery is that after she wrote the letter she used one of the most elaborate and secure letterlocking methods to seal it. Not only that, she uses a variation of the technique – a single large slit rather than a run of small ones – which may testify to the limited tools she had available in her final hours.” A letter by Catherine de’ Medici from 1570 and one written by Elizabeth I in 1573 to Henry III, in which she expresses her surprise at Henry’s suggestion of her possible marriage to the king’s younger brother François, are also identified by the article as having been sealed with a spiral lock. The research is part of the British Library’s exhibition Elizabeth and Mary: Royal Cousins, Rival Queens. “Letterlocking is one of the most important communication techniques the world has known, but its history is only just coming to light,” said Smith. “For some 600 years, virtually all letters were sent using letterlocking, before the invention of the modern gummed envelope in the 19th century – it was as important to epistolary communication as computer coding is to emails today. The study of letterlocking supplies us with rich information about the concern historical figures had with communication security, and it also testifies to the inventiveness and even aesthetic creativity with which they responded to these concerns. The fantastically intricate spiral lock brings all these aspects together.”The Guardian has today announced three new appointments to its editorial newsletters team as part of an ongoing refresh around its newsletters offering. Archie Bland will become editor, daily newsletter, responsible for the writing and production of the Guardian’s daily current affairs newsletter. Most recently Archie was joint executive producer of the Guardian’s flagship daily news podcast Today in Focus, and has been a senior reporter and editor at the Guardian for seven years. Hannah J Davies has been appointed deputy editor, newsletters and will work across the Guardian’s complete newsletter portfolio, overseeing both content and development. Hannah has been the Guardian’s deputy TV editor for two years. Craille Maguire Gillies also joins as newsletter production editor, helping to improve curation and design. Craille has worked in production for the Guardian’s culture desk across news and features. Charlie Lindlar, previously an opinion editor at the Huffington Post, will cover as newsletter production editor until Craille returns from maternity leave. Archie moves into his new role early next year, while the deputy editor, newsletters and newsletter production editor are already in post. The Guardian is currently refreshing its suite of newsletters to make them more compelling and easier to discover for readers, with updated designs and new formats. The Guardian has already launched TechScape, a weekly newsletter from the Guardian’s UK tech editor, Alex Hern; Inside Saturday, a behind-the-scenes look at the Guardian’s brand new Saturday magazine every weekend; The Guide, an irreverent take on pop-culture goings-on every Friday; and Down to Earth, a weekly environment newsletter from the Guardian’s top climate crisis correspondents. A new video game newsletter, Pushing Buttons, will also launch later this month written by the Guardian’s video games editor, Keza MacDonald. Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “Newsletters are a major editorial focus right now and play an important part in deepening readers’ engagement with Guardian journalism. These new editorial appointments reflect our ongoing investment in the newsletters team, and I’m looking forward to seeing what they produce in 2022.” Toby Moses, head of newsletters, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “I’m excited to be gathering such a talented team to build a new portfolio of original, authored newsletters that the Guardian can be proud of. This is a collaborative effort across the business – from product and engineering, marketing and reader revenue, to our global colleagues in the US and Australia – as we expand our newsletter capabilities to offer readers great content and fresh new ways to engage with the Guardian.” Archie Bland, editor, daily newsletter, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “I’m completely thrilled to be joining the newsletter team to write and develop the Guardian’s daily current affairs newsletter. We’ll aim to make it an indispensable part of our readers’ morning routine, coupling the authority and sweep of the Guardian’s best journalism with the pleasures of an email from a well-informed friend. I can’t wait to get started.” -ends- For more information please contact: media.enquiries@theguardian.com Notes to editors About Guardian News &amp; Media Guardian News &amp; Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, one of the world’s leading English-language news websites. Traffic from outside of the UK now represents around two-thirds of the Guardian’s total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week, first published in 1821, and the world’s oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer.The Omicron variant has the potential to “very substantially overwhelm the NHS” and cause up to 10,000 hospitalisations a day if it is as virulent as Delta, according to a leading scientist who helped shape Britain’s coronavirus lockdown strategy. Prof Neil Ferguson, a mathematical epidemiologist from Imperial College London, said the UK was already experiencing a “very explosive wave of infection” from the new variant. This could lead to “quite an explosive wave of hospitalisations,” depending on the severity of disease caused by Omicron. “Unfortunately, most of the projections we have right now are that the Omicron wave could very substantially overwhelm the NHS, getting up to peak levels of admissions of 10,000 people per day,” he told the Guardian. Ferguson added that the figure could be reached “sometime in January” but noted the impact on deaths was less clear. He also added the caveat that the projection was based on assumptions around the variant’s ability to evade existing protection, and the premise that Omicron was similar to Delta in terms of the severity of disease it causes. But Ferguson said: “Even the best-case scenarios involve several-fold more admissions per day than we’re getting at the moment – we are at about 700 right now.” The stark figure of 10,000 hospitalisations a day is more than double the current highest level, with 4,582 admissions on 12 January this year. Some have been quick to point to early signs that Omicron may cause more mild disease, including former prime minister Theresa May. Ferguson said, at present, however, there was very little data on the severity of disease caused by the new variant, and that it was not necessarily the case that viruses evolved to cause less severe illness – such a situation only occurs if it favours their transmission. With Covid, as “99% of transmission occurs before anybody even gets to hospital,” the severity of disease is “a very minor selection pressure”. While there was a “little bit of a hint” in UK data of a slightly higher rate of asymptomatic infection with Omicron, Ferguson said it was too soon to say if it was good news. “It could be confounded with many other things like vaccine status [or] reinfection,” he said. “So we’ll just have to wait and see.” He cast doubt on the plan B measures announced by the prime minister on Wednesday being enough if his worst-case scenarios came true. “In the context of Delta, I think the government had a clear policy that hospitalisations were manageable, deaths were relatively low, and they did not want to restrict people’s freedoms any more than they had to. I think that calculus has now changed with Omicron,” said Ferguson. Nevertheless, the measures could prove to be enough if Omicron turns out to cause much less severe disease than the Delta variant. “If it turns out, actually, it looks like hospital admissions may only peak at 2,000 to 3,000 a day, then it’s possible that something like plan B – maybe a little bit plan B-plus – might be sufficient, given the government’s overall motivation to do the minimum possible to avoid the NHS being completely overwhelmed,” he said. But if Omicron ends up even close to the severity of Delta, models suggest things could be different. “In most of those scenarios, all I would say is plan B will not be enough to stop an overwhelming wave of hospitalisations.” The hope, he added, was that the new measures would slow the spread of Omicron, potentially dropping its doubling time to four or five days. That may not sound like much, but Ferguson noted it could buy crucial time to get more booster vaccines into arms – and allow scientists to get a better understanding of the risk of people ending up in hospital. Ferguson’s team produced modelling early in the pandemic that suggested the UK would suffer 500,000 Covid deaths – before the onset of vaccines or a lockdown. But the disaster scenarios often proffered in these models are averted due to changes in government policy. Sometimes, however, the modelling just comes a cropper: in July, Ferguson said the final phase of unlocking in England would bring on 100,000 cases a day – a level that was never reached – while the peaks and troughs over the past few months have left experts sometimes scratching their heads. “I think people have been overinterpreting the ups and downs, which have been going on really since mid-July,” Ferguson said. “I made the unfortunate, overconfident prediction that we’d hit 100,000 cases, which I then later apologised for, but that was a very clear multi-week exponential growth.” He added: “Since then what we’ve seen is occasional rises, occasional falls, partly coincident with relaxing measures, a lot with school holidays, and a lot with vaccine rollout. So we’ve had this gradual pattern of increasing contacts – it’s not like on ‘Freedom Day’ in July, everybody went back to normal.” Ferguson said the booster programme was already making a difference, with significant drops seen in hospitalisations and deaths, while there is evidence it may even have had an impact on infection rates in some groups. “But now, in a certain sense, that progress is slightly moot given we now have a variant which has evolved specifically to not wipe out, but substantially evade that immunity we’ve built up in population,” he said. “It really is essential in the next few weeks that we get as many boosters out as possible, particularly getting high coverage in the most vulnerable groups, but frankly, across the population.”For Misha Novitskyi, the question of whether Russia will invade Ukraine is not theoretical. The enemy is just 50 metres away behind a concrete slab. From time to time Russian voices float eerily across a wintry no man’s land of ragged trees and scrub. “When they light their stoves you can see the smoke,” Novitskyi – a senior lieutenant in the Ukrainian army – said, speaking from what is in effect Europe’s eastern front with Russia. He added: “Every day they shoot at us.” The conflict between Kyiv and pro-Russian separatists has gone on for nearly eight long years. There are first world war echoes. Both sides face off along a fixed 250-mile “border”, or line of contact, which snakes across Ukraine’s Donbas region. There are muddy trenches, fortified command posts and buildings smashed up by shell fire. Novitskyi defends a former textiles factory. It is now a ghostly and roofless ruin. On a wall someone has scrawled a helpful reminder: “Fuck up and you die.” All is quiet until it isn’t. On Thursday morning Ukrainian soldiers were making their way towards a nearby frontline position overlooking the city of Donetsk. The separatists are based at its wrecked airport, along what was once the runway. Three shots rang out: sniper rounds. The soldiers quickened their pace. A pheasant rose from a yellow field marked out with red signs warning of mines and unexploded ordnance. Old-fashioned metal wires connect the brigade’s forward post – an ant-hill-like embankment with bunkers and ladders – to its nearby village HQ. Much of the diplomacy of the past week is reminiscent of a bygone age, too. Vladimir Putin has made no secret of his contempt for Ukraine. It is, in his view, sub-sovereign: less of a country, more an enduring zone of Russian imperial influence and control. In 2014 Putin seized Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula and installed separatist proxies in Donetsk and neighbouring Luhansk, adjoining Russia. What Putin intends next is worryingly unclear. The signs are ominous. This autumn Moscow has amassed troops and heavy weapons right across Ukraine’s borders. Satellite images showing about 175,000 Russian soldiers have spooked the US and its allies. It remains unclear whether this is a negotiating tactic or buildup to invasion. On Tuesday Joe Biden spoke to Putin for two hours via video link. The US president reaffirmed his commitment to Ukraine’s territorial integrity. But he refused to offer Putin what he wants: a cast-iron guarantee that Kyiv will never join Nato. Biden on Thursday briefed Ukraine’s comedian turned president Volodymyr Zelenskiy on his talks with his Russian counterpart. Eastern European nations are concerned. They fear the US is preparing to “accommodate” the Kremlin’s apparent security concerns – thereby rewarding Moscow for solving a problem it created. Why Putin has chosen this moment to escalate tensions is a mystery. One theory is that he realises Ukraine is moving inexorably away from Moscow’s orbit. For his part, Novitskyi rejected Putin’s recent assertion made in an essay that Ukraine and Russia are “a single people”. Novitskyi said: “Russia is stuck in the Soviet past. Ukraine is travelling in another direction, towards the west and Europe. We are an independent nation. “Russia and Ukraine are not one people but black and white, yin and yang.” Earlier this week Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, toured the frontline where Novitskyi is based, at an industrial area in the city of Avdiyivka. A little way to the south is Donetsk, under rebel control since 2014. Reznikov predicts there will be a bloody massacre, should Moscow attack, with both sides taking huge casualties. For now, nobody knows whether Putin’s tanks will advance here, across a landscape of vast black fields, belching chimney stacks and Orthodox churches adorned with glinting gold cupolas. The existing conflict might seem retro in nature, but this is very much a 21st-century war. “We have better weapons than in the past,” Lt Alexander Tymoshuk pointed out, standing in a trench corridor fixed up with netting and reinforced with metal plates. In the first world war, reconnaissance involved sending out groups of men. Now surveillance cameras could detect any movement or intrusion, Tymoshuk noted. Ukraine recently used for the first time a Turkish-made drone to blow up a Russian-made howitzer. Paradoxically, those serving on the Ukrainian frontline say they are unworried by the threat of invasion. They claim Kyiv’s army is stronger, more experienced and better equipped than it was eight years ago, when it crumpled under superior Russian firepower. According to Vitaly Barabash, Avdiyivka’s mayor, Russia would soon find itself embroiled in a partisan war, were it to grab more territory. He estimated about 300,000 military veterans would pick up weapons – in contrast to 2014, when some of the patriotic volunteers who fought and died were IT workers from Kyiv. Too much blood had already been spilled on the front, he said, and on the Maidan, the central square in Kyiv where in 2014 anti-government protesters ousted Ukraine’s pro-Russian leader Viktor Yanukovych. He added: “We won’t go back to Russia. Nobody wants to be Putin’s slave.” As Biden prepares to hold further talks with Moscow, including over Nato, people continue to die. Since September, 16 members of the Ukrainian forces have been killed, including a 22-year-old private shot dead last week. Most are killed by snipers or IEDs. Others are wounded. “It’s really hard to take casualties. Some strings in me are broken. I’ve become more cynical,” Lt Ivan Skuratovsky said, showing off his basement living quarters. Two cats dozed on his bed. The base has a small library and mess room, its wooden pillars decorated with drawings sent by Ukrainian schoolchildren. The civilian cost of this unresolved conflict with Russia has been enormous. The villages directly in range of hostile fire are mostly abandoned, though a few elderly residents refuse to leave. The frontline runs through Timiryazev Street, named after a Russian botanist. The street’s once-pleasant dachas are all wrecks. The gardens survive. In summer the soldiers gather walnuts, as they thread their way past on patrol. They also look after the dogs left behind when their owners left in a hurry, never to come back. In the absence of humans nature has flourished, with the odd blue tit and many crows. Since the war began, Avdiyivka’s character has changed. According to Mariia Lepilova, a former teacher, the younger generation is more pro-Ukrainian. Donbas was once mostly Russian-speaking. There had been a switch to the Ukrainian language in schools and shops, she said. Children learn Ukrainian in class from the age of six or seven. Lepilova said she was forced to leave the town in the winter of 2014, when shelling made living there impossible. “There was no power. Our house was hit. My 10-year-old daughter was very afraid. Almost everyone left,” she said. Fighting broke out again in 2017. Since then much of the population has come back, with flats rebuilt and new investment. Like many in the town she has relatives living in Donetsk, a pro-Russian enclave known as the DNR or Donetsk People’s Republic. She can no longer visit them but speaks on the phone. “We avoid politics and talk about our kids,” she said. “People can get used to anything,” she added. Previously, residents of Avdiyivka visited Donetsk to go to restaurants or the cinema, or to support the city’s famous football team, FC Shakhtar Donetsk, which played in the Donbas Arena. The nearest McDonald’s is now 190 miles away in the city of Kharkiv. Lepilova said she missed the cultural life in the big city and its museum, especially its collection of Dutch paintings and Greek sculpture. “It’s the city of my youth,” she said. Moscow’s attempt to claim the region for itself had pushed people towards embracing a Ukrainian identity, she added. Back on the airport frontline there was more sniper fire. The local brigade commander, Maj Sergei Kozachok, said his men were ready for anything the Russian side might throw at them. The separatists were constantly fortifying their positions, he said, with no visible increase in activity this week. Kozachok said his soldiers obeyed the Minsk ceasefire agreement, signed by Kyiv in 2015 under intense Russian pressure. It forbids the use of heavy weapons. Recent tensions have brought the treaty to the brink of collapse. The Ukrainian side did not fire back, he claimed, despite repeated “provocations”. What would his message to Putin be, in the unlikely event they were to meet face to face? Kozachok thought for a moment and smiled. He answered: “I would punch him on the ear.”The Spider-Man star Tom Holland has revealed he is considering quitting acting at the age of 25 as part of a “midlife crisis” come early. Holland, who was promoting the latest instalment of the Marvel series, said he was considering giving up acting to return to his roots in dancing, after he played Billy Elliot in the West End as a child. “I don’t even know if I want to be an actor,” he told Sky News in an interview to promote his new film. “I started acting when I was 11 and I haven’t done anything else, so I’d like to go and do other things. Genuinely, I’m sort of … having a midlife crisis – at 25, I’m having like a pre-midlife crisis.” The actor revealed this week that he had signed up to play Fred Astaire in a biopic, a move that could signal the beginning of his career shift. Holland acknowledged a debt to the Spider-Man franchise, which had enabled him to “do some amazing things”. The latest film, No Way Home, is expected to be the biggest of the year – possibly ever – with pre-sales before its UK release on 15 December outstripping that of Avengers: Endgame (2019). Holland is not the first actor to tire quickly of the profession. Greta Garbo announced a “temporary” retirement at the age of 36 in 1941, while she was still one of the biggest box office draws in the world. It lasted 49 years, until her death in 1990. Although her reasons are not fully understood, Garbo is believed to have been a private, introverted person who struggled with the spotlight cast on her through fame, and who perhaps pre-empted the declining opportunities at the time for female actors as their youthful beauty faded. More recently, the Game of Thrones star Jack Gleeson retired after the series finished. He told Entertainment Weekly that he had been acting since he was eight and had “stopped enjoying it as much as I used to”. He said that earning a living from acting had changed his relationship with his craft compared with the “therapeutic” benefits he had enjoyed when it was just a hobby.Experience Hamilton 10/10 Without doubt Hamilton’s trump card, with 15 seasons and seven world championships under his belt, including several that have gone to the wire. He will bring a calm confidence to this final test. This year he appears particularly unfazed by the pressure and his decision-making and judgment are as sharp as ever, drawing on the lessons learned from a remarkable career. There is no more formidable opponent on the grid. Verstappen 7/10 Far from a newbie, the Dutchman is now in his seventh season in F1 but crucially this is his first title fight. He is certainly not lacking in self-belief and has shown great composure and some absolutely flawless performances this season to reach this stage but must now prove himself in the heat of a crucible he has never experienced. A test like no other for the 24-year-old. Single lap ability Hamilton 7/10 Has long-since addressed what he felt was a weak point in his game in qualifying and made great strides. Yet this year he has been unable to match Verstappen, much as he has often extracted more than might be expected. Sensitive to how well the car finds its sweet spot, especially vital in the limited running of qualifying, the single-lap test in the Mercedes this season has proved perhaps the toughest he has encountered since 2014, so is battling more variables than Verstappen. Verstappen 8/10 Has outscored Hamilton in poles this year by nine to five. Verstappen has delivered some of the best qualifying laps of his career and has outperformed his car even on tracks not suited to the Red Bull. Yet has also shown moments of frailty, notably in grasping to overachieve, in failing to slow for yellow flags that cost him in Qatar and on an absolutely monumental lap in Saudi Arabia, when going too hard into the final corner was massively costly. Racecraft Hamilton 9/10 Hamilton’s racecraft has been acknowledged throughout his career from the very earliest days in karting. He has honed it since with an ability to read races, to manage his tyres to perfection and to find pace where others flounder. There is a sharp racing intelligence behind the natural talent and reactions, displayed earlier this season in being circumspect when wheel-to-wheel with Verstappen and in the latter stages in scything through the pack in Brazil. Verstappen 8/10 Aggressive, yes, and steadfastly unafraid to get his elbows out, but Verstappen now also brings a much more measured and calculated tone to his racing. This season for all the on-track tussles with Hamilton he has largely brought great precision to his instincts. Has come through the field brilliantly, notably in Russia from the back of the grid, and has shown an intelligent grasp of strategy. Yet still there is the chink of his single-mindedness proving costly when the bigger picture is at stake, as Monza proved. Mental strength Hamilton 10/10 Has always pushed to make himself stronger physically and mentally and is perhaps now in better shape in both than at any point in his career. His refusal to be bowed by circumstances has been rightly recognised. Setbacks and frustrations are of course bemoaned but then discarded as he immediately looks to find ways around them with a fearsome, relentless focus. Will not be distracted by the occasion. Verstappen 8/10 “I never even think of the mental side of things because I never had any issues. I just enjoy it and drive as fast I can,” Verstappen has pointedly noted. With the confidence of youth he has not gone far wrong doing so and has ridden setbacks well this season, not least in coping with losing a 32-point lead within two races. No quitter but he is, however, in uncharted territory now and under the psychological pressure of the biggest moment of his career. Simply driving fast might not be enough. Leading edge Hamilton 7/10 The world champion will be more than aware of the dangers of a DNF and that Verstappen enjoys the win-rate advantage. He will have to be wary of lunges that he knows the Dutchman will be unafraid to try, as he did at Monza, which ended with both of them in the gravel trap. Hamilton will have to balance the risk-reward ratio to a finer margin than his rival. Verstappen 8/10 The two drivers are tied on points at 369.5 apiece but crucially Verstappen remains the championship leader by virtue of having won nine races to Hamilton’s eight. It is, after 21 meetings, a potentially crucial advantage. Should neither driver finish Verstappen will be champion based on win countback and he will know this going into a risky move with the potential to eliminate them both, attacking or defensive, although the FIA has warned that a deliberate offence could carry a points deduction. Totals Hamilton 43/50 Verstappen 39/50This tart is decadent and a bit over the top, but it’s also everything you want when planning a celebration-style dessert. The various components can be made quickly and kept aside to be assembled as one, so, if you need to, take your time and space out the work over a few days. I’m going for triple chocolate here, but without making it sickly; the base is dark, crunchy and salted, the filling delicate and the topping slightly sharp and creamy. Triple chocolate tart Prep 50 min Chill 4 hr+ Cook 40 min Serves 8 For the biscuit crumb 200g plain flour 35g cocoa powder 80g light-brown sugar ½ tsp (3g) bicarbonate of soda ⅓ tsp (2g) sea salt 125g cold unsalted butter, cubed 50g golden syrup For the tart 250g biscuit crumbs (see above and method) 70g unsalted butter, melted For the milk chocolate panna cotta 1½ gelatine leaves 50ml double cream 50ml whole milk Pinch of flaky salt 1 tbsp honey 200g milk chocolate, chopped into pieces For the creme fraiche topping 130g creme fraiche 130ml double cream ½ vanilla pod, seeds scraped out (optional) Pinch of salt 1 tbsp caster sugar 50g white chocolate First make the biscuit crumb. In a stand mixer with the paddle attachment or in a food processor, combine all of the dry ingredients and mix well. Add in the butter and mix again until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Pour in the golden syrup and mix until a very loose dough forms. Spread this out on a large baking tray lined with greaseproof paper, and bake at 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 for 35-40 minutes, stirring it every 15 minutes so it bakes evenly. Leave to cool completely, then blitz to crumbs (or break up with a rolling pin). Weigh out 250g of the crumb mix (the excess will keep well in an airtight container for two weeks; sprinkle over ice-cream or through an ice-cream base just before freezing, or mix through buttercream if you’re decorating a cake), then stir in the melted butter to coat. Press the buttery crumb mix into a 20cm loose-bottomed tart tin so it covers the bottom and goes up the sides, then chill while you make the filling. Soak the gelatine in ice-cold water until soft, then squeeze out and set aside. Warm the cream, milk, salt and honey in a medium pan until steaming, then add the softened gelatine and stir to dissolve. Pour over the chopped chocolate, leave to sit for a minute, then stir with a whisk until the chocolate melts. Leave to cool, then chill for four to six hours, until set. In the bowl of a stand mixer, whip the cooled panna cotta mixture for a minute or two, until it turns silky, then spoon over the crumb base and smooth out the top. In the bowl of a stand mixer (or by hand), whisk the creme fraiche, cream, vanilla (if using), salt and sugar to soft peaks, then spoon on top of the panna cotta. Chill, then serve with the white chocolate shaved on top to finish. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoOn the morning of 3 December, Priyantha Kumara, the 49-year-old export manager of Rajco Industries, asked his workers to remove a sticker from a machine in their factory in Sialkot. Kumara, a Sri Lankan, had lived in the industrial town in Punjab since 2010, when he and his two brothers had come to Pakistan in search of better economic opportunities. The Kumaras worked hard, kept their heads down, and like migrants the world over had managed to build honest lives out of their lonely labour. The sticker in question had been put up by supporters of Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan (TLP), a hardline Islamist party that in April 2021 was declared a militant organisation by prime minister Imran Khan’s government. Khan has been nicknamed Captain U-Turn by his opponents, and proceeded to remove the ban on the TLP a mere six months later, bending to the fundamentalist outfit when they took to the streets in a dharna or protest. Khan himself had popularised the dharna as a form of political strategy during his opposition days, and though the TLP’s agitation was violent, killing as many as six policemen as they rampaged through the streets of Lahore, Khan responded by taking them off the terror list. Kumara had lived in Pakistan long enough to know to stay away from our serpentine politics. He wanted the sticker removed because he was a diligent and professional manager, and the factory was to undergo a whitewash ahead of a delegation of visitors arriving. When the workers refused, he removed the sticker himself, at which point some of his young employees erupted in a fury, accusing Kumara of blasphemy – religious verses had been printed on the sticker – and exhorting their co-workers to kill him. In Pakistan, to accuse someone of blasphemy is a death sentence. You can denounce someone without even clarifying how exactly they blasphemed – lest you commit blasphemy yourself – so the charge is often used to settle enmities, land disputes or petty vendettas. Hundreds of factory workers chased Kumara, tearing his clothes and beating him. A co-worker tried to shield Kumara, protecting him with his own body, but he could not hold back the angry young men for long. After they broke Kumara’s bones, they dragged him out to the road and set him alight. The killers, all young men and boys, shouted TLP slogans and took selfies for their social media feeds, standing next to the black smoke of what the Pakistani journalist Zarrar Khuhro called their “human bonfire”. For timid men to erupt in sudden violence in south Asia is not new, we are a riotous subcontinent – but the selfies, those are new. One of the men who posed in front of Kumara’s burning body was captured by another lens. Holding his camera up above his face as he glared into the screen, one could read the writing on the back of his smartphone: “Apna time ayega,” it said, citing the lyrics of a popular Bollywood rap song. My time will come. Though Khan himself condemned the blasphemy killing and the military declared “zero tolerance” for extremists, not everyone was in full accord. Pervez Khattak, Pakistan’s doddering defence minister, told the press that there was no link between the murderous lynching and the government’s flip-flopping and unbanning of the TLP. “Murders take place,” he opined, when young men are emotional. “When you were in college, were you also not emotional?” he asked a journalist. There has been no recognition that enraged men like this tend also to be victims of a poorly imagined globalisation. Men who left rural communities for cities in search of wealth and opportunity, only to find that nothing awaited them except the “glittering misery” of urban life. Unheard and unseen, these angry men toil with no future and few prospects ahead of them. They are the casualty of so many colliding forces, both social and political, that exploit their dreams of liberty and economic security, using them for cheap labour – Rajco Industries makes sportswear for export, shiny workout gear sold for hundreds of dollars – in return for a suffocating and crushing invisibility. This invisibility is the source of a chilling rage, a murderous undercurrent travelling beneath us at all times. It spares no one, not the young, not the old, infecting everyone equally. A viral video of a stray dog in Islamabad was recently uploaded to social media. Though the shivering, frightened dog averts its eyes from the humans that surround it, the squeaky, babyish voice of a young girl, a child, can be heard off-camera: “I want to rip it to pieces,” she says, in a tinny, cartoon-like voice. Across the border in India, where Narendra Modi’s rightwing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has held power for the last seven years, the cases of lynchings are too many and too grotesque to count. The Indian right has all but made living as a Muslim a crime, and routinely paints Muslims as jihad-hungry fifth columnists: Muslim men who marry Hindu women are accused of committing “love jihad”. Recently, saffron-clad mobs assembled in Gurgaon, a Delhi satellite, with the sole purpose of stopping Muslims from performing their daily prayers. “There will be no namaz here,” screamed angry Hindu fundamentalists. When Muslims, with fewer and fewer mosques to pray in, began to offer their prayers outside on the dirt of Gurgaon’s open roadsides, the furious men howled that they would not tolerate Muslim “land jihad”. “What counts today, the question which is looming on the horizon,” wrote the political philosopher Frantz Fanon, “is the need for a redistribution of wealth. Humanity must reply to this question or be shaken to pieces by it.” The collective rage shimmering in the subcontinent is set against a paper-thin political fragility: the fragility of our leaders, small men who cannot stomach criticism or make the effort to care for a wounded and terrified citizenry; the fragility of majorities who refuse to cede any ground to minorities; the fragility of damaged men whose hearts are broken and cannot express themselves except through unhinged acts of cruelty; and the fragility of the rich who are blind to the anxieties of the dispossessed all around them. Fatima Bhutto is a Pakistani author of fiction and nonfiction. Her novel The Runaways was published last yearWe are a nation of sweet tooths, consuming more than twice as much sugar as the global average. But with too much sugar linked to serious health conditions, how can we wean ourselves off it? I asked Graham MacGregor, chairman of campaign group Action on Sugar. Graham, I always joke that the only thing I stand to inherit from my family is diabetes. But recently I’ve been taking it seriously and cutting out sugar. It’s hard. Well, it’s stuffed into everything. I hate the impenetrable names – dextrose, sucrose, fructose. Why can’t they just say “sugar”? That’s just one of the tricks of the food industry. Like how they’ll say something is made without added sugar because it uses a fruit concentrate. That’s still sugar. Refined sugar is a concentrate – just of cane or beet. The industry gets away with murder. You have experience fighting the food industry – you also founded Action on Salt, which successfully campaigned for industry-wide salt reduction. Are salt and sugar comparable? They’re both hidden in vast amounts in our food, to make bad ingredients taste good cheaply, and are linked to problems such as obesity and heart disease. And they’re addictive. Addictive? Really? OK, well, if I’m being scientific I’d say they lead to habituation. Our salt taste receptors get suppressed over time, so you need more to get a salty taste. Same for sugar. Look, I’m not a sugar nut who thinks every health problem is sugar’s doing. But the evidence for healthy food’s positive impact is overwhelming. What change would you like to see? The same thing as salt: targets set for gradual sugar reduction. Now, food in the supermarket has 20 to 40% less salt and no one’s noticed. The issue with sugar is reformulating the products. So if a biscuit is roughly 40% sugar … Oh man, a biscuit is my only treat … Don’t have biscuits. If you took out half the sugar, you’d lose a lot of bulk. Would you accept a smaller biscuit? I’d choose a smaller one over no biscuit. The point is, they’d need to put something back into the biscuit, a bulking ingredient that does the same as sugar but has fewer calories. The food industry is actually working on an ingredient like that. That’s positive! Plus there are junk food bans coming – on advertising at the end of 2022; on buy-one-get-one-free promotions from April. Perhaps sugar will go the same way as salt. The salt issue isn’t over. Action on Salt was lucky: it was a Labour government and they’d set up the Food Standards Agency to be beyond ministerial control. Then the Conservatives got in. I think Andrew Lansley was on the side of the food industry, because he made it responsible for policing itself. As one of my colleagues said, it was like putting Dracula in charge of the blood bank. They stopped reducing salt further – we did a report about how many deaths this was responsible for. But the bans would be good. If they happen. Could artificial sweeteners be useful? There’s no evidence they’re toxic, but are they good? One has to be sceptical when there’s big money involved, even if it’s a natural sweetener. An oleander leaf can kill you and it’s natural – it’s probably the most dangerous poison out there. Actually, maybe novichok is. Graham! I do not want to think about novichok. I’m off to not eat a biscuit! Bye!For quite a loud woman, it’s amazing how hard Judith Howell had to work to get heard. Howell, 49, used to be a government lobbyist, and she noticed a well-known phenomenon: “It’s incredibly male-dominated, and I’d find that if I said something it would get picked up by someone else in the meeting as if they’d said it. So I’d have to push a bit harder, be a bit more strident, literally interrupt and – not shout, but raise my voice. And some people found that very annoying.” Howell cheerfully admits that she has a loud voice. “I grew up in a family of boys,” she boomed. “And I learned to sing at a young age, so I know how to project.” As a rowing coach, when she gives instructions to her crew from the riverbank, she can be heard from nearly a mile away. In a career that required the ability to make a case as forcefully as possible, she didn’t see anything wrong with it. But sometimes she would be taken aside and told she was overconfident, or pushy. “And I’d think – I’m literally doing the same thing as the men.” For women like Howell, who know that they are loud because they are passionate or confident, being asked to be quiet is more than just a sexist insult: it can have severe professional consequences. This week, a physicist at Exeter University struck a small blow in their defence. Dr Annette Plaut, who was sacked by the university after a 30-year career, won a claim for unfair dismissal after she said that her bosses could not tolerate her “naturally loud” voice, or her demonstrative body language. To Sara, an academic in Leeds, the story was all too resonant: anonymous student feedback from her lectures complained that she was “too loud”. “I felt a bit embarrassed when I first read it,” she said. “But then I also felt a bit indignant! It’s one of the comments that’s stuck with me despite my best efforts. I do often wonder if I’m being too loud in a class, but then usually only in retrospect. When I’m in the middle of teaching, it doesn’t cross my mind.” She has never heard of a male colleague getting similar feedback. She notices something similar among her students, where the men are “consistently louder’ and women are “constantly railroaded,” something she tries to mitigate. For her own part, she “needs to convey a certain level of authority and confidence” in class – and she is “quite self-conscious about seeming overbearing and too gregarious”. She said all this via email, as she’s recently lost her voice. If women like Sara face such perceptions in the workplace, it seems to be echoed in the public sphere. It is striking to think about the celebrities who are seen as loud – and reflect that, whereas for Brian Blessed or Dom Joly, it is largely viewed as a source of entertainment, women like Margaret Thatcher and Angela Rayner are routinely viewed as strident or difficult. Even Adele is seen as overpoweringly gobby – and she’s a singer. Sonia Mortlock’s experience suggests that horror at a loud woman can be multiplied when race is also a factor. Mortlock, a retired 67-year-old who lives in Southend, is of Jamaican heritage, and says that in her former job at a housing association she endured “frequent comments about the tone and volume of my voice, even when I thought I was being perfectly respectful and polite”. “I do have a loud voice,” she said. “But I’m not rude. People said I had an aggressive attitude.” She would see white men “literally shouting in meetings and nothing would happen,” she added. “And so sometimes I did become indignant, and that just made matters worse.” Eventually, she lost her job because she didn’t want to move from a four-day to a five-day week. She brought an unfair dismissal claim. “The judge was very quiet, and when I spoke he told me he wouldn’t tolerate raised voices. But again, I was just speaking in my normal voice.” That was when she knew she would lose. To Emma Wainer, a corporate speaking coach who runs a coaching programme called Influential Leadership for Women, these are familiar stories. “Women in the workplace have two spaces available to them – the kind, appeasing, gentle woman, and the absolute bitch.” They don’t even have to be especially noisy, she noted. “If women use more masculine turns of phrase, more direct language, shorter sentences, gesture, and if they combine that with a higher pitch, they will be labelled as difficult.” If it isn’t always easy to adapt the way we speak, that may be because the factors that make a person loud are deeply embedded. “Nature is a part of it – if we take voice pitch as an analogue for this, it can be affected by body size, hormones, gender differentiation,” said Mark Huckvale, a professor of speech science at University College London. “But that’s a small component compared to the nurture side of it. It varies across cultures, and people’s positions within society, and whether we’re expected to be submissive or dominant.” Then there’s the way that our own hearing can affect how loud we think we need to be. “You can have very large differences in hearing across individuals without being considered to have an impairment. But that feedback loop is very important in judging the level of your voice.” Howell, for her part, did try to be quieter at work. “And I ended up incredibly depressed, because I simply wasn’t being me. I’ve spent decades creating this professional self, and all of a sudden it’s gone.” She ended up leaving her lobbying job and becoming a gardener. “It’s lovely,” she said. “The plants don’t mind, and they don’t talk back.”Parliament’s intelligence watchdog has said it was misled by the government when it failed to reveal that a former GCHQ boss had been allowed to resign quietly after it emerged he had helped a paedophile priest to avoid jail. The intelligence and security committee (ISC) said it had been assured that Robert Hannigan had quit for “family reasons” in 2017, only to discover from a media report two years later that the truth had been covered up with the approval of the then prime minister, Theresa May. The ISC complained in its annual report that it had been “misled on the issue” and added that when “the head of an intelligence agency steps down unexpectedly … this committee must be fully informed of the circumstances.” It accused the former national security adviser Mark Sedwill of giving unsatisfactory answers after committee members read about why Hannigan had quit in a report in the Mail on Sunday, which accused May of “presiding over a cover-up”. “Given the investigative powers with which we trust our intelligence community, it is imperative that they are above all suspicion,” the ISC said. The cross-party committee, chaired by the Conservative MP Julian Lewis, has oversight of GCHQ and Britain’s other intelligence agencies, MI5 and MI6. It holds its meetings in secret but publishes an unclassified annual review and other reports giving more details of its scrutiny activity. Hannigan was criticised for appearing in a Channel 4 documentary, The Hunt for Jihadi John, after he had left GCHQ. The ISC complained that in the programme “he provided operational details” as to how the Britain’s intelligence agencies identified the Briton Mohammed Emwazi as the notorious Islamic State killer. Hannigan said in the documentary that Emwazi was identified by “his size, his hands but above all his voice”. ISC inquiries established that Hannigan’s participation had not been cleared by the government and that the only sanction taken against him was that his successor, Sir Jeremy Fleming, sent him a letter of advice reminding him “to seek approval” before appearing in the media in future. The cross-party committee said it was surprised “that a previous head of one of those organisations can appear on television and divulge those secrets and yet no substantive action can be taken”, and this sent “entirely the wrong message” to those who may be tempted to breach the secrecy rules in the future. Hannigan resigned as head of the signals intelligence agency in April 2017 after two and a half years in the job. It was briefed that he was stepping down principally to look after his ill wife and two elderly parents. It subsequently emerged that the National Crime Agency had discovered that Hannigan provided a character reference in the 2013 trial of Father Edmund Higgins, a Catholic priest who was found guilty of possessing 174 child abuse images. The reference helped the priest avoid jail; instead he received an eight-month suspended sentence. Hannigan resigned at a time when Higgins was again under police investigation, this time under the name Edmund Black. He was subsequently jailed for 31 months in June 2018 after pleading to guilty to further charges involving child abuse images. The court heard that Higgins would watch and share child abuse videos, including one that involved a baby. The national security adviser told the ISC that the intelligence watchdog had not been told about the real reason for Hannigan’s departure because the police inquiry was ongoing and the information needed to be held within a restricted group. “It would not have been appropriate to share information outside this group, including with the ISC, during the investigation,” Sedwill wrote.Great to hear that a 57-year-old Downing Street man is keen to help the police with their inquiries into a growing number of potential misdemeanours at his address. Boris Johnson says that “of course” he will tell the Met the truth, which pretty much guarantees they’ll never get to the bottom of it. When you want Sherlock Holmes but have to settle for Elizabeth Holmes. Still, here he comes – Shagatha Christie, trying to deduce what the hell has happened this week. Happy to help: the sphincter of his prime ministership has failed. Tory MPs whose inboxes now resemble something designed by Lulu Lytle are reminded that character is fate. There was simply no other place a Johnson government would ever end up but mired in rampant lies, chaos, negligence, financial sponging and the live evisceration of public service. To the Conservatives and media outriders somehow only now discovering this about their guy, I think we have to say: you ordered this. Now eat it. To self-styled classics expert Johnson, meanwhile, we should extend our sympathies. Dude … worst last-days-of-Rome EVER?! Instead of bacchanalian orgies and high-end decadence, you’re back on the nappies while taking blitzkrieg for some naff Secret Santa “do” at which a press officer was reportedly handing out prizes to other press officers. Still, I hope the prizes were free girlfriends. Give them something they need. We’ll get to the parties and the gold wallpaper and the institutionalised mendacity in a minute, but while we’re vaguely on the police, many have noticed a certain investigative sluggishness on their part over the number of Covid rule-breaching events that may or may not have taken place last Christmas in the very house where the government makes the rules for the rest of us idiots. Do you detect the same? If so, at least someone’s doing some detecting. I know most crimes have now effectively been legalised by lack of investigation, but it would be nice to think the Met might at least be able to chase down potential law breaches in buildings that have multiple serving police officers in and around them at all times. Mind you, when you think of all the people who restrain themselves to death in police stations without any coppers seeing anything, you can quite see how officers might miss a big cheese-and-wine party just yards from their various sentry points. It all depends on the sightlines, no doubt. Anyway: standards. Apparently Johnson’s current independent standards adviser, Lord Geidt, is considering quitting after it turns out the prime minister misled him in his investigation into how the welfare king and queen of No 10 treated themselves to a load of hugely expensive stuff for their flat on other people’s dime. Picture Boris and Carrie looking in their rattan mirror (Soane, price on application) and going: “We DESERVE this.” If Geidt does walk, Johnson will have disgusted two standards advisers in just over 12 months. Two! I’m not going to twee this up with the Lady Bracknell quote – it doesn’t remotely cover it. Try and imagine Lady Bracknell going back to Armie Hammer’s place; now you’re in the ballpark. In the meantime, Boris Johnson’s standards adviser is starting to look like the old al-Qaida number three position. Dead men’s shoes. Speaking of shoes, other lockdown-breaking gatherings are being alleged, including one reportedly held by Carrie Johnson in the No 10 flat last November, in the immediate wake of a Kansas farmhouse landing on Dominic Cummings. After this, milady seems to have thought the ruby slippers would pass automatically to her, but this week they are beginning to look more like footwear for Liz Truss. (Rishi Sunak’s slippers are made of actual rubies.) Were journalists at any of these parties? That is a line of inquiry/rumour, reminding you just how incestuous the political-media complex is in this backwater country. I keep reading that a journalist is godfather to the Johnsons’ son, Wilfred. Then again, maybe the prime minister has had so many kids it’s like jury service. Every UK adult should expect to be called as godparent at some point. Either way, getting too close to politicians on either side of politics is always a mistake for journalists: you might think the access makes them a great contact, but the compromises and self-editing required to retain them means that ends up being just a lie you tell yourself. And, by extension, your readers. Telling me the REAL story of the election only after it’s been won or lost is for courtiers. Professional pride or your terrible social life. Pick a lane. Staying with the subject of rigorous independence, though, what a hoot to learn that the entire investigation into Downing Street parties will be carried out by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, a certified wet blanket whose earlier appointment procedure was once characterised by Dominic Cummings as: “I brought in Simon Case … because I thought the prime minister is not listening to me.” Sorry, but why is the person deciding who should be subject to disciplinary consequences on a team he works closely with ALSO the person who decides what those consequences are? I guess it’s Johnson’s world. We just live in it. And what a world. The sheer clusterfuckery of it this week means we’ve barely time to even discuss Johnson or Johnsons’ intervention in that ex-Marine’s Kabul pet evacuation – a saga on which we’ll slap the title The Animals Give Farthing Wood. I’m kidding, of course. A lot of people anthropomorphise their animals. You know the sort of thing. “My dog loves Homes Under the Hammer.” “My guinea pig is sulking.” “My cats are high-value Taliban targets.” As for Dominic Raab, in any other week we’d have been boggling at the Foreign Office whistleblower’s claims that as capacity for removals from Afghanistan tragically dwindled, the foreign secretary was asked to personally approve individual cases, but “took several hours … to engage”, then asked for the relevant files to be resubmitted in a different kind of spreadsheet. According to Raab, that’s “not quite right”. Not quite? Wonder how he did put it. Maybe: “I’m not interested in appeals for desperate people and their children not to be murdered unless they’re correctly formatted.” Previous flights of fancy in this column might have cast Dominic Raab as kind of guy who owns a lock-up with a chest freezer. This underestimated him. I now realise he combines the calm psychopathy of a medieval steppe warlord with the fist-gnawingly obdurate “desk hygiene” of a regional manager. Regional manager of either a photocopier firm or a forced resettlement programme. Regrettably, though, space constraints must end our recap of the week here. But on it all goes, as Omicron closes in. We’ll play out with a reminder that in a pandemic that has so far killed 146,000 of the Britons who these people are supposed to be in politics to serve, the absolutely vital public health message has now TWICE been most fatally undermined by people who worked at the very heart of No 10 with Boris Johnson. That is absolutely a disgrace, and absolutely not a coincidence. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistIt is surrounded on all sides, regularly bombed, and plagued by shortages of vital medicines. Yet in the lead up to Christmas, the isolated Gaza Strip has – for once – ample supplies of something the rest of the world craves but can rarely find: a brand new PlayStation 5. Sony’s flagship video game console is hot property this holiday season, although most people who have asked for one will be sorely disappointed on Christmas morning. A global supply-chain crisis twinned with a shortage of semiconductors – vital computer chips used in the console – has kept stock scarce. While secondhand, resold and stolen PS5s can be found, they are rare and often cost much more than the £359-£449 retail price tag. In downtown Gaza City, the price is also way above the official figure. Still, unused PS5s can be seen in a few shop windows. Hassan al-Baik, who runs an electronics outlet, has five consoles but says he has trouble selling them in the impoverished enclave. “There is no great demand for the devices in Gaza because their prices are still high,” he said. Baik says his few customers are mostly gaming cafes, makeshift arcades that cover the steep price by charging Palestinians to play. The first PS5s arrived in Gaza in April as contraband, Baik says. They were sourced in Dubai, taken apart, smuggled in pieces through Egypt and reassembled in Gaza. A handful sold for close to £1,200. However, Baik said Israel has in the past few months allowed suppliers in Gaza to import consoles from Israeli traders – at a premium. The price has since dropped in Gaza to £765-£860, although many linger on shelves. At least three shops have PS5 stock. Adham Masri, a salesman at Mobile Zone said he sells three to five devices a month. “But demand is limited,” he said. When Sony launched the PS5 just over a year ago, US and UK retailers were overwhelmed by demand, with multiple shopping websites crashing as people rushed to buy one. During the past year, the Japanese entertainment and electronics conglomerate has drip-fed consoles, which normally sell out in seconds. Gamers hoping to buy one spend hours scouring the internet for information – often leaked by shop employees – on where and when the next stock “drop” will appear. Gaza is an unusual location to have PS5 supplies. Israel and Egypt, citing security concerns, have maintained a crippling blockade for years and residents refer to the territory as “the world’s largest prison” because of their inability to travel freely. Israel regularly prevents common items, from cement to batteries to medical equipment, from entering Gaza, claiming they could be used by the military group Hamas to build homemade rockets. UN experts say the blockade is a form of collective punishment for the strip’s 2 million residents. The UN agency for Palestinian refugees, Unrwa, says 80% of the population depends on international aid. Separately, a World Bank report last month said unemployment reached nearly 50% earlier this year, even before the devastating 11-day war in May. “This the highest unemployment rate in the World Bank database,” it said. Three out of four graduates in Gaza have no employment prospects, the report said. “Despite their severity, these numbers fail to fully portray the degree of suffering of Gaza’s citizens,” the World Bank report said. Still, even the most coveted luxury products will find a way to get into the strip. The PS5’s main competitor product, Microsoft’s Xbox Series X, is also available in Gaza, Baik said, although it, too, finds few buyers. “I got a request recently,” he said of the new Xbox – but only for two consoles.Political satire may not usually be considered in their wheelhouse, but this week Ant and Dec were given a shoutout during prime minister’s questions after the presenters referenced the alleged Downing Street Christmas party on I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, cited the joke as he pressured Boris Johnson into admitting he had been aware of the Christmas party hosted at No 10 while London was under tier 3 restrictions last year. Starmer said the duo were “ahead of the prime minister on this.” He was referencing a gag on Tuesday night’s episode, in which Ant remarked of the celebrity contestants: “They categorically deny that they had a party. And this fictional party definitely didn’t involve cheese and wine or a secret Santa.” Dec added: “Evening, prime minister … for now.” Political and media experts who spoke to the Guardian said the joke transcended political differences of opinion because it spoke to the prevailing view that Johnson is untrustworthy, and reflected the fact the pandemic restrictions are seen as a human issue – not just a political one. They also warned the prime minister that, if Ant and Dec have trained their own brand of cheeky irreverence on to him, it was a good indicator that his recent controversies were resonating with the public. “If Ant and Dec pick it up like that it’s because they feel the pulse of the country better than the politicians, and it’s what everyone’s talking about,” said Lis Howell, a professor emeritus of journalism at City, University of London and a former broadcasting executive. She added: “Ant and Dec are universally popular and therefore very influential. They’re more damaging than any pundits. It’s the court jester who has the power to mock the king, but it’s no good mocking the king unless there’s some truth in it.” The “evening, prime minister” refrain has punctuated a series of jibes about Johnson on the show, including describing contestants’ role as to “look increasingly dishevelled, give cushy jobs to their mates and pretty much make it up as they go along”. On Wednesday night, Ant reprised the double entendre between the celebrity contestants and the prime minister, remarking: “you can’t get way with covering things up”. The pair’s foray into political comedy has prompted an outpouring of support on social media from viewers, who praised their candid remarks and commented on how they were an unlikely force to bring down the government. It also represents a considerable departure from Ant and Dec’s usual comedic style and the type of jokes considered appropriate for mass entertainment shows, which are notoriously wary of offending viewers. Matthew Flinders, a politics professor at Sheffield University, said Johnson’s role as the UK’s first “celebrity prime minister” had blurred the boundaries between politics and entertainment by “building his reputation on joking around, not taking things seriously and breaking conventions”. The inclusion of political humour may have been a deliberate decision by I’m a Celebrity’s producers to revive slumping ratings for what is increasingly seen as an ailing format. “Prime time entertainment shows like this tend to avoid politics because it polarises the audience and is generally dull and serious, but Boris embraces slapstick. The producers of I’m A Celebrity will have inserted the gag into Ant and Dec’s script as a tester, and it resonated immediately. The PR machine needs constant topicality and cut-through so it remains in people’s minds,” said Julian Henry, an entertainment PR expert. Last year, I’m a Celebrity was still pulling in an average of 11 million viewers nightly, but this week ratings averaged just 5.2 million nightly, according to BARB figures. This season has been beset by problems, including cancelled episodes due to storm Arwen and the early exit of contestant Richard Madeley for a medical emergency. While the political jokes haven’t translated into higher ratings yet, they have generated headlines in a way not seen since the show’s heyday. Their popularity may reflect a gap in television programming for a satirical show which can keep up with social media. I’m a Celebrity is one of the few shows that films live nightly, unlike the UK’s main political satire, Have I Got News For You, which records weekly. “News and politics travels so fast now so a lot of the jokes we were sharing yesterday aren’t the same ones we’re sharing today,” said Scott Bryan, a culture writer. Bryan added that the fact ITV had a clip of the joke on social media “within minutes” helped it go viral. “It’s a strategy at a time when television is incredibly competitive,” he said. “As well as attracting people who’d always watch the show, they’re getting other people writing and talking about them.”Boris Johnson’s ethics adviser, Lord Geidt, has demanded an explanation after the prime minister was accused of misleading him over the Downing Street flat scandal, with sources suggesting Geidt could resign if the answer does not satisfy him. Pressure is mounting on Geidt, the adviser on ministerial interests, over the investigation he completed in May. It exonerated Johnson of wrongdoing over an undeclared £52,000 donation to the Conservatives to cover the cost of a makeover to the prime minister’s No 11 residence. Despite Geidt’s report finding that Johnson said “he knew nothing about such payments” until stories in the press emerged in February 2021, the Electoral Commission released new evidence in a report this week. A WhatsApp message was unearthed sent from Johnson to the donor – Lord Brownlow – in November 2020 asking him to approve more funds for the costly refurbishment. Sources predicted Geidt would not “act hastily” and quit immediately, but would probably consider his position if unconvinced by Downing Street’s explanation that Johnson knew Brownlow was administering the donations but not the source of them himself. No 10 confirmed that officials were liaising with Geidt, who could potentially update his findings. A senior Whitehall source said Geidt was furious on Thursday after the publication of the Electoral Commission report but was considering No 10’s explanation of what happened. No 10 is likely to have argued that Johnson knew Brownlow was overseeing the organisation of funds for the refurbishment but was not aware he was the underlying donor. Johnson’s official spokesperson refused to say whether Geidt and the prime minister had spoken personally. The government insiders suggested Geidt’s resignation was a “realistic option” given how, they said, he valued his integrity – both personally and for the office he holds. Geidt needs Johnson’s permission to formally reopen the case, so is expected to ask him to explain the apparent contradiction – either by seeking a statement from Downing Street, requesting a personal interview with the prime minister, or asking for new evidence such as the WhatsApp message he seemed unaware of before. He may wish to update the initial report by adding an addendum or footnote, but any such changes would need the signoff of Johnson himself. Geidt’s resignation would be an embarrassment for Johnson, who has spent months fighting off sleaze allegations. Geidt, having only taken up the post in April, replaced another adviser on ministerial interests who also quit over Johnson’s actions. Alex Allan stood down in November 2020 after the prime minister overrode his findings that the home secretary, Priti Patel, had bullied staff. Even if Geidt is not allowed to reopen his investigation, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, is expected to launch an inquiry into the issue. She assured Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, she would look into the flat-funding scandal and undeclared donation once the Electoral Commission had published its report. Rayner has said Johnson “must now explain why he lied to the British public” and accused him of taking people for fools. Although more than £110,000 was paid on Johnson’s behalf for the refurbishment works, the prime minister later covered the cost himself, meaning Brownlow’s money ended back in his own hands. The source of the funding used by the prime minister to cover the costs has not been revealed.Steven Gerrard’s Anfield return has dominated the buildup, with the Liverpool legend making his first competitive appearance at the ground since leaving in 2015. However, emotions will be quickly parked – for both the Aston Villa manager and his opposite number, Jürgen Klopp – as the business of claiming vital points takes priority. The visitors have won three of the four matches under their new manager while Liverpool can equal a club record of scoring in 31 successive games, set as a Division Two side between April 1957 and January 1958, should they find the target again. A home win would take Klopp over the 500-points mark as a Premier League manager. Andy Hunter Saturday 3pm Venue Anfield Last season Liverpool 2 Aston Villa 1 Referee Stuart Attwell This season G9 Y29 R0 3.22 cards/game Odds H 3-11 A 12-1 D 6-1 LIVERPOOL Subs from Kelleher, Pitaluga, N Williams, Gomez, Konaté, Tsimikas, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Milner, Morton, Keïta, Minamino, Jota Doubtful Jota (muscle) Injured Phillips (fractured cheekbone, 3-4 weeks), Adrián (calf, unknown), Firmino (hamstring, 1-2 weeks), Jones (eye, unknown), Elliott (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y19 R0 Form DLWWWW Leading scorer Salah 13 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Archer, El Ghazi, Hause, Bogarde, Tuanzebe, Caleb Chukwuemeka, Sanson, Ings, Young Doubtful Sanson (illness), Ings (hamstring) Injured Traore (thigh, 3 weeks), Bailey (thigh, 3 weeks), Trezeguet (knee, 1 week) Suspended None Discipline Y32 R1 Form LLWWLW Leading scorer Watkins 4UK government officials were in Tehran last week discussing legal ways to pay Britain’s historical £400m debt to Iran, the Iranian ambassador to London has said. Mohsen Baharvand added that he was in live discussions with the Foreign Office, and said the issues were not insurmountable. The UK Foreign Office has refused to discuss any details of the payment to Iran, or what has been holding up the settling of the £400m debt dating back to an arms sale to Iran in the mid-1970s. Families of the UK dual nationals detained in Iran have repeatedly said they believe their family members are being held hostage until the debt is paid. The former foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt has also said he does not think the UK dual nationals will be released until the debt is paid. Baharvand, speaking to reporters in London on Friday, said Iran and the UK had been close to an agreement on the debt in the summer: “We wanted to use that deal to ask our people that we are seeing a good sign from the UK and then that gives us a possibility to expedite our efforts to help the dual nationals and things like that. Then we had a deal. We signed it but two days after the signature of that deal the UK government said they could not implement it because of US sanctions,” he said. “We are trying. We should not be that pessimistic. We are working with our Foreign Office colleagues maybe to reach that deal. We are in the process of discussions. Last week there was a delegation from the UK in Iran and personally I was talking to the Foreign Office and I am hopeful we will reach an agreement.” Referring to reports that the money could be paid in the form of humanitarian aid, he said: “It’s not aid. Our money is here and we want our money. That is very simple. We want to receive our money. We are not insisting on interest. Otherwise it would be billions. We are talking to our UK colleagues as to which channel is the most probable to transfer that money to our accounts.” Asked if the US could give a letter of comfort to the UK to guarantee the payment would not be sanctioned, he said: “The US are not doing that. They have to help the UK government to do that. It is not impossible. Obstacles are not insurmountable, but we have to discuss, negotiate and find a way. We are now discussing through what channel that money be transferred. There is a negotiating process now.” He also stressed that the issue of the detainees’ release was a matter for the Iranian judiciary, and could not be mixed up with the wider issue of the Iran nuclear talks in Vienna. In response to the Iranian ambassador’s remarks a Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office spokesman said: “We continue to explore options to resolve this 40-year-old case and will not comment further as discussions are ongoing.” Foreign office sources stressed that the UK recognises that it legally owes a debt to Iran, but said it was unhelpful to connect wider bilateral issues with those unfairly detained in Iran. The UK’s priority was the immediate release of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, Anoosheh Ashoori and Morad Tahbaz. Officials added it was in Iran’s gift to do the right thing and allow British nationals home to be reunited with their family. In a question-and-answer session at the thinktank Chatham House this week, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, acknowledged that the UK owed the debt. She has met the families of two UK-Iranian dual national detainees, Zaghari-Ratcliffe and Ashoori. Richard Ratcliffe, the husband of Zaghari-Ratcliffe, said: “It is a positive sign. It seems to us as if Iran may be trying to push this over the line, but the UK is very careful not to say what the problems are with the payment so we do not know what we do not know. “Our lawyers believe the US sanctions cannot be preventing the payment. There may be political problems with the US. Any EU sanctions prohibiting payment have now become UK sanctions so it is possible for the UK to certify that payment of the debt would not breach UK sanctions. “But Nazanin remains in harm’s way, and it is now the sixth Christmas that our family will be apart – that is a long time. I am afraid I am more pessimistic than I was last Christmas.” Sherry Izadi, the wife of Ashoori, who is detained in Evin prison, Tehran, said: “Although we expected to be told of this development by the FCDO, we sincerely hope the report is true and that we are one step closer to having our loved one back. In these months of gloom and despair, this has been the first real ray of sunshine.”Members of the mutual insurer LV= have blocked a takeover by the US private equity firm Bain Capital, scuppering a year-long campaign by the company’s board to secure backing for its preferred bidder. Only 69% of the 174,240 members who cast ballots on Friday approved of the £530m takeover offer, whereas 75% of voting members were required to approve the deal. The vote is a victory for critics, including MPs, campaigners and members, who were concerned about losing one of Britain’s largest mutuals and feared that transferring power to a US private equity firm would put an emphasis on short-term profits, at the expense of customer service and returns for members. LV= said it would work “swiftly” to reassess its options, including another takeover deal that would maintain its mutual status, given members’ concerns. That could mean potentially merging with fellow mutual Royal London, which LV= confirmed on Friday had put forward an unsolicited offer to combine the two businesses earlier this week. In a statement Royal London said its tentative bid “will offer LV= customers the opportunity to have their life savings protected and invested by a mutual. We envisage that the terms of the merger would offer LV= members the option to become members of Royal London”. LV= said its board “will consider this proposal seriously”. Royal London was one of the rival bidders that failed to gain the LV= board’s backing despite putting forward a higher bid worth £540m last year. “The board has listened to member concerns about the loss of mutuality and so will in particular explore whether mutuality can be retained either on a standalone basis without undue risk to members, or through a merger with a larger mutual organisation,” LV= said, adding that it would update members in the new year. LV= said the business would continue to serve its customers as usual in the interim, but confirmed that its chairman, Alan Cook, would be stepping down, although a date was not specified when this would happen. Both Cook and the LV= chief executive, Mark Hartigan, had been accused of a conflict of interest by campaigners at the Association of Financial Mutuals, who said they had an interest in working for the business after Bain’s takeover. There had been speculation that both men could have lost their jobs had the board backed a rival bid. LV= denied any contract discussions between Bain and its leaders. However, Gareth Thomas, chair of the all-party parliamentary group for mutuals, called for both Hartigan and Cook to resign immediately after the failed vote. “I want to congratulate members who have asked tough questions of the board and LV=, and exposed the weaknesses of the proposal. And I welcome Mr Cook’s departure but I think Mr Hartigan has to set a timetable for his departure too.” Thomas added: “There are serious lessons to be learned about the way in which this proposal has been allowed to get as close to passing as it did.” The MP has now called for an overhaul of rules governing mutuals, particularly demutualisations, as well as a review of the way City regulators the Financial Conduct Authority and Prudential Regulation Authority handled the LV= case, after both failed to intervene in the process despite pleas from campaigners and lawyers acting on behalf of concerned members. “They should have recognised that they had extra responsibilities to the consumers of LV= because they were also the owners of the business,” Thomas said. Bain said in a statement that despite gaining the backing of nearly 70% of LV=’s voting members, “we respect this outcome is not enough for our transaction to proceed. “Our proposal for LV= was deemed to be the best for members, enabling LV= to grow, reduce its debt and maintain its proud heritage. It remains crucial that members are looked after and protected. We have always wanted LV= to flourish and become a leading company in the sector, that offers more consumer choice and creates more jobs.”Manchester City, along with Barcelona, Real Madrid and Bayern Munich, represent the “next step” in Erling Haaland’s career when he leaves Borussia Dortmund, according to the striker’s agent, Mino Raiola, who suggested that Manchester United were not an option. Haaland is considered the best young forward in Europe and is a target of City as Pep Guardiola seeks to replace Sergio Agüero, the club’s record scorer who left in the close season. United came close to signing the Norwegian in 2019 but Raiola said the only English club of interest now were City. “He can and will take the next step,” Raiola told the German TV channel Sport1. “Bayern, Real, Barcelona, City – these are the big clubs he can go to. City have won the championship five times in recent years, significantly more than United. When we moved to Dortmund, we all knew that this step would come.” Asked how soon a move would happen, Raiola said: “Maybe this summer, maybe the summer after. But there is a great chance that Erling will leave this summer.” Guardiola refused to respond when asked about Raiola’s comment. “Next question,” City’s manager said. “Don’t ask me about that – I’m not going to answer.” Last season City claimed the title with 86 points. Guardiola, whose team are leaders with 35 from 15 games, believes 90 or more points will be needed this term. “The champions will have to win a lot of games for sure and [accrue] 90 or over,” he said. Concerns regarding coronavirus have caused City to cancel the club Christmas party. “This organisation every Christmas organises a party for all the workers, the people here and we cancelled it,” Guardiola said. “We cannot do it. Everyone at home with their family and kids [can] organise a party. I think they’re going to do it but just be careful.”Let’s abandon the misconception that only deaf and disabled people benefit from subtitled television. If you were one of the 5.7 million viewers in the UK who watched the Korean drama Squid Game last month and opted for subtitles, you’ll know what I mean. Everyone who watches content with subtitles does so to engage with a show and process information in a way they otherwise couldn’t. In every situation, subtitles are an accessibility feature. Channel 4’s subtitles outage in September affected huge numbers of viewers. Damage to hard drives caused by the triggering of the fire suppression system at the London base of Red Bee Media – which provides access services to large broadcasters – left Channel 4 viewers without subtitles for weeks, with casualties including the latest series of The Great British Bake Off. Accidents happen, and sometimes there’s no one to blame. But Channel 4’s response to the incident was lacklustre. It was not the only broadcaster affected – Channel 5 and the BBC also experienced loss of subtitles. Yet months later, it is the only channel yet to resume normal service across both its live programming and catch-up service. It has only sorted the former. The broadcaster took nearly a month to fix the subtitles on their broadcast output, although this was quicker than the mid-November date they’d initially predicted, due to having “to build a completely new system”. As well as that, Red Bee and Channel 4 failed to provide detailed and consistent updates on the situation. Over a fortnight after the initial outage, the Royal National Institute for Deaf People published a statement on their website in which they singled out Channel 4 for criticism. It stated: “We do not believe that they have communicated effectively with the deaf community.” They had to resort to writing to the broadcaster to ask them to provide the deaf community with updates on – among other things – how long the situation would continue. Granted, Channel 4 did issue a series of press releases with updates on the situation, but they came far too late – making deaf and disabled viewers like me feel completely disrespected. Also, returning subtitles to live programming does not mean the issue is over and done with – and we cannot give Channel 4 an easy ride on the matter. There is still a huge problem with catchup services. I approached Channel 4 for a comment as part of my reporting on the issue, and a spokesperson told me the subtitling backlog for this won’t be resolved until the second week of December. That’s two and a half months after the initial incident – which is shameful. Deaf and disabled people should not be waiting for access, and yet they are. In some instances, we miss out on programmes completely, with them disappearing from our screens and streaming services before they have a chance to be subtitled. This is especially the case for US programmes licensed by Channel 4, which have a limited shelf life on All 4 due to rights reasons. It has already caused issues for those looking to watch series five, episode one of the US legal drama The Good Fight, which was taken off All 4 at the end of November before it could be captioned. Deaf and disabled users have now been cut out of a conversation they were entitled to enjoy at the same time as everyone else. It’s outrageous, though unsurprising. Deaf people often find themselves left behind the zeitgeist. The state of UK cinemas is so dire in terms of accessibility that I have to wait weeks for a subtitled screening. Provided the captions file doesn’t encounter any technical difficulties – as happened when I finally got to see No Time to Die last month and a big cinema chain ended up running a version without subtitles instead – I can join the conversation around the latest blockbuster release several weeks late. In that time, friends and family members may well have moved on to the next big thing. Another prominent example of failure to serve deaf viewers is the UK government’s coronavirus briefings. Having rejected a petition signed by over 26,000 people, the government’s refusal to provide a British Sign Language (BSL) interpreter is forcing deaf people to receive public health information from unofficial channels or via word of mouth. As for All 4, what does it say when a service that could help us deaf and disabled viewers “catch up” on content we missed the first time (because it wasn’t subtitled) isn’t accessible, either? It’s a damning stain on the reputation of a broadcaster that has long put diversity and inclusion at the forefront of its branding. Eventually, captions will come back to All 4, but the trust Channel 4 has built up with deaf and disabled subtitles users will take much longer to rebuild. The National Deaf Children’s Society has estimated that the broadcaster will fail to meet the annual 90% target for subtitled content it is legally obligated to provide by the Communications Act 2003. This is unacceptable. Ofcom has suggested that they intend to take enforcement action if this happens, and they must not take this infringement lightly, if so. Ofcom needs to make sure that any action taken is to the greatest extent possible. Channel 4 must take its responsibilities to deaf and disabled viewers far more seriously – and the regulator needs to send a strong message to the broadcaster to ensure this happens. Even if this were to be the case, it would not necessarily solve the situation with All 4, which could still justifiably fail to provide access under current regulation. Unlike TV channels, streaming services have no legal obligation to provide access services. The Digital Economy Act 2017 allows the culture secretary to impose requirements on providers, but we’ve yet to see this done. This has to change. A failure to start regulating catch-up services on their access provision would mean broadcasters can fail to give sufficient priority to subtitling on these platforms, without consequences. When TV channels fall foul of accessibility requirements, they risk Ofcom breathing down their neck, ready to take regulatory action. It’s time the government recognises the contribution catch-up services make to the world of entertainment, and legislates to ensure that every viewer’s experience is accessible. It’s a move that is long overdue. Only when this happens, together with strong action against Channel 4 from Ofcom, will the public be able to have any confidence that we can prevent such a dire case of inaccessibility from happening again. Liam O’Dell is an award-winning deaf and disabled journalist and campaigner.Julian Assange can be extradited to the US, according to the high court, as it overturned a judgment earlier this year and sparked condemnation from press freedom advocates. The decision deals a major blow to the WikiLeaks co-founder’s efforts to prevent his extradition to the US to face espionage charges, although his lawyers announced they would seek to appeal. Two of Britain’s most senior judges found on Friday that a then district judge based her decision earlier this year on the risk of Assange being held in highly restrictive US prison conditions. In their ruling, they sided with the US authorities after a package of assurances were put forward that Assange would not face those strictest measures unless he committed an act in the future that required them. Lord Burnett said: “That risk is in our judgment excluded by the assurances which are offered. It follows that we are satisfied that, if the assurances had been before the judge, she would have answered the relevant question differently.” He added: “That conclusion is sufficient to determine this appeal in the USA’s favour.” The judges ordered that the case be remitted to Westminster magistrates court with a direction that a district justice send it to the secretary of state, who will decide whether Assange should be extradited. Stella Moris, Assange’s fiancee, described the high court’s ruling as “dangerous and misguided” and a “grave miscarriage of justice”. “Today is international human rights day, what a shame. How cynical to have this decision on this day,” she said, speaking outside the Royal Courts of Justice. The case against the 49-year-old relates to WikiLeaks’s publication of hundreds of thousands of leaked documents about the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, as well as diplomatic cables, in 2010 and 2011. Alarm at the high court ruling was expressed by advocates of press freedom, with Amnesty International describing the ruling as a “travesty of justice”. Nils Muižnieks, Amnesty International’s Europe director, said: “By allowing this appeal, the high court has chosen to accept the deeply flawed diplomatic assurances given by the US that Assange would not be held in solitary confinement in a maximum security prison.” Rebecca Vincent, director of international campaigns at Reporters Without Borders said the ruling marked a “bleak moment” for journalists around the world and called on the US government to drop the case. The high court was told earlier this year that blocking Assange‘s removal from the UK due to his mental health risked “rewarding fugitives for their flight”. James Lewis QC, for the US, said the district judge based her decision on Assange’s “intellectual ability to circumvent suicide preventive measures”, which risked becoming a “trump card” for anyone who wanted to oppose extradition. US assurances included one that Assange would not be subject to “special administrative measures” or held at a maximum security “ADX” facility and could apply, if convicted, to be transferred to a prison in Australia. The US assurances were described in the ruling by Lord Burnett of Maldon, lord chief justice, and Lord Justice Holroyde as “solemn undertakings offered by one government to another”. Assange’s lawyers will be seeking permission to appeal to the supreme court in relation to the question of the US assurances. But Nick Vamos, a partner at Peters &amp; Peters solicitors in London and a former head of extradition at the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS), said it was unclear if the supreme court would hear such an appeal as it related to factual matters rather than points of law. It was more likely, he suggested, that the battle would eventually shift to a cross appeal by Assange’s lawyers, which would take place first at the high court and focus on questions of free speech and political motivation of the extradition request. “It’s back to all of those big questions, which he feels provides stronger ground in the media and the public. But will it have traction in court? The district judge was not impressed and any argument that the US case is politically motivated or that Assange would not get a fair trial quickly runs into the problem that the UK courts accept that the US has a fair and independent legal system.” Such appeals, and possibly even hearings before the supreme court about the right to appeal, are likely to take place in the coming months, with the European court of human rights remaining a last resort.With the Downing Street Christmas party and flat redecoration controversies reaching crisis level this week, Boris Johnson has once again found himself explicitly accused of lying. Here we look at some of the most egregious examples of the prime minister’s alleged dishonesty. Christmas partygate Last week, reports emerged of a Christmas party held in Downing Street on 18 December 2020, at a time when the country was subject to strict Covid measures. Johnson’s official spokesperson denied that any party had taken place, and the prime minister told the House of Commons that “all guidance was followed completely in No 10”. But after a video of his former press secretary, Allegra Stratton, laughing and joking with colleagues about a non-socially distanced wine and cheese party, the prime minister changed tack. He told the Commons he had been “repeatedly assured” there was no party but had now asked the Cabinet secretary, Simon Case, to establish “all the facts”. Wallpapergate The ministerial standards adviser, Lord Geidt, said in a report that Johnson had told him he knew nothing about who made payments towards the renovation of his Downing Street flat until immediately before media reports in February 2021. But in a separate report published on Thursday, the Electoral Commission said it had seen evidence that Johnson had sent Lord Brownlow, a peer and party donor, a WhatsApp message in November 2020 “asking him to authorise further, at that stage unspecified, refurbishment works on the residence”, to which he agreed. The watchdog fined the Conservative party over the donation. Downing Street now claims there was no inconsistency between the Geidt and Electoral Commission reports, as Johnson knew only that Brownlow was organising donations to pay for the refurbishment works, not that Brownlow was himself “the underlying donor”. Brexit spending One of the most enduring lies Johnson put to his name was the claim on the side of the Vote Leave campaign bus that “we send the European Union £350m a week” and the money could be used to “fund our NHS instead”. After journalists, campaigners and economists challenged the claim, the official statistics watchdog put the final nail in the coffin of the now infamous propaganda. In 2016, the UK Statistics Authority said it was “disappointed to note that there continue to be suggestions that the UK contributes £350m to the EU each week, and that this full amount could be spent elsewhere”, the UK’s contribution to the EU is paid after the application of the rebate and this was a “misleading” gross figure. In 2018, Johnson was still standing by the claim; in fact, stating that the claim was “too low”. Misleading the Queen In 2019, Johnson was accused of lying to the Queen over the advice he gave her on suspending parliament for five weeks. The power to suspend, or prorogue, parliament lies with the Queen, who conventionally acts on the advice of the prime minister. The supreme court ultimately ruled the prorogation unlawful – and Johnson was faced with accusations of lying to the Queen. Asked whether he had lied to the monarch about his reasons for the suspension, he replied: “Absolutely not.” Hillsborough disaster The prime minister was condemned for publishing an article in 2004 as editor of the Spectator in which he blamed Liverpool fans for the 1989 Hillsborough disaster. While the article says the event was “undeniably” a tragedy, it adds: “That is no excuse for Liverpool’s failure to acknowledge, even to this day, the part played in the disaster by drunken fans at the back of the crowd who mindlessly tried to fight their way into the ground that Saturday afternoon.” The Hillsborough inquest jury later concluded: “The jury found nothing to suggest that the behaviour of fans, drunken or otherwise, contributed to the disaster.” In 2012, Johnson apologised and added that he “bitterly regretted” the comments. Extramarital affair In 2004 Johnson was fired by the then Tory leader, Michael Howard, from positions as shadow arts minister and party vice-chairman for lying about his extramarital affair with the Spectator columnist Petronella Wyatt. When it transpired that tabloid reports, which Johnson had dismissed as an “inverted pyramid of piffle”, were true, he refused to resign. Once the allegations were confirmed by Wyatt’s mother and Johnson was sacked, he refused to go into any further details of his private life, but added: “It’s difficult and much of what I have heard is very peculiar.” Journalism In the late 1980s, Johnson was sacked by the Times newspaper over a front-page article about the discovery of Edward II’s Rose Palace, in which Johnson allegedly invented a quote from his godfather, the historian Sir Colin Lucas. He later said: “The trouble was that somewhere in my copy I managed to attribute to Colin the view that Edward II and Piers Gaveston would have been cavorting together in the Rose Palace.” It turned out that Gaveston had actually been killed 13 years before the palace had been built. New hospitals A pledge to build 40 hospitals by 2030 was repeated many times by Johnson during the 2019 election campaign. Ministers have since set out more details, revealing that the bulk of the projects involve rebuilding or consolidation, and that only four have been started. The scheme comes with a promised spending package of £3.7bn. However, NHS Providers, which represents hospital trusts, said the real cost of building 40 new hospitals would be more like £20bn.The inquests into the deaths of the four victims of the serial killer Stephen Port have been told of a catalogue of failings, described as unique by the Metropolitan police deputy assistant commissioner, Stuart Cundy, which had “terrible consequences”. The coroner Sarah Munro QC said the jury had to consider if there were missed opportunities in each investigation to catch Port sooner and so prevent deaths. Jurors found that police failings “probably” contributed to the deaths. Barking and Dagenham borough police “missed opportunities” in the first three investigations to catch Port sooner, the jury said in its conclusions. They also found there were omissions and failures in the involvement of the Metropolitan police’s specialist crime and operations unit in the first three investigations which probably contributed to the subsequent deaths. Anthony Walgate A 23-year-old fashion student from Hull, Anthony Walgate had been dead for hours when found outside Port’s Barking flat, according to an ambulance responder and forensic medical adviser, immediately contradicting Port’s account that he had found him alive making “gurgling” noises. That should have raised significant questions. Neither a police national computer (PNC) record of a previous allegation of drug rape against Port by one man, nor a British Transport Police (BTP) report of him being questioned in the company of another drugged man at Barking station two weeks before Walgate’s death, were logged on the crime reporting information system (Cris), which updates officers on the ground – a “huge failure” and “terrible mistake”, one detective sergeant said. Neither of these men were questioned. Walgate’s underpants were inside out and back to front, his flies undone, and bruising under his arms indicated he had been moved. But his death was deemed unexplained rather than suspicious. When it emerged one week later that Port had hired Walgate as an escort using the pseudonym Joe Dean, Port changed his story, claiming Walgate had self-administered drugs and died in his flat. Port’s laptop was seized. He was charged with perverting the course of justice, pleaded guilty in March 2015 and was sentenced to eight months. By then he had killed Gabriel Kovari and Daniel Whitworth. But the crown prosecutor who advised that charge was not told about the previous PNC drug rape allegation, nor the BTP report, and did not know the contents of Port’s laptop because police had not yet examined it. The laptop The homicide assessment team (HAT), which advised Barking borough police on its investigation, instructed on 27 June 2014 that Port’s laptop be seized for examination. But Barking police did not submit it for forensic examination for a further 10 months, prior to Walgate’s first inquest. And they did not examine the downloaded results until July 2015 – more than a year after Walgate’s death. The trainee detective who eventually examined the downloaded material failed to register Port’s “absolutely incessant … all day, every day” obsessions with gay drug rape pornography, and the hundreds of thousands of messages in online forums and on social media about drug rape, especially of unconscious young men: an immediate red flag. Friends of Walgate continuously urged police to check Port’s laptop, telling officers Port was “dodgy as fuck”, but claimed they were told it was “too expensive” to check – a claim police strongly denied. Primacy The Met’s major investigations team refused requests from Barking borough police to take over the “complex” Walgate investigation – and those into the subsequent deaths – because they thought there was insufficient evidence of murder/manslaughter. Yet MIT officers were more experienced, and had access to the Holmes police database. Barking police were unhappy at the MIT decision. One Barking officer told colleagues it was “if and when” Port was arrested on suspicion of murder, and the borough CID commander said it was “more likely than not” to be a homicide case, telling superiors that “on the balance of probabilities” Walgate died “at the hands of another”. Gabriel Kovari and Daniel Whitworth Though the two men had never met, police linked their deaths because Port placed a fake suicide note on Whitworth’s body claiming he had killed himself after accidentally killing Kovari with an overdose of the date-rape drug GHB during sex. The note said: “BTW. Please do not blame the guy I was with last night. We only had sex then I left. He knows nothing of what I have done.” Police did not trace this “guy”, who was, in fact, Port. They did not submit the note, the bedsheet Whitworth’s body was wrapped in, or the drug bottle planted on him for forensic examination. Checks to verify Whitworth’s handwriting were limited to an officer emailing a scanned photograph of a small fragment of one sentence to Whitworth’s father, Adam. He told her he “wasn’t sure”, a claim the officer denied. No handwriting experts were consulted; instead officers later compared it with a diary. No phone data was obtained to show Whitworth was not in Barking when Kovari died. No tests were carried out on Kovari’s sunglasses, later shown to have Port’s DNA on them. Kovari’s social media accounts were not properly examined; nor was his former boyfriend, whom Port had befriended on Facebook using an alias, contacted and questioned. The family liaison officer in Kovari’s death never contacted his family in Slovakia, and referred to Kovari in one email as being from Lithuania. Jack Taylor The investigating officer was not aware of the striking similarities with the previous three deaths, despite two detectives working with him having been involved in the Kovari and Whitworth deaths. A police constable, who was a member of the parks police, patrolling on bicycles to prevent antisocial behaviour, was first at the scene. Despite his lack of any investigatory training, he was surprised to find himself tasked with following up leads. But it was he, rather than the CID, who discovered that Taylor had taken a taxi to Barking, and he who found CCTV footage at Barking station showing Taylor meeting an unidentified tall man – later identified by another officer as Port. And so the link was finally made.The big handicap chase at Cheltenham’s December meeting has always been an obvious target for horses that ran well in the Paddy Power Gold Cup in November, and eight of the winners since 2006 lined up for that race three weeks beforehand. Only Exotic Dancer, in 2006, has completed the double, however, and he had enough quality to make the frame in a Gold Cup. Midnight Shadow, who overcome a stumble at the last to scramble home in the Paddy Power last time, is not quite in that class and has been raised 7lb since, so once again, it may pay to look for a horse that ran well behind the winner. Lalor and Dostal Phil, close up in third and fourth, respectively, both arrive with solid claims and at the likely odds, Dostal Phil (1.50) makes most appeal at around 7-1. He is lightly raced for an eight-year-old, with only six starts over fences behind him, and should come on for his latest start, his first since April. Doncaster 2.05 Every runner here goes to post with a chance on their best form, but Takeit Easy split two subsequent winners at Huntingdon last time and makes most appeal at the prices at around 9-2. Cheltenham 2.25 The market is focused on Blazing Khal and Gelino Bello, first and second in a similar race here last month, which makes Olly Murphy’s Barony Legends very backable at around 6-1. He was an easy winner on a tight rein at Lingfield in October but still stopped the clock in a useful time. Doncaster 2.40 Knight Salute has a penalty for his win in a Grade Two at Cheltenham last month and that could open the door for Magistrato, who was close up in fourth there, to reverse the form. Cheltenham 3.00 A couple of these are better over further so last year’s winner Song For Someone is worth an interest to build on his strong run into second when giving 6lb to the upwardly-mobile winner, Buzz, at Ascot last time. Doncaster 3.15 The Wolf ran his best race over fences with a tongue-tie applied for the first time at Perth back in April and has gone well after a break in the past. Cheltenham 3.35 Wynn House showed improved form to win at Wincanton last month and the form is backed up by the clock so a 3lb rise in the weights may not be enough to stop her following up.Families in England could be forced to choose who is allowed to visit loved ones in nursing and care homes, it has emerged. The government has confirmed it is considering restricting visits to homes to just three named visitors over the Christmas period, saying it is the natural consequence of the uncertainty caused by the Omicron variant. Under new measures being considered by minsters to tackle increasing cases of Covid, families and residents in England will have to choose which three visitors enter the care or nursing home over Christmas, with changes to named visitors allowed only under strict conditions. The limits have been described as “devastating” and “a body blow” for families, and a nightmare for residential homes, which are already struggling to recruit enough staff. The campaign group Relatives &amp; Residents Association called the proposed cap “hugely disappointing”. A spokesperson said: “It just takes us back to where we were many months ago and the impact it will have on families will be devastating. It’s absolutely heartbreaking for families to have to choose who can visit them. How do you pick those three people? There are many people who have been living in care for a while and thinking that this could be their last Christmas, so it’s just going to be devastating and lead to absolutely heartbreaking decisions for so many families.” Nadra Ahmed, chair of the National Care Association, said homes had already organised Christmas entertainers, school choirs and other festive events for residents. “It will be very sad if these have to be cancelled,” she said. Ahmed questioned how care homes, already struggling to recruit sufficient numbers of staff, would have time to arrange restricted visits. “The logistics of making these new restrictions work are time-consuming,” she said. “There is already a big issue with staffing levels in homes. Where are the extra hours going to come from to facilitate this new layer of organisation?” The Independent Care Group said such a move would be disappointing but that it felt inevitable. Its managing director, Mike Padgham, said: “A restriction on visitor numbers as we approach Christmas, or just after, would be a body blow to those in nursing and care homes and to their families and friends who will be looking forward to spending more – not less – time together over the festive period. But, as restrictions across the country become tighter and tighter, such a move does seem inevitable whilst we, as a country, fight to keep everyone as safe and well as we can.” Changes to visiting guidelines are not expected to be announced imminently but a government source has confirmed that “reductions are the next natural step to current guidance in the light of the Omicron uncertainty”. There are currently no government restrictions on the number of friends and family members allowed to visit care homes.The Christmas tree in Bailiff Bridge is shining a metaphorical light on the West Yorkshire village, having been described as “the worst in the north” after it was decorated only a third of the way up. Council bosses say the issue with sprucing up the spruce is that the natural tree has grown too tall, meaning it is unsafe to decorate the higher sections “as they can’t be reached by any maintenance vehicles”, according to Calderdale council’s cabinet member for public services and communities, Jenny Lynn. “It’s Elf and Safety gone mad,” said the local Conservative councillor George Robinson. “It is clear that it is the worst Christmas tree in the north. When I saw the tree, my heart went into my stomach, the Christmas spirit left my body – I was just left with a Scrooge-like feeling. The lights go a third of the way up the tree, there are two stray baubles on there, clearly a token gesture: in some ways, you wonder why the council bothered.” Amid a pandemic, local people had hoped the tree would bring some festive cheer to the village, but instead it has left them feeling as gloomy as the upper branches when walking past Memorial Park where it is situated. “A Christmas tree is not just a tree,” said Robinson, “it is what it represents, it embodies ambition, excitement, being with family and friends, it is much more than a tree – I think that is the point. Especially after Covid, people want to look at a tree and be excited. “Some people have said we would be better taking our own Christmas tree and plonking it in the park. It would certainly bring more joy to residents than that shambles, which is up there.” There is some positive news for locals, as Calderdale council has promised a superior offering in 2022, allowing the people of Bailiff Bridge to select an alternative tree to decorate in the village. “It is a success story, it is the power of media,” said Robinson. “I think it is important that Calderdale council put this bah humbug attitude behind them so we can move forward, so next year Bailiff Bridge gets the best Christmas tree, the Christmas tree it deserves.”Mikel Arteta has urged the Premier League to clarify the number of positive Covid-19 cases required for matches to be postponed, saying the current rules leave clubs in the dark. Tottenham’s scheduled game with Brighton on Sunday was called off on Thursday after eight players and five members of staff tested positive for coronavirus. On the opening weekend of the season Arteta’s Arsenal side were required to face Brentford even though four players recorded positive tests, eventually losing 2-0, and the manager said later that he was surprised the fixture went ahead. He believes a threshold is required to eliminate uncertainty. “That would be helpful, yes,” he said when asked whether such a ruling would be helpful. On whether the stipulations are too vague, he continued: “I think it is, because you don’t know when you have to play and when you don’t and we have some examples of that.” The Premier League has no fixed cut-off for Covid-related match postponement, which is decided on a case-by-case basis by the league’s board, with submissions from clubs and medical advisers. Arteta suggested it would be preferable to abide by a firmer set of rules. “It’s about the decision-making that goes the same way for everybody and this is what we have to hope for,” he said. “We [want to] know the context where we’re going to be competing and if there are certain things that you don’t meet, then the game is off, and if you do, the game is on. [Then] we all know and it’s a fair competition.” Arsenal face Southampton on Saturday at the Emirates in a match that does not appear in jeopardy, with Arteta saying his players are “very protected in terms of vaccines” and confirming the club have put extra Covid protocols in place. Victory over an injury- and suspension-hit Saints appears a necessity after successive defeats by Manchester United and Everton, and Arteta’s biggest selection dilemma surrounds a spluttering strike force. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has not scored in his past six appearances while the rarely used Eddie Nketiah, who was lively in a substitute outing at Goodison Park but missed a clear chance, is believed to have rejected a new contract recently and could leave for free in the summer. “Eddie knows how much I rate him and I would like him to stay at the club,” Arteta said. “He has the Arsenal DNA in his blood, and he loves the club so much. His reason is that he wants to play more football, and that’s a genuine reason, it’s nothing to do with anything else. He wants more minutes, and he feels he is able to contribute much more, and that’s why I like him.” Arteta scotched suggestions he would try to sell Aubameyang, who was dropped to the bench at Everton, in January and said his captain must not lose heart. “Obviously when a player is not scoring it’s affecting his confidence,” he said. “It’s affecting the mood and probably the belief, but you have to rebel against this situation, don’t affect it and feel sorry for yourself.” Emile Smith Rowe should return after a groin injury.With 1bn doses of Covid vaccines expected to arrive in Africa in the coming months, concern has shifted to a global shortage of equipment required to deliver them, such as syringes, as well as insufficient planning in some countries that could create bottlenecks in the rollout. After a troubled start to vaccination programmes on the continent, health officials are examining ways to encourage take-up as some countries have had to throw away doses. Critics have blamed hoarding of vaccine doses by a handful of western countries for a situation in which only 7.5% of people in African countries have been vaccinated – which some argue led to the emergence of the Omicron variant in southern Africa – but health experts point to a wider series of issues. The World Health Organization says a shortage of syringes – in particular a 0.3ml syringe version required to deliver the Pfizer dose – may slow delivery, and it has stepped up technical assistance missions in 15 countries that have lagged behind. Figures show a wide disparity in what has been achieved, with 15 countries reaching a target of 10% of the population vaccinated by the end of September, and more than half struggling to reach a third of that number. Among the success stories have been some smaller island states, including Seychelles and Mauritius, which have vaccinated more than 60% of their populations, and Morocco has reached 48%. The case of South Africa – which had vaccinated 40% of its population as of 3 December – highlights some of the complexities involved. With sufficient doses for an estimated 150 days of vaccination, it has cancelled some vaccine shipments as it has tried to reinvigorate a campaign that had met resistance from some sections of the population, not least in the 18-34 age group. Some of South Africa’s vaccine supply problems were self-inflicted, including being slow to initially secure stock. There have also been technological issues, with requirements to register using a phone or computer creating a digital barrier in a country where only 60% of people are internet users. Dr Richard Mihigo, a WHO programme coordinator, said there had been a “start and stop” approach to vaccine drives in Africa in recent months. “The first doses arrived in Ghana in March and there were a lot of promises from Covax [the global vaccine consortium] that countries would receive their allocations. But that delivery was stopped when India halted delivery from the Serum Institute [in the midst of its own outbreak] earlier this year,” he said. “That start was not ideal. Since then, however, the situation has stabilised. Now the prospects through March 2022 looks very good with almost 1bn doses forecast to arrive, which in theory could cover 70% of the African population.” Set against that, however, has been the struggle of some countries to deliver what doses they have – because of instability, for example in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria; health systems with poor reach, especially outside big cities; and vaccine hesitancy around the Covid jab. Nigeria’s underfunded health system lacks everyday supplies such as cotton swabs. Spotty power supply means fridges holding vaccines need to be kept on expensive fuel generators, and millions of citizens live in areas racked by banditry or Islamist insurgencies that medics cannot reach. Nigeria’s health minister, Osagie Ehanire, said last week: “The foundation is not strong. And if you don’t have a strong foundation, there’s not much you can build on top.” Hesitancy has been driven by a combination of factors on a continent that in general, studies suggest, has far higher rates of vaccine acceptance than the US. The huge amount of misinformation that has circulated globally is partly to blame, but there are also economic reasons. David Harrison, the head of the nonprofit DG Murray Trust in South Africa, said some were reluctant to give up a day’s work or pay to travel to a vaccination site. “Twelve million people applied for an R350 (£16) emergency Covid-19 relief grant,” he said. “If you’re asking those people to pay R20 for a taxi fare to and from a vaccine site, it’s a significant trade-off.” Mihigo, of the WHO, echoed this point. “To make sure more and more of the available vaccine can be put in arms of the people, we need to focus attention on providing additional incentives to people to get vaccinated without compromising their livelihoods. “I was in DRC recently and I heard someone say precisely this. They can’t afford to travel and then wait in a vaccination centre for two hours.” Writing in South Africa’s Mail and Guardian this week, Anand Madhvani, a co-founder of Covid Kenya – a group of volunteers that uses social media to create awareness about Covid-19 issues – raised local inequalities in vaccine access. “In many African countries we have some existing systems for vaccinations, but these require massive expansion and support for mass adult campaigns – even once a steady supply of vaccines is available,” he wrote. “In Kenya, where I work, we needed high-profile local language vaccination campaigns. There is deep inequality within our countries. Relative elites in capitals quickly got themselves vaccinated but stopped pushing for everyone.”Manchester City are targeting a sixth Premier League win in a row, and in Wolves welcome opponents who last beat them in the league 11 years ago. Factor in City’s haul of 35 points from 15 games, with 32 scored against nine conceded, compared with the visitors’ 21 points from the same number of matches, with 12 goals for and 13 against, and a comfortable win for Pep Guardiola’s men seems the most likely outcome. While City will start as red-hot favourites it is worth remembering that Crystal Palace handed them a 2-0 lesson at the Etihad in October, proving that even the champions are vulnerable to an upset. Jamie Jackson Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue Etihad Stadium Last season Manchester City 4 Wolves 1 Referee Jon Moss This season G9 Y16 R2 2 cards/game Odds H 2-11 A 20-1 D 7-1 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Palmer, Fernandinho, Jesus, Aké, Mbete, Zincehnko, Delap, Mahrez, Laporte, Foden, Egan-Riley, Wilson-Ebrand, Lavia, McAtee Doubtful Foden (ankle), Delap (ankle), Jesus (match fitness), Aké (back), Laporte (match fitness) Injured Torres (metatarsal, 1-2 months) Suspended Mendy (indefinitely) Discipline Y21 R1 Form LWWWWW Leading scorer Silva 7 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Hoever, Marçal, Boly, Cundle, Dendoncker, Traoré, Silva, Podence Doubtful None Injured Mosquera (hamstring, 2-3 months), Jonny (knee, 2-3 months), Neto (knee, 1 month) Suspended None Discipline Y28 R0 Form WLWDDL Leading scorer Hwang 4Prospects of a pre-Christmas rise in interest rates have rapidly diminished amid signs that Britain’s economic recovery had come close to stalling even before the onset of the new Omicron variant of Covid-19. Financial markets now expect the Bank of England to leave borrowing costs at 0.1% after the release on Friday of figures from the Office for National Statistics showing that in October, the first month after the end of the government’s furlough scheme, output grew by only 0.1%. A breakdown of the ONS data showed signs of a sharp drop in people going to restaurants, pubs and bars even before tougher curbs were brought in this month. Gross domestic product at the end of October was still 0.5% below its pre-crisis peak in February 2020. Of the three main sectors of the economy, only services expanded in October, with higher spending in the shops and an increase in face-to-face GP appointments contributing to a 0.4% rise. However, production, which includes manufacturing, energy and North Sea oil and gas, was down 0.6%, while a shortage of materials because of supply chain problems resulted in a 1.8% drop in construction output, the steepest since the start of the pandemic in April 2020. Chances of an interest rate rise had already taken a hit after the re-introduction of tougher plan B measures earlier this week, but the monthly rise in GDP was weaker than had been anticipated, with a poll of economists having expected growth of 0.4%. In September the economy grew by 0.6%. The nine members of Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee will announce their latest decision on Thursday but it is now thought they will push an interest rate increase back to February next year. Grant Fitzner, the chief economist at the ONS, said: “While GDP growth slowed in October, the UK health sector again grew strongly while secondhand car sales and employment agencies also boosted the economy. Taken as a whole, the dominant services sector reached its pre-pandemic level for the first time in 20 months. “These gains were offset by a drop in restaurants, which fell back after a strong summer, and reduced oil extraction and gas use. Construction also saw its biggest drop since April last year, with notable falls in housebuilding and infrastructure work, partly driven by shortages in raw materials.” Over the three months to October, the economy expanded by 0.9% – a marked slowdown on the growth rates posted as it emerged from lockdown in the spring and summer. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, said: “We’ve always acknowledged there could be bumps on our road to recovery but the early actions we have taken, our ongoing £400bn economic support package and our vaccine programme mean we are well placed to keep our economy on track. “We have still been recovering quicker than expected, with more employees on payrolls than ever before and redundancies remaining low.” Alpesh Paleja, the lead economist at the lobby group the CBI, said: “Growth disappointed in October, reinforcing concerns about the resilience of the UK’s economic recovery to the Omicron variant and the impact of further restrictions.” Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics said: “The news that the economy was hardly growing at all before Omicron means it is touch-and-go whether it will grow a bit in December or shrink a bit. Against that background, we doubt the Bank of England will raise interest rates next Thursday.”Jimmy Kimmel Days after a homeless man with mental health issues lit the Christmas tree outside Fox News’s Manhattan studios on fire, “Fox desperately wants this to be a political thing,” said Jimmy Kimmel. Fox &amp; Friends hosts decried New York City bail reform which allowed the suspect to go free, for example, with host Brian Kilmeade even calling the arson “a hate crime against us”. “You can’t commit a hate crime against a channel, in the same way you can’t shoplift at Etsy – it’s impossible, really,” Kimmel retorted. “They must not have anything to talk about at Fox this week,” he added, “because they really went to town on this ‘we have been victimized’, jag,” none more so than host Tucker Carlson, who called the burning “an attack on religious observance”. “The [Department of Justice] can tell you precisely how many Qur’ans were burned last year in the United States, but they don’t keep track of Christmas trees, why is that?” Carlson said. “Well for one, little snowflake, unlike the Quran, Christians don’t base our faith on pine trees,” Kimmel responded. “It’s the reason we don’t hang popcorn and cookie ornaments on the Bible. But you know that.” Kimmel also mocked a new MasterClass video by Hillary Clinton on “resilience”, in which she gets emotional reading from the victory speech she had planned to give in 2016. “What is this? What is she doing? Is this a Christmas present for Donald Trump?” Kimmel wondered. “It’s like she made him a Cameo video for his birthday. Donald Trump will masturbate to this MasterClass.” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert checked in on Joe Biden, who hosted a virtual Summit for Democracy this week. “I’m not sure we’re the country to be hosting it,” Colbert said of the two-day summit with 80 world leaders. “These days, a US president lecturing the world about stable democracy is like Andy Cohen hosting the Rational Discourse Among Sober Housewives Summit.” Biden kicked off the summit with a virtual address. “Government of the people, by the people, for the people can at times be fragile, but it also is inherently resilient … democracy is hard, we all know that.” “Do we though, Joe?” Colbert responded. “It’s like he’s saying all the right things but he kinda seems like the kind grandpa who’s moved in because Mom and Dad have ‘gone away for awhile’ and doesn’t understand where the family’s at right now. He’s reminding the kids about the basics: dinner is at 6, face and hands washed, say grace first, while ignoring the cockfighting ring they have set up in the family room.” Colbert also touched on the burning of the Fox News Christmas tree, and especially Brian Kilmeade’s attempt to label it a “hate crime” against the network. “Yes, it’s clearly a hate crime against a historically marginalized group: morons,” Colbert deadpanned. “Fox lives matter!” Seth Meyers “Republicans are, as usual, lying about lockdowns and vaccines,” said Seth Meyers on Late Night. “Instead, they’d rather focus on absurd, unproven remedies like hydroxychloroquine or ingesting bleach,” or a new one from Wisconsin senator Ron Johnson: mouthwash. “Standard gargle, mouthwash, has been proven to kill the coronavirus,” Johnson told a radio show on Wednesday. “If you get it, you may reduce viral replication … why not try all these things?” “Or even better, don’t use mouthwash and your bad breath will keep people 6ft away from you at all times,” Meyers quipped. To be clear: Listerine confirms on their website that mouthwash “is not intended to prevent or treat Covid-19” and should be used as directed on the label. “I don’t even want to imagine what’s next,” said Meyers. “Is Titleist going to have to issue a statement that says ‘Contrary to Republican statements, covering our golf balls in Sudafed and eating them for dinner will not give you ‘Superman eyes?’” Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah also looked at Hillary Clinton’s new MasterClass, in which she faces the camera and reads from her planned 2016 victory speech that she’s “never shared” with anyone before. “The way she’s sitting like that and reading it to us, it’s like the world’s most depressing fairy tale – ‘Once upon a time, an ogre crushed the dreams of a princess, and nobody lived happily ever after, the end,’” Noah said. “I really love how she was like ‘I’ve never shared this speech with anybody before, it was too painful, and – you’re paying me how much? Oh well, I guess I could read a few pages,’” he added. “I’ll say one thing: you’ll never see Donald Trump doing this,” he concluded. “He doesn’t write backup speeches, because whether he wins or loses, that dude gives the same speech.”Nearly a year after three young boys vanished near their homes in Rio de Janeiro’s rundown northern sprawl, police have accused members of the city’s largest drug faction of murdering the children in reprisal for stealing an ornamental bird. The boys – aged nine, 11 and 12 – disappeared on the afternoon of 27 December 2020 after leaving their homes in the Morro do Castelar favela to play. They were last seen in eerie security footage showing them walking towards a local street market. What became of those children – Lucas, Alexandre and Fernando – has remained a mystery despite a nationwide outcry and a major police investigation. On Thursday, however, investigators claimed they had finally cracked the case, having discovered that the boys had been abducted by members of the Red Command (CV) faction that controlled their community. The homicide chief Uriel Alcântara said the children had been tortured and subjected to a vicious punishment beating, in which one of them had died, for allegedly stealing a bird belonging to the uncle of a local gangster. “They beat up the children, went over the top and ended up killing one of them – and so they decide the solution is to execute the other two,” Alcântara alleged. The murders have exposed the senseless violence that plagues Rio’s low-income favelas, over which authorities have largely relinquished control to the increasingly well-armed gunmen employed by drug factions or paramilitary gangs. Police claim one local trafficker, Ana Paula da Rosa Costa or “Auntie Paula”, had arranged for the children’s corpses to be smuggled out of the favela, dismembered and thrown in a river. The bodies have yet to be found. During the investigation, one witness reportedly claimed he had heard one of Castelar’s drug bosses, Wille Castro da Silva, admit: “We got the kids and we killed them.” Silva, 35, a gangster known by the alias “Stala”, was one of five murder suspects police had arrest warrants for when they raided the favela before dawn on Thursday. But at least three of those five are already thought to be dead, having been executed on the orders of senior CV leaders for their role in murders that violated the group’s strict internal code and drew unwanted attention to its criminal operations. Auntie Paula, 44, who sold synthetic drugs such as ecstasy in the favela, was reportedly tortured and killed in early October after being summoned to the CV’s headquarters in the Complexo da Penha favela network. Days later another trafficker and murder suspect, known by the nickname “Piranha”, was also reportedly sentenced to death by CV chiefs for failing to prevent the killings. Stala, who allegedly oversaw the beating and torture of the children after his uncle’s bird was taken, is also believed to have been killed. Flávia Oliveira, a prominent political and social commentator, told the GloboNews TV network that the killings, and their brutal aftermath, revealed “a society that has succumbed to barbarism”. “This is a society that has trivialised death and has trivialised the lives of its children,” Oliveira said, urging Rio’s governor, Brazil’s president and all Brazilians to apologise to the victims’ families. “These three boys … also died as a result of exclusion, a lack of assistance, indifference, and because of the initial delay in investigating. They died because of misery, poverty and the lack of security,” she said. The leftist politician and human rights activist Marcelo Freixo called for the perpetrators to be punished and for the killing to end. “Rio cannot continue to be held hostage to the violence of crime.” Yet there is little sign of the city’s decades-long drug conflict coming to an end. A police “pacification” project designed to regain control of the favelas before Brazil’s 2014 World Cup and 2016 Olympics has largely disintegrated. At least 4,386 gunfights have been reported in Rio this year alone, according to the violence monitoring group Fogo Cruzado. More than 1,000 people have died. In a wretched demonstration of the seemingly unbreakable cycle of violence, it was reported in October that the father of one of the missing boys had been arrested with a gun after signing up to a local gang in the hope of tracking down his son’s killers. “He said he had joined the faction so he could find the murderer and avenge the death of his son,” the police chief José Mário Salomão told reporters at the time.A STORY ABOUT COMEDY IN THE FIVER Few laughs are as forced, fake, exaggerated and downright obsequious as the Football Press Conference Laugh and a classic of the genre could be heard at Jürgen Klopp’s latest audience with the ladies and gentlemen of the Fourth Estate. Taking his seat at the top table for media duties before Aston Villa’s visit to Anfield on Saturday, Klopp greeted his audience, picked up a water bottle, unscrewed the lid and announced that he would not be answering any questions about $tevie Mbe. Following a pregnant pause he grinned, showing all present his expensive Dulux Colour Chart “Frosted White” veneers, prompting all present to realise he was joking and completely lose their minds. While it was unlikely to get him an opening slot on Live at the Apollo, as gags go it wasn’t too bad; we’ll certainly give him that. However, given the reaction it got from the assembled hacks, the German could have been forgiven for thinking he’d morphed into mid-1980s Billy Connolly, as his audience erupted into paroxysms of collective mirth. Braying and honking at preposterously great length, they slapped their thighs and rubbed tears from their eyes … then asked him questions about $tevie Mbe. With the Anfield favourite returning to his old stomping ground as Villa’s manager, it is no surprise the former Liverpool skipper and fan favourite has captured the pre-match headlines. And having been on his current stepping stone for all of four games, the obvious focus was on whether or not he was destined to manage his old club in the future. “Yes, absolutely,” tooted Klopp, to stony silence before tapping his mic. “The only thing is when is the right moment for that. I think it will definitely happen and that is good for everybody.” Meanwhile in his own press conference, Mbe wasn’t so much cracking wise as resisting the urge to commit an act of violence as yet another journalist asked him about his relationship with Liverpool. “I want to win every game that I play in and now my priority, my focus, and everything I give on a daily basis, will be for Aston Villa,” he sighed. “One thing I can guarantee the supporters, the players and all the staff here is that when I commit to something, I’m all in.” An assurance of sorts that, in comedy terms, he’ll be at Villa all week. Don’t forget to tip your waitress and try the chicken. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join John Brewin from 8pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Brentford 0-0 Watford in the Premier League. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Erling Haaland will take the next step. Bayern, Real, Barcelona, Manchester City – these are the big clubs he can join. City won the Premier League five times, significantly more than Manchester United. When we moved to BVB, we all knew this step would come” – infamous Mr 20% Mino Raiola plays fast and loose with Premier League facts as he tries to engineer a bumper move from Dortmund for his goal-guzzling Norway striker. THE TOP 100 Who is the Guardian’s No 1 female footballer for 2021? It’s … oh, just click to find out. FIVER LETTERS “You can tell Matt Dony (yesterday’s Fiver letters) not to worry. In a few years’ time Liverpool will have an ex-player who was much better than Divock Origi being brought in as their woefully under-qualified manager” – Richard Saunders. “As a flamin’ Australian, just when I thought there was no way for Sam Kerr to become more of a national icon she goes full Andrew Symonds on a pitch invader (yesterday’s Quote of the Day). No offence to our nation’s frontline worker heroes (or Pat Cummins), but I think she’s a lock for Australian of the Year” – Adam Osborne. “There are multiple permutations for Peter Lingard’s team-related pub names around England (yesterday’s letters). Forest County, City Rovers, etc. But I would definitely be happy to fork out London prices for Tin in The Ham Palace” – Andrew Want. “I was thinking of opening a pop-up Christmas pub called Bar Humbug” – Peter Worley. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’ the day is … Peter Worley, who bags a revised and updated version of Richard Foster’s Premier League Nuggets. We’ll give a copy away every day this week, and it is available to buy here. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Here’s the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. There’s a new Ashes pod about too, if you’re that way inclined. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS The top 42 clubs in Spanish men’s football have voted through a €2.1bn investment from private equity fund CVC Capital Partners for an 8.2% stake in a new company that will manage their broadcasting revenues. Only Real Madrid, Barcelona, Athletic Bilbao and Ibiza voted against, while one club abstained. Brighton v Spurs on Sunday has been called off because Covid is refraining from doing one and Arsenal’s Mikel Arteta wants clearer rules around postponements. Anthony Martial’s Mr 15% has also been flapping his gums wildly in the hope of earning some serious coin. “Anthony wishes to leave [Manchester United] in January,” wibbled Philippe Lamboley. “He just needs to play … and I will speak to the club soon.” Meanwhile, Ralf Rangnick revealed he got on the blower to Paul Pogba to ask him when he might be able to do a shift in United’s midfield. “We had a telephone call for about 10 or 15 minutes,” yelped Rangnick, who has yet to meet Pogba while he recuperates in Dubai. “He told me he is getting better but … of course he has been idle for quite some time.” Arsenal boss Jonas Eidevall is trying his hand at optimism after a walloping at the Emirates by Barcelona in Women’s Big Cup. “It’s great even if it doesn’t feel good losing 4-0,” he parped. And Brendan Rodgers sounds delighted to be taking Leicester into Tin Pot after being dumped out of Big Vase by Napoli in a thrilling 3-2 defeat. “With all due respect to the competition, I’m not sure what it is,” he head-scratched. STILL WANT MORE? OK, so now you know Alexia Putellas is No 1, here’s Bea Redondo on how the Barça midfielder became the best in the world. Ten things to look out for in the Premier League, including Christian Benteke being prolific … at missing big chances. Photographer Sophie Grew is following the Women’s FA Cup on the road to Wembley, continuing with her latest picture essay on Wolves v Nottingham Forest in round two. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! WON! WON! WON! Congratulations to Tony Crawford and Noble Francis who correctly answered the The Blizzard’s fiendish question about which former Liverpool forward was the only player to play international football in four decades. It was Jari Litmanen. The Quizzard: The Blizzard Quiz book are on their way. Readers can buy a copy of The Quizzard for the reduced £6.99 (print) or £5 (digital) by entering code GQUIZ at the checkout. ONLY £4,300 FOR A WATCH WITH A LION ON ITWith the Formula One title fight between Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen rapidly approaching its climax the tension in the paddock in Abu Dhabi is palpable. Yet there was at least a rapprochement of sorts for their two team principals. Before their duel in the desert and after a season of often bitter feuding, Mercedes’ Toto Wolff and Red Bull’s Christian Horner shook hands and almost made up. For their final pre-race press conference of the year the pair reached across the F1 constructors’ trophy between them and shook hands. “Good luck, may the best man and the best team win,” said Wolff. Both were doubtless convinced that their driver was the man in question. Hamilton and Verstappen go into Sunday’s finale equal on points, only the second time two protagonists have been level pegging in the decider since 1974 when McLaren’s Emerson Fittipaldi and Ferrari’s Clay Regazzoni went head to head at Watkins Glen for the title, with Fittipaldi coming out on top. This time the battle has been marked by a steady deterioration in relations between teams and their drivers and with the pleasantries over Horner swiftly intimated that his man, who was penalised twice in the last race in Saudi Arabia, had been the victim of a smear campaign. “Max has had allegations about his driving, his driving style and driving standards, there has been a narrative pushed to put pressure on him,” he said. “Lewis has used every tool available to him to put Max under pressure this year, I believe, aided by Mercedes’ media machine. He’s not only up against Lewis but a huge machine in Mercedes Benz, so all credit to him in the way he has handled that pressure this year.” Yet despite concerns that have echoed round the paddock all weekend that a crash between the two protagonists could decide the title, Horner remained bullish in insisting Verstappen would change nothing for the final showdown. “Max drives in a manner that ignites passion, it has brought new fans into the sport this year and we do not want him to change,” he said. “We want him to drive in the exact manner he has that has put him on the precipice of fighting with Lewis for this championship. We have spoken about the weekend, the most important thing is for him to enjoy it and drive how he has in the previous races, to attack it in the way he has to give him those nine victories.” Wolff and Horner have traded barbs this season, with accusations and counter-accusations of cheating, and Wolff too could not resist a final jab. “I can understand the rationale that if things go against a team or the two drivers, I can get quite emotional in the moment and Christian has his own way of dealing with it,” he said. He also emphasised just how intense the title fight had been and that with so much at stake it was only to be expected that there would be friction between the protagonists. “It is just this fight for the trophy, one of the most important prizes in sport,” he said. “That is why you can’t expect a lot of schmoozing between the drivers, team principals and the team.” The Yas Marina circuit has undergone several adjustments including the removal of two chicanes to be replaced with faster corners in an attempt to improve the chances of passing at the circuit, which has often presented a procession in the past. Given its first test as the verbal sparring began to die down it was Verstappen who took the early advantage on the track. He was quickest in first practice, from the Mercedes of Valtteri Bottas with Hamilton in third, three-tenths down. However, in the more representative evening running, taking place at the same time as the race is scheduled, Hamilton and Mercedes were firmly on the front foot. Having won the last three races with a dominant turn of pace, Hamilton was flying in Abu Dhabi. Three-tenths up on Esteban Ocon in second and six-tenths clear of Verstappen in fourth, this was just the preparation the world champion required.The streets in towns and cities across Myanmar were deserted on Friday as the public held a “silent strike” to protest against the military government, days after a massacre of villagers provoked international condemnation. Reports of the killing of 11 villagers, including children, in Sagaing region on Tuesday, were described by the US as “credible and sickening”. A spokesperson for the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) warned of an “alarming escalation of grave human rights abuses in Myanmar”. The military rounded up villagers, shooting them and setting them on fire, according to reports by independent local media. A video and photograph that appears to show the burned corpses in Don Taw village have been shared on social media. The OHCHR called for a “firm, unified” international response. It also referred to a recent military attack on a small group of peaceful, unarmed protesters who had gathered in Yangon on 5 December. A military vehicle rammed into the group and opened fire, killing as many as five people, according to local media reports. “These attacks are heinous, completely unacceptable, and disregard common values of humanity. They are also far from isolated,” said Rupert Colville, a spokesperson for the OHCHR. In state-controlled media, the military responded to international criticism by accusing UN officials and others of interfering in Myanmar’s domestic affairs and relying on “distorted news”. It denied reports of the massacre in Don Taw and instead accused “nation-destroying media” of publishing false reports. On Friday, the “silent strike” was observed in many areas of Myanmar, with businesses shut between 10am and 4pm to signal defiance against the junta. In Yangon, normally congested roads were deserted, and lines of shops and businesses shuttered. A prominent protest leader, Min Han Htet, posted images of empty streets on social media with the message: “We are one organism”. The prominent activist Thet Swe Win said on social media that, in some towns, soldiers had confiscated the property of businesses that had closed, and that business owners had been forced to show up and be arrested. Friday’s protest was reportedly observed across Myanmar’s second city, Mandalay, and in towns across Sagaing region, Bago region, Ayeyarwaddy region, Shan state and Magwe region. Mass protests that spread across Myanmar in the aftermath of the coup were crushed with deadly violence by the military. However, opposition remains widespread and people continue to find new, peaceful ways to defy the junta. An armed resistance consisting of people’s defence forces has also emerged. The military has killed at least 1,323 people since it seized power on 1 February, according to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners, an advocacy group that monitors deaths and arrests. A further 7,881 are currently detained.A sycamore tree saved from felling by Nottinghamshire rebels who slept beneath it, and a Monterey cypress growing on a Welsh beach that was also protected by people’s passion for trees, are among 10 contenders for Britain’s Tree of the Year 2021. Public voting is open for the Woodland Trust’s annual contest which the charity hopes will highlight the lack of legal protection for ancient and much-loved trees in Britain. Last year’s winner, the Happy Man Tree – a London plane tree on a Hackney street – was felled because of redevelopment despite a public campaign to save it. But two of this year’s contenders have a more felicitous recent history. In Newark, the local council’s extension to a car park threatened four graceful sycamores but residents forced a rethink after spending nights sleeping beneath the trees to protect them. On Scar Rock at Saundersfoot beach, Pembrokeshire, a Monterey cypress planted in January 1938 and now claimed to be dangerous, was given a reprieve for a year after local people hailed it as Saundersfoot’s Eiffel Tower. The community has a year to carry out surgery to make it safe, with one tree expert judging that it could live for another 40 years despite its precipitous position. “Tree of the Year has a serious message,” said Adam Cormack, head of campaigning at the Woodland Trust. “Many of our oldest and most special trees in the UK have no form of legal protection. It’s time that our oldest trees got the same protection as our oldest buildings. Our built heritage and our natural heritage are both important and worthy of protection. After all, once they’re gone – ancient trees can never be replaced like for like.” It has been a bumper autumn for sweet chestnuts and this could be the year for that species with two monster trees on the shortlist: one at Willesley Park golf club, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, with a knotted girth of more than 11 metres, and another at Rydal in the Lake District, whose celebrated twisting trunk would have been enjoyed by William Wordsworth. Northern Ireland’s contender is an exceptionally curly parasol beech in Parkanaur forest park, County Tyrone, where its knotted branches grow back towards the ground in a glorious tangle. Scottish entries are a wind-sculpted lone hawthorn beside the water at Kipford, Dalbeattie, and a graceful ash set within a churchyard beside Ettrick Forest in Selkirk.In the four years since Willow Smith last performed live in the UK, the 21-year-old has been through multiple artistic transformations. On 2017’s The 1st, she was a raw singer-songwriter in the vein of Tracy Chapman or Fiona Apple; her eponymous 2019 album ventured into psychedelic soul. With this year’s pop-punk-influenced Lately I Feel Everything, it feels as though Willow has found her final form as a Black alt poster girl for Gen Z. (Her mum, Jada Pinkett Smith, previously fronted the nu metal band Wicked Wisdom.) Her angsty but powerful vocals are right at home in Camden’s sold-out home of rock. The show starts with a special guest, which turns out to be her older brother, Jaden. Perhaps spooked by the recent deaths at the Astroworld festival, he checks that the crowd have enough space and asks fans to cross their arms if they feel uncomfortable. Amid clouds of smoke, he performs his song Icon, then introduces his little sister. “Once upon a time Willow would go on stage and then I would go on stage,” he says. “But now the tide has turned.” Willow’s set feels like a metamorphosis – a young artist coming into her own, belting out long clear notes that dwarf the sound of her guitarist and drummer. A few tracks in, she pulls her woolly hat off to reveal a bold shaved head; she puffs nonchalantly on a cigarette like a rock star and shows off her prowess on guitar on Female Energy Part 2. Between songs, she instructs fans to fill the room with positive energy. “I’d really like to know your deepest darkest fears and aspirations,” she says. The atmosphere of liberation proves contagious when a fan throws their wig in the air at the crescendo of TikTok favourite Meet Me at Our Spot. Notably absent from the setlist is her debut single Whip My Hair, released when Willow was 10 years old. She has spoken about being traumatised by that era of her career. More than a decade later, she’s an artist whose anxieties, frustrations and pride fuel her most beloved music to date. “I couldn’t have asked to come back and had a better show than this,” she says, beaming at her fans.The Czech president, Miloš Zeman, has set the stage for a constitutional tug of war after rejecting the nominee to be the country’s next foreign minister on the grounds of his allegedly poor degree thesis. In a move decried as legally baseless by many constitutional scholars, Zeman refused to accept the nomination of Jan Lipavský, citing “low qualifications” and adding that he had only completed a bachelor’s degree, which he said was a lower qualification than those held by all other proposed ministers in the incoming coalition government. He singled out Lipavský’s bachelor’s dissertation, saying examiners had awarded it “the worst possible grade”. The basis of Zeman’s criticism was confirmed by Czech Radio, which reported that the thesis, on the politicisation of Russian energy supplies, had received a grade 3, the lowest band, after Lipavský defended it at Charles University’s international studies institute in Prague. However, critics questioned the reasoning and pointed out that Zeman had approved the temporary appointment of Jan Hamáček as acting foreign minister in the outgoing government, despite Hamáček holding only a high school diploma. Zeman, an outspoken populist, also lambasted Lipavský for supposedly “distant attitudes” towards Israel and the so-called Visegrád group comprising Poland, Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech Republic, formed after the demise of communism in eastern Europe. He further criticised him for suggesting that an event marking Sudeten German day – in memory of ethnic Germans expelled from Czechoslovakia after the second world war – should be staged in the Czech Republic. Lipavský, a member of the liberal Pirates party, has vowed to return Czech foreign policy to the explicitly pro-western position championed by the country’s first post-communist leader, Václav Havel, and pledged a tougher line towards Russia and China, with whose governments the president has fostered closer ties. The disagreement threatened to further delay the inauguration of the new coalition, which is still waiting to take office two months after a general election resulted in defeat for the government of Andrej Babiš, the sitting prime minister who continues to govern on a caretaker basis. Petr Fiala, the prime minister-designate, said he would insist on Lipavský’s appointment and vowed to take the matter to the constitutional court after a scheduled meeting with Zeman at the presidential countryside retreat at Chateau Lány next Monday. “It is necessary for the constitutional court to resolve once and for all the question of competence regarding the appointment of new members of the government,” tweeted Fiala, leader of the centre-right Spolu grouping, the coalition’s senior partners. Analysts said the court could to take up to seven weeks to resolve the dispute, with most predicting a ruling against Zeman. To avoid such a delay in forming a new government, Fiala could accept a cabinet without a foreign minister or nominate himself temporarily for the role, while filing Lipavský’s nomination before the court.MPs have approved a new chair of the charities watchdog but criticised the way the search “became subject to allegations of political interference” as well as a lack of diversity. The Commons culture select committee approved Martin Thomas, an insurance and financial services professional and experienced charity trustee, as chair of the Charity Commission following a pre-appointment hearing on Thursday. However, while the committee welcomed Thomas’s appointment, it said it was “regrettable” that the process had been drawn out and mired in controversy around alleged attempts by ministers to influence the process. The former culture secretary Oliver Dowden caused controversy when he wrote a Sunday Telegraph article in September saying ministers would only choose a candidate who could show they would use the commission’s power to pursue charities which stray into so-called “woke” and “political” activities. Dowden’s article came days before interviews for the commission chair took place and triggered a legal challenge from the Good Law Project, which argued that ministers were unlawfully trying to control the commission chair. There had been widespread concern that ministers would seek to appoint a partisan figure who would pursue an agenda aligned with the government’s, but MPs welcomed Thomas’s commitment to maintaining the independence of the commission. Thomas has no declared political activity. Thomas said in the pre-appointment scrutiny hearing he believed the commission should stay as far as possible out of debates about “wokeness”. He also said he did not believe charities were “too political” and there was no need to change existing rules governing their political activity. The committee said the government should have “worked harder to ensure a more diverse pool of candidates applied for the role”, although it noted that ministers had also expressed disappointment at the lack of diversity among candidates. There were 37 applications for the £62,500-a-year role. Of the 36 that filled in a diversity monitoring form, nine were female, six were black, Asian or minority ethnic (BAME) and one was disabled. Of the seven who went forward to interview, one was female and one BAME. Thomas, who was educated at a public school and has a classics degree from Oxford University, told MPs he wanted charity boards to be more diverse. Being a trustee was “something for everyone”, he said, and should not be regarded solely as “an extra feather in the cap” for the middle class. Thomas has more than 20 years of experience in insurance and financial services, and worked at the Bank of England and the European Central Bank. He has chaired several charities, including the Forward Arts Foundation, which runs National Poetry Day. In confirming his appointment, the committee praised Thomas’s skills, experience and temperament, adding that he “demonstrated a sound awareness of the challenges of the sector”.The supreme court ruled on Friday that Texas abortion providers can sue over the state’s ban on most abortions, but the justices are allowing the law, the strictest such regulation in America to date, to remain in effect. The decision is a mixed result for reproductive health advocates at a time when social conservatives seem on the march in America and the supreme court is leaning towards restricting or outlawing abortion nationally in the future with its conservative supermajority, engineered by Donald Trump. The Texas law is unusual in that it relies on the public, rather than the authorities, to sue those suspected of performing an abortion or aiding in the service, although not the patient undergoing the termination. The framing of the law was widely seen as a device to make it harder for the abortion ban to be challenged in federal court given the lack of state involvement in enforcing the prohibition. Friday’s supreme court opinion, written by Justice Neil Gorsuch, gives a complicated legal response that abortion providers in Texas and beyond are likely to receive as a partial but by no means overwhelming victory. In his opinion, Gorsuch makes clear that the court in this case was not addressing the issue of abortion rights per se, or whether the Texas ban was consistent with existing federal law. Those larger questions will fall to a separate case currently before the supreme court, Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, out of Mississippi, which specifically seeks the overturning of Roe v Wade, the 1973 landmark supreme court ruling that paved the way for legal abortion nationwide. That case, which could determine the future of abortion rights in the US for decades to come, was heard in oral arguments last week but is unlikely to be concluded until a ruling is issued next June. The overall result of Friday’s opinion is that abortion providers in Texas will be allowed to press ahead with their legal challenge to the near-total ban on abortion. But their legal path forward has been narrowed and from now on they will be forced to direct their efforts at a small number of state employees. As part of their challenge to SB 8, abortion clinics had attempted to sue a Texas state judge. That was dismissed unanimously by the nine justices as being inconsistent with a 1908 supreme court ruling that prohibits federal courts imposing injunctions on state courts. The court ruled by a lesser margin that the providers will be able to continue challenging SB 8 by focusing on four licensing officials who would be involved in taking action against abortion clinics under the terms of the new ban. But state court clerks and the attorney general of Texas, Ken Paxton, who had been named as defendants, could not be sued. Sonia Sotomayor, one of the three remaining liberal-leaning justices on the nine-judge supreme court bench, expressed strong views in dissent. She said that by casting their opinion so narrowly, the conservative majority was “shrinking” from its duty to defend the supremacy of the US constitution over the whims of individual states. “The court should have put an end to this madness months ago, before SB 8 went into effect,” she wrote in a dissenting opinion. “It failed to do so then, and it fails again today … Federal courts can and should issue relief when a state enacts a law that chills the exercise of a constitutional right.” The legal battle to try and stop SB 8 and reopen access to abortion to millions of Texan women will now return to a lower federal court in the state capital, Austin. While it does so, however, the prohibition against almost all abortions in the state will continue to stand. Massachusetts Democratic senator and former presidential candidate Elizabeth Warren said the Friday decision in the Texas case was outrageous. “While Scotus has allowed challenges to SB 8 to proceed, it’s outrageous that the Court has again decided not to block Texas’ unconstitutional abortion ban,” tweeted Warren. “More Texans are harmed every day this law is allowed to stand. The Senate must pass the Women’s Health Protection Act.” The law would codify the right to abortion access in the US into national legislation. The bill passed the House in September and is in limbo in the US Senate. Also on Friday, the court dismissed an overall challenge to the Texas law from the Biden administration that would have blocked the ban entirely. The law in Texas has been in effect since September, aside from a district court-ordered pause that lasted 48 hours. It bans abortions once cardiac activity is detected, usually around six weeks and before many women know they are pregnant. While courts have blocked other state laws effectively banning abortion before a fetus can survive outside the womb, the Texas law has so far avoided a similar fate because it leaves enforcement up to private citizens, a move that many critics have said effectively creates anti-abortion bounty hunters. The law allows anyone, anywhere to bring a suit against anyone who helps a woman obtain an abortion, and provides a $10,000 penalty against defendants found to violate the law. Meanwhile, a judge in Texas had ruled on Thursday that the law violated the state’s constitution because it allows private citizens to sue abortion providers. State district court judge David Peeples was ruling on the law but abortion providers had already signaled that despite the ruling, they were unlikely to resume the procedure until the supreme court announced its decision.Are we there yet? Are we at the end of the Boris Johnson odyssey? It’s an impatient question, given it was only two years ago this very weekend that Johnson was celebrating a victory that brought an 80-seat majority and excited talk of a 10-year reign in No 10. An impatient question but one hardly confined to excitable Westminster journalists. The prime minister’s own colleagues are asking it of each other and themselves, prompted by the serial revelations of a torrid week. “Cummings was bad, but this is off the scale,” one minister tells me, reflecting the widely shared view that Dominic Cummings’ lockdown jaunt to Barnard Castle has been outdone by the video of sniggering Johnson aides implicitly admitting that they had been partying in Downing Street while the rest of the country faced a bleak, often lonely Christmas; that they had been knocking back the booze while many were denied the right to give so much as a consoling touch to a dying loved one. That imagery should be devastating for Johnson, who ran, however improbably, as the populist tribune of the people against the hated establishment. The mock press conference footage exposed that fraud. It confirms voters’ worst fears, says that same minister, “that the government is a conspiracy of elites, taking the public for fools”. Add to that the striking allegation that the PM misled his own standards adviser, Lord Geidt, over the source of funds for his absurdly extravagant makeover of the Downing Street flat – decorating Versailles while outside the palace the people trembled in the face of plague – and you have a prime minister confirmed as the embodiment of the very elite he claimed to oppose: pampered, greedy and out of touch. The result is that the man who united shire Tories with “red wall” Brexit voters to forge a winning coalition in December 2019 has crafted a new alliance in December 2021. He has brought together previously warring factions of his own party – the anti-mask crowd, good-government types who remember integrity, and the 2019 intake still waiting for Johnson to deliver on his promises – in unison against him. The latter group is the one watched most closely. There are a lot of them and they face constituents who made clear two years ago that they were merely lending their vote to the Tories, that their support was conditional. “When they are complaining,” says one MP of the class of 2019, “then he’s in real trouble. And they are.” All of this would obviously have finished off any normal politician, but Johnson does not fit that description. He has already survived so much – not just successive waves of scandal but a record of incompetence in the early handling of Covid that led to tens of thousands of needless deaths – that it’s tempting to reach the same conclusion that Johnson drew about himself long ago: to him the normal rules do not apply. You can imagine him staggering on until the Christmas cessation of hostilities, then returning in the new year full of new promises and new slogans, breezily dismissing the current agonies as old news. Such are the arguments of the Westminster village, as cheerleaders and critics trade competing scenarios. But there’s one player missing from these dramas, in which all power rests with the 361 members of the parliamentary Conservative party. That missing player is the electorate. So often our politics is like that, the public reduced to a data point, their involvement limited to one say every four or five years and the muffled voice they are granted in the form of digits on an opinion poll. Happily, next week may be different. There is a byelection in rock-solid North Shropshire, the seat vacated by Owen Paterson, the man who broke lobbying rules, and whom Johnson wanted to let off without punishment. Given that Tory MPs’ attachment to Johnson is deeply transactional, contingent solely on his electoral prowess, a shock result on Thursday could prove to be a tipping point. Defeat there will spark mass panic among Conservative MPs: if that seat can fall, they will say to themselves, then what about mine? Even Labour’s most optimistic souls concede they cannot win North Shropshire, which leaves the Liberal Democrats as de-facto challenger. But some Labour tribalists are hardly enthused by the prospect of a Tory defeat there at the hands of the Lib Dems. They worry a revived Lib Dem party could be a headache, and they’d prefer to see a weakened Johnson remain in post. One senior Labour figure says “it’s a no-brainer” that the party should not want to see the Tories repeat their trick of 1990 and 2019 – switching leaders, so the public feels it has had the catharsis of a change of government without changing the governing party. Much better, runs the argument, for Johnson to limp on to the next election, where he’ll be a scandal-plagued, damaged-goods PM facing former prosecutor and straight-arrow Keir Starmer. That, they say, is a contest Labour could win. I get all that logic. But politics can’t always be about gaming out scenarios and plotting chess moves. Sometimes it’s simpler than that. In this case, the plea needs to go out to the Tory voters of North Shropshire. They were cheated by their Tory MP, who promised to work for them but was found to be lobbying for the companies that paid him handsomely. They have been cheated by a Tory prime minister who has lied and lied – setting the rules for everyone else while he and his chums broke them without a second thought, laughing at the saps who were stupid enough to comply. This isn’t only an offence against the integrity of our public life, it’s a danger to our public health. Because you cannot fight a pandemic if the government’s instructions will no longer be followed. Many Britons will look at Cummings’ eye test and the Secret Santa in No 10 and decide they won’t be fooled again. We face a government that is cruel, useless and rotten from the head down. The voters of North Shropshire have a rare chance on Thursday to declare that the citizens of this country will not just take it. That they won’t just shrug and say, “That’s Boris.” That they will demand better. The political after-effects will take care of themselves. The most immediate task is to send Downing Street the clearest possible message: the party’s over. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistHaving two doses of a Covid vaccine offers less defence against symptomatic infection from the Omicron variant than with Delta, experts have said, although a booster jab raises protection considerably. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said Omicron was projected to become the dominant variant of coronavirus in the UK by mid-December, based on current trends. It added that there could be more than a million coronavirus infections by the end of the month. Dr Susan Hopkins, the UKHSA’s chief medical adviser, said: “I think what we’re seeing is that if you’ve had two doses more than three months ago, then it’s not going to prevent you from getting symptomatic disease.” However, a Pfizer/BioNTech booster jab, given after an initial round of either Oxford/AstraZeneca or Pfizer, raised the level of protection, offering 70-75% protection against symptomatic infection. The findings came as the UK reported 58,194 new cases of Covid-19 on Friday – the highest number of positive cases in a 24-hour period since 9 January – and 120 deaths. A total of 448 Omicron cases were also reported, compared with 249 on Thursday, with the total across the UK to date now standing at 1,265. The UKHSA report offers early insights into the degree of protection the initial two vaccinations may offer against Omicron. The data suggests that people who have had two doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab 25 or more weeks ago have far lower protection against symptomatic infection with Omicron than with Delta. While the data suggests such individuals have about 40% protection against Delta at this time point, protection against symptomatic infection with Omicron could be less than 10%. However, there is a great deal of uncertainty around that figure given the small number of people studied and the fact that the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab was largely given to older or more vulnerable people. A similar trend was seen for those who have had two doses of the Pfizer jab, with about 60% protection against Delta at 25 or more weeks since the second dose, and just under 40% protection against Omicron at the same time point – although, again, there are uncertainties around the figures. About 44 million people received their second jab at least three months ago, but about 22 million have received a booster since then. Experts have said Omicron infections are doubling every two to three days in the UK, leading to concerns that the variant could overwhelm the NHS if it is as virulent as Delta. In the UK, about 39% of those over 12 years old have had a booster dose, compared with 81% of people having had two doses. “The booster is really adding to protection,” said Dr Mary Ramsay, the head of immunisation at the UKHSA. While the effectiveness of the jabs against severe disease is still unknown, the team says it is expected to be higher, drawing parallels to the drop in vaccine effectiveness for Delta when compared with earlier variants. “We did see this reduction in protection against milder disease with Delta way back in June. And what we didn’t see was any reduction in protection against hospitalisation,” said Ramsay. This is important because experts have previously warned that a drop in effectiveness against severe infections from, for example, 96% to 92% could lead to double the number of people who are not protected against hospitalisation. While some data from South Africa has suggested that infections with Omicron may be mild, Hopkins said it was too early to know whether the variant causes less severe disease than Delta. The findings chime with a report by scientists on Friday of the first cluster of Omicron cases in a group of people who had all received booster doses, suggesting that even three doses does not always protect against symptomatic illness. The group of seven German tourists in their 20s and 30s had recently visited South Africa and were subsequently found to have been infected with Omicron. All had mild to moderate symptoms and were not admitted to hospital, but the findings contrast slightly with more encouraging early laboratory results released by BioNTech and Pfizer this week. Prof Wolfgang Preiser, of Stellenbosch University in South Africa and senior author of the report on the cluster of Omicron cases, said: “We regard any claim that three doses would protect against symptomatic infection as not supported by available evidence. “But importantly the message is not that vaccination does not work – it just does not work as well as it used to against pre-Omicron viruses and an updated vaccine is desirable.”The owner of Geronimo, the alpaca who was culled because officials believed he had bovine tuberculosis, has launched a fierce attack on the UK government after postmortem tests suggested he might have been clear of the disease after all. Helen Macdonald said she felt betrayed and continued to grieve deeply for Geronimo’s ‘“senseless” loss. “It’s a rollercoaster. No two minutes are the same. I feel grief, traumatic grief.” Geronimo was killed in August after years of court battles, protests and celebrity interventions, with the government insisting he had to die because he had twice tested positive for the disease. Macdonald, a veterinary nurse, argued that the testing process was flawed, and she and her supporters have been waiting for the results of postmortem examinations. On Friday the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) conceded it had not been possible to prove from the postmortem tests that Geronimo did have TB. Speaking at her farm in Gloucestershire, Macdonald became tearful as she recalled how Geronimo was taken away by government vets, supported by police officers, despite the efforts of supporters known as “alpaca angels” to guard the animal. “He was tortured. Vets dragged him screaming to a horse box. If that was a person, they’d be up before the courts. You can’t use the word murder because he wasn’t human, but he was a sentient being.” Macdonald, who clutched a mug reading “Beware, crazy alpaca lady” as she spoke, said she could not bear to go into what had been Geronimo’s pen, saying it felt like a crime scene. “It brings back too many memories,” she said. “I’m going to carry on fighting for the truth. George Eustice [the environment secretary] has spent a ridiculous amount of taxpayers’ money trying to prove this one alpaca had bovine TB, when we knew all along that he didn’t, and ultimately, he personally ordered for Geronimo to be condemned to an unjust death. It is incredibly sad and personally devastating that the truth only emerges after the senseless death of Geronimo.” Defra claimed that an initial postmortem examination revealed the presence of what it believed were TB-like lesions – although Macdonald disputes this is what they were. The Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) has been trying to culture bacteria from these lesions but, it has now emerged, has been unable to do this. Defra argued this did not mean Geronimo was free of disease because he had twice tested positive while alive. The chief veterinary officer for the UK, Christine Middlemiss, said: “This animal tested positive for bovine tuberculosis on two separate occasions using highly specific tests. Due to the complexity of the disease, further testing has not enabled us to use whole-genome sequencing to try to understand how the animal became infected in the first place.” Macdonald’s supporters say the APHA was not able to culture bacteria from the tissue samples because there were no bacteria to do so. Iain McGill, a veterinary scientist who has advised Macdonald, said it was a “very sad day.” He said he believed the failure to culture bacteria showed it was “extremely unlikely” that Geronimo had TB. Defra said bovine tuberculosis was one of the most significant animal health challenges that England faced, costing taxpayers more than £100m each year. In 2020 alone, more than 27,000 cattle had to be slaughtered to curb its spread.And that concludes the blog for this Friday. Thanks ever so much for reading. On our Top 100 female footballers. Barcelona dominate with 13 players in the list, Ballon d’Or winner Alexia Putellas taking a hard-to-argue-against victory with 3,136 points, 293 points clear of Vivianne Miedema, who finishes as the runner-up for the second year running, ahead of former winner Sam Kerr. Forty-six of our 83 judges had Putellas as their No 1 with Miedema the next best with 15 winning votes. The two Champions League finalists dominate the top 10 with six Barcelona players joined by three Chelsea players as well as Miedema from Arsenal. Here’s today’s chortlesome chunks of Fiver, centred on this comedy classic. When football managers joke we hacks guffaw like Del Boy has just fallen through the bar. In which Pep Guardiola’s City take on Wolves, having an incredible season.... Let us recall it was Mikel Arteta testing positive that stopped the Premier League in March 2020. There seems to be some concern about what may happen now. Rightly so. Statement from League Two Mansfield Town. Mansfield Town Football Club has today issued a lifetime ban from One Call Stadium to a spectator found guilty of racist abuse during the club’s mid-week match at home to Carlisle United. A 31-year-old male was sentenced to a total of six months and two weeks in prison when he appeared at Nottingham Magistrates’ Court on Thursday 09 December 2021. He was also ordered to pay £100 in compensation and handed an eight-year football banning order after pleading guilty to assault and racially aggravated public order offences. Mansfield Town completely condemns the use of racist language and instances of discriminatory or prejudiced behaviour will not be tolerated at any game at One Call Stadium. Anyone who is found guilty of such an offence will be banned from the club for life. Any such behaviour has no place within our stadium, our Club, our community or our game. Big news from Spain here. Per Reuters. Spain’s top soccer clubs have approved a 1.994 billion euro investment from private equity fund CVC Capital Partners in the first deal of its kind in Europe, though four clubs - including Barcelona and Real Madrid - opted out. On Friday 37 clubs voted in favour of the “LaLiga Boost” deal that buys CVC an 8.2% stake in a new company that will get revenues from LaLiga broadcasting and sponsorship rights. Real Madrid, Barcelona, Athletic Bilbao and Ibiza voted against the deal, one source close to the negotiations told Reuters. There was no immediate official statement from those clubs or details on their next moves. At least 32 of the 42 teams from the Spanish first and second divisions needed to back the plan. On top of the four objections, one other club abstained from voting, the source said, without naming the club. La Liga had said the deal would be worth 2.7 billion euros when it was first unveiled in August. The lower 1.994 billion euro figure announced on Friday reflected the opt-outs and will be shared among the participating clubs and paid over a three-year period, the league said. A source close to Real Madrid told Reuters the club will begin legal action against La Liga as they threatened when they announced their objection in August. The objecting clubs will not take any share of the CVC investment, though they will continue to receive their allocated share of TV rights money, La Liga said Jamie Jackson’s news story on those Erling Haaland developments - or lack of them. Asked how soon a move would happen, Raiola said: “Maybe this summer, maybe the summer after. But there is a great chance that Erling will leave this summer.” Guardiola closed down a question when asked about Raiola’s comment. “Next question,” City’s manager said. “Don’t ask me about that – I’m not going to answer.” Preview of that emotional return for Steven Gerrard, with some further history at stake. Liverpool can equal a club record of scoring in 31 successive matches, set between April 1957 and January 1958, should they find the target again. A home win would take Klopp over the 500-points mark as a Premier League manager. Some Pep Guardiola classicism here, where he praises Manchester City’s opposition to stratospheric levels. Here, he is talking about *Wolves* who are eighth, have won one in five, and scored just one goal in doing so. They scored 12 goals and conceded 13 and are so stable. They played more between the lines last season, it was always tough in the last years when we faced Wolves and tomorrow will be no exception. When you have played 15 games and you can take a look at goals scored, goals conceded - their balance is stable, few on both sides. Always when we face Wolves it has been a tight game. They have structure, pace up front and good character. Wolves are having an incredible season so far. But at the same time we are in a good position to continue our run in the Premier League. Count Max Allegri has blasted his Juventus players. Per Reuters. Juventus currently need five shots to score a goal and must improve their finishing, coach Massimiliano Allegri, while revealing that Arthur Melo will miss their Serie A clash with Venezia after turning up late for training. The Turin club, who are fifth and seven points outside the top four, have scored 22 goals this season, the lowest number of the top 12 sides. Their issues finding the net were laid bare during a 2-0 league win over Genoa last Sunday, when Juve had 27 shots to the visitors’ zero, but took until the 82nd minute to put the result to bed with a Paulo Dybala strike. “We need to be calmer and more clinical in front of goal. Our current finishing percentage is too low for Juventus. To score a goal we need five chances,” Allegri said. Quiz! Quiz! Quiz! I got 9/11. Beat that. More on that Steven Gerrard destiny comment from Jürgen Klopp. This looks to be a game affected by Covid, though not much pointing to a postponement at this stage. A question to which I have no answer - and nobody probably does - if Omicron is much more transmissible, then how might that affect sport? Worth noting it’s actually summer in South Africa though also that Omicron has not been mentioned in either the case of Spurs and Norwich, who happened to play each 0ther last week. I shall park the amateur virology there. Well, that was quite a buildup from the legendary Barry Glendenning. I shall be your guide through the press conference banter and weekend previews until I can give no more. That’s all from me. Have a great weekend and no less a journalistic titan than John Brewin will take you through the rest of the afternoon’s news. Rafael Benitez has told defender Lucas Digne he must put the team ahead of himself. The Frenchman was dropped from Everton’s squad for Monday’s dramatic late victory over Arsenal which ended a run of eight matches without a win. His omission prompted speculation of a fall-out between player and manager. Digne, Everton’s only recognised left-back, has trained with the squad this week but Benitez would not confirm whether a return against Crystal Palace on Sunday is on the cards. “It is clear - the manager decides,” he said. “He has been training today. It is a normal situation with the player training and we will see tomorrow if he is available or not. “We need all the players around because that increases the competition, but at the same time everyone has to be focused and realise the priority has to be the team. What he has to do is ensure he continues working hard and the team is ahead do any individual.” Manchester City: After Mino Raiola, the agent of the Borussia Dortmund striker, mentioned the Premier League winners as a possible destination for the Borussia Dortmund striker, Manchester city boss Pep Guardiola was asked about the likelihood of the Norwegian inrternational joining the club. “Next question,” said the City manager. “Don’t ask me about that. I won’t answer.” Football press conferences: They’re peculiar events where any gag, however lame, cracked by the bloke at the top table is greeted by howls of raucous, obsequious laughter by the assembled journalists. As Steven Gerrard prepares to take Aston Villa to Anfield tomorrow, it should go without saying that Jurgen Klopp was asked for his take on the returning hero during his own press conference. “Wonderful story, I can imagine how his feelings are,” he said. “Stevie is already an experienced coach and knows how to approach games but probably had no idea how to approach it when he steps in the stadium and dugout. “It’s not easy for a world-class player to become an outstanding manager, but it’s possible and it looks like Stevie has all the skills you need. I’m really happy for him.” Gerrard has been touted as a long-term successor to Klopp and the German was asked if he believe the former Liverpool captain is destined to manage the club in the future. “Yes, absolutely,” he said. “The only thing is when is the right moment for that. I think it will definitely happen and that is good for everybody.” Manchester United: Manchester United interim manager Ralf Rangnick says he spoke to injured midfielder Paul Pogba this week but expects the France midfielder to be a further four weeks away from a return to action. The 63-year-old said he held a phone conversation on Tuesday with Pogba, who is undergoing warm-weather recovery work in Dubai following a thigh injury suffered on international duty last month. “He is better to come back today, and then we will get to know each other in person on Sunday,” said Rangnick. “We had a telephone call for about 10 or 15 minutes. He told me he is getting better but obviously he is still not fully fit, so it will take another couple of weeks until he is fit for training again and then of course he has been idle for quite some time, so I guess it will take another couple of weeks to get match-fit.” Pogba’s United future seems to be an almost constant source of speculation, and his current deal with the club expires next summer. Southampton: Speaking ahead of his side’s match against Arsenal on at the Emirates tomorrow, Southampton boss Ralp Hassenhuttl has said it was “not perfect” for him to publicly criticise the professionalism of his goalkeeper Alex McCarthy following Saints’ draw with Brighton last weekend. McCarthy injured his hamstring during the game and enlisted outfield players to take his goal-kicks because his movement was impaired. Hassenhuttl subsequently blamed the goalkeeper for Neal Maupay’s last-ditch equaliser, despite the fact it was the Austrian manager who left him out on the pitch playing with an injury. With the injured McCarthy fearing he was not mobile enough to protect the entire goal, James Ward-Prowse raced back to provide cover and ended up playing Maupay onside. Hasenhuttl said after the game that McCarthy “must be definitely more professional than that”, adding he would have replaced him with youngster Harry Lewis had he known about his hamstring issue. A hamstring injury that seemed quite apparent to everybody else in the ground. “I was not perfect to do this after the game,” he said. “I didn’t have all the information I should have after the game and that is always an issue. I hadn’t spoken with everybody. I know more now about what happened on the pitch and I would do it differently. But now isn’t the time to speak about it. We took a few good things from the last game.” McCarthy has been ever-present for Southampton in the Premier League this season but is facing three to four weeks on the sidelines. With Fraser Forster also sidelined by injury, the 40-year-old Willy Caballero is set to make his Southampton debut at Arsenal. The former Manchester City and Chelsea goalkeeper Caballero, who had been training with AFC Wimbledon to sustain his fitness since leaving Stamford Bridge in the summer, signed a short-term Saints contract on Monday. Another “come and get my client” plea: It’s a big afternoon for agents hoping to make some extra money during the transfer window. First we heard from Mino Raiola, now Philippe Lamboley has his say ... Not the Premier League: As we approach Christmas, we’re getting towards that time of year where managers start complaining that their teams have to play football matches. Over to you, Ange Postecoglu. “It’s a ridiculous amount of games we are having to play,” said the Celtic manager, who lost strikers Albian Ajeti and Kyogo Furuhashi to hamstring injuries during their final Europa League game. A Europa League game, incidentally, both players could have sat out because Celtic were already out of the competition but guaranteed their spot in the Europa Conference League. “And I guess it’s the way and the manner in which we play our football as well, it’s very demanding on the players. We don’t have the squad yet to cope with that and that’s putting stress on, which we have had to deal with pretty much the whole way through. “We still have seven games to go, remarkably, between now and the break. Hopefully getting some game time for guys means they become options for us in terms of making them game-ready. Hopefully when the break comes we will get reinforcements and come out stronger. “I do think it’s too many games. If we had a little more depth in our squad then potentially it wouldn’t be as much of an issue as it is right now. But there’s no doubt, if you want to maintain high-quality football and have players playing at their optimum levels, it’s too much to ask players to play every three days. But ultimately we want to be in the cup final and we want to be in Europe, so we just have to learn to cope.” Listening to Ange’s lament, it’s difficult not to feel for Celtic, the poverty-stricken churchmice of Scottish football. Good afternoon everyone. Mino Raiola has been on the wireless somewhere saying Erling Haaland won’t be going to Manchester United when he leaves Borussia Dortmund, because they’ve won significantly fewer Premier League titles than teams like Manchester City. It’s quite the recency bias-based history re-write by Mino: Manchester United have won 13 Premier League titles compared to Manchester City’s five. If you factor in football that was played before the sport was invented in 1992, Manchester United have won 20 titles compared to Manchester City’s seven. Anyway, that’s my morning’s work done: stay tuned for press conferences from Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United, Newcastle and much more. Barry Glendenning will coax you through the afternoon. Bye. Here’s a fuller PA Media report on Gerrard’s press conference: Steven Gerrard admits he will be happy to give up his hero status at Liverpool on his return as Aston Villa manager. Former Liverpool captain Gerrard enjoyed a stellar 17-year senior career there, guiding the Reds to Champions League, UEFA Cup, FA Cup and League Cup glory with his talismanic performances. Gerrard - who scored 186 goals and had 145 assists in 710 appearances for Liverpool between 1998 and 2015 - returns to Anfield just a month into his reign as Villa boss with a “smile on my face” but determined to play down the occasion. “The noise is for other people to get excited about, for me it’s about preparing the team in the best way I can to try and get a positive result for Aston Villa,” Gerrard said. “Everyone in that stadium will know me well enough to know what I’m about and what I’m going to Anfield for. I’m going back to a club where I spent many years and it brings a smile to my face for a couple of reasons. “One, I’ve got a good relationship with a lot of people at the club. I had a fantastic time there, a really good journey, I’m a local boy. It was the team I supported growing up and I will always support that team. “But at the same time it brings a smile to my face because I’ve got the opportunity to go there and compete against a good team and a good manager and try to win the game. That’s my only focus. If I’m on the bus heading back down the M6 towards Birmingham and I’m not the most popular at Anfield, so be it.” Gerrard has won three of his first games in charge of Villa, with the only setback being a 2-1 home defeat to champions Manchester City. Liverpool present the same size of task as City did, with Jurgen Klopp - who put Gerrard in charge of the Reds’ Under-18 team at the start of his coaching journey - overseeing a run of six consecutive wins with 17 goals scored and only two conceded. “Liverpool are in a fantastic place and on top form, we’re aware of the challenge and how difficult it’s going to be,” said Gerrard, who described 20-goal Mohamed Salah as “100 per cent the best player in the world now. But we’ve got to take confidence and belief from the start that we’ve made. “We know how difficult Anfield can but other teams have gone there with a game plan and taken something out of the game. I will forever be grateful to Jurgen and the best bit of advice I got from him was take your own team and do it your own way. “What identity you want to use, go and make your own mistakes away from the cameras. Evolve, start your own journey - and I’ll give you whatever support you need. “That was golden advice for me as a player coming out of a long career who has ambitions to go into coaching and management. “When I had that conversation I didn’t expect to be competing against him in that short space of time, but I’m looking forward to that challenge.” Villa have beaten Brighton, Crystal Palace and Leicester to climb into the top half of the Premier League table. John McGinn has been at the heart of Villa’s revival and Gerrard has hailed the influence of the Scotland midfielder. He said: “John been outstanding in every way on and off the pitch. He’s a real infectious character around the place and the glue in terms of the squad pulling it together. His performances have been high level, so I can understand some noise around John. “I’ll be disappointed if that noise goes away because that means he’s not playing at that high level. But at the same time it’s clear from my point of view that I want to work with John for a long time. He’s very highly respected here and we see a big role for him and pushing Villa forward.” Here’s a nice little picture essay to pore over, as we continue our Women’s FA Cup road to Wembley series, with photographer Sophie Grew capturing the essence of Wolves’ tie against Nottingham Forest, with the latter progressing: Eddie Howe’s been talking ahead of Newcastle’s increasingly winnable-looking tussle with Leicester. Howe has put Newcastle’s Christmas party on hold - who hasn’t? – as he plots a path out of Premier League relegation trouble. “I don’t think this moment is the time for the players to be having a Christmas party,” he said. “We have had a gathering this week of staff and players, a meal together, but I don’t think with: one, the fixture congestion; two, Covid and three, our league position, it is the time for that. I will be trying to get the message to them to focus on the work and the games. That takes priority over anything else.” “We just have to look at the Leicester game in isolation, and it’s a tough game. It’s away from home against a very strong opponent, really well managed with some very good players. But we have to take confidence from our recent performances, the feeling that we had on Saturday and try to get that feeling again. “You look at the work it took to win that match from the players, the physical outputs it took - we’re going to need to hit those heights again.” A bit of Stevie G chat about his return to Anfield: “It brings a smile to my face for a couple of reasons,” he told his pre-match presser, “one because I’ve always had good relations with people at the club, I grew up suporting the club and I always will, but also because I’ve got the opportunity to take a team there and compete. “The best advice I got [when retiring as a player] from Jurgen Klopp was to take your own team and do it your own way, and I’ll give you whatever support you need at any given time and that’s golden advice for a player coming out of playing and looking to go into management.” Trinket news: Trent Alexander-Arnold has been named Premier League player of the month for November, as the great Year Of The Full-Back continues. And here’s more on our chart-topper, a player a cut above in a team a cut above. As demonstrated again at Arsenal last night. Meanwhile, our top 100 female players reveal is now complete. Discover, chew over, argue about, the top 10 here: News in from PA Media that the Norwich head coach, Dean Smith, admits the club are waiting anxiously on Covid-19 test results before their home match against Manchester United. Norwich’s last game was at Tottenham, who have of course since been hit by a coronavirus outbreak that resulted in their games against Rennes and Brighton being called off. Smith feels none of the current concerns within the Norwich squad are linked to the Spurs game, but nevertheless faces a nervous wait to get confirmation if any of his players will be ruled out of the United match because of a positive PCR result. “We have got a couple of knocks and have got a couple of Covid-related issues that we are waiting on results for this morning,” Smith said. “I can’t really let you in on any names, but there’s a couple of players whom we are worried about, so we have tested and we will wait for the PCR results back on them. “[They are] just feeling a little bit unwell, not likely to be linked to the game last week with Tottenham. It is just in general, I think [like] with the whole nation, [we are] holding our breaths at the moment.” Steven Gerrard’s been speaking about the Covid situation: he says his Aston Villa players are to receive more information on Covid-19 protection as football attempts to prevent the new Omicron variant from disrupting the sport. “I had a conversation last night with [the chief executive] Christian Purslow,” Villa boss Gerrard said. “He’s going to come down on Monday and address the players in more detail. But we have been told and warned that things are changing all the time. Just to be careful and look after ourselves. “I obviously sympathise with Antonio [Conte, the Spurs manager]. It’s a concern for myself and every other manager. There was a situation here before I came and you’ve always got that lingering paranoia about the what-ifs. “It is a virus that has not gone. We’re not through the woods and it’s changing all the time. So you’ve got to be as careful as you can because you don’t want to be in a situation where you’re losing players, which obviously affects points.” Morning everyone, as we gear up for the last weekend for a while on which fans can attend games without carrying out additional Covid precautions. One game has, of course, already fallen victim to the rise in cases – Tottenham’s match at Brighton. So stay safe out there. Among the games going ahead, Steven Gerrard’s return to Anfield with his new Aston Villa charges will inevitably garner plenty of attention, and the impressive recent form of both sides suggests this could be one of the games of the weekend in any case. Villa played with verve and vigour against Leicester last Sunday, while Liverpool are banging them in for fun. We’ll have pre-match media conference news from both managers later. Elsewhere, Chelsea v Leeds looks a tasty one on Saturday afternoon, not just because of the decades-old rivalry between the pair but the scratchy recent form of both make this a trickier one to predict than might be expected. And leaky Leicester will be licking their wounds after exiting the Europa League at Napoli, and will present Newcastle with a real chance for a second league win of the season. Further afield, a Madrid derby on Sunday night rounds off our weekend, with Real eight points clear at the top of the table and the defending champions 10 points behind their city rivals. So there’s plenty to warm us all up.The UK has recorded 58,194 new coronavirus cases, the UK Health Security Agency has announced. That is the highest daily total since 9 January, when 59,937 new cases were recorded. The UKHSA has said that the number of confirmed Omicron cases in the UK has gone up by 448 from yesterday to 1,265. That’s a 55% increase. As my colleague Nicola Davis reports, the UKHSA now expects Omicron to be the dominant variant in the UK by mid-December. Here is the latest risk assessment for Omicron. The Omicron variant has the potential to “very substantially overwhelm the NHS” and cause up to 10,000 hospitalisations a day if it is as virulent as Delta, according the leading epidemiologist Prof Neil Ferguson. Boris Johnson’s ethics adviser, Lord Geidt, has demanded an explanation after the prime minister was accused of misleading him over the Downing Street flat scandal, with sources suggesting Geidt could resign if the answer does not satisfy him. No 10 has cancelled its Christmas party this year because of worries about Covid, despite still encouraging people to go ahead with workplace functions. Parliament’s intelligence watchdog has said it was misled by the government when it failed to reveal that a former GCHQ boss had been allowed to resign quietly after it emerged he had helped a paedophile priest to avoid jail. In September Boris Johnson told the Covid-19 Bereaved Familes for Justice group that he would appoint the chair of the Covid inquiry before Christmas. The inquiry is due to start work in the spring. Christmas is two weeks tomorrow, and the chair has still not been appointed. Today 10 law firms, representing family and professional groups likely to be granted core participant status in the inquiry, have written to Johnson challenging him to delay no longer. In particular, they are demanding: a date to be set for the start of the inquiry no later than April 2022; an urgent public consultation on its terms of reference; the panel be appointed in an open and transparent manner; and the panel to be diverse, in particular reflecting groups most affected by Covid. In their letter, coordinated by Bindmans, the lawyers tell Johnson: In your statement to parliament, you stated that you expected the inquiry would begin in spring 2022. The institution day under the Inquiries Act only triggers the process and is not the beginning of evidence hearings. In the circumstances there has already been an inordinate delay in announcing the initiation of the inquiry. An announcement now of a ‘setting-up’ date no later than 4 April 2022 will concentrate minds on the task at hand and reduce the very real risk that memories will fade or be reformulated, documents will be lost, and it will help those who have lost most to start to feel that there will be an explanation coming for that loss. YouGov has released some new polling showing Boris Johnson’s popularity as prime minister at a new low. Last night YouGov published a poll giving Labour a four-point lead over the Conservatives (Lab 37%, +4; Con 33%, -3). And Survation published a poll giving Labour a six-point lead (Lab 40%, +1; Con 34%, -2). Compared with other potential standards inquiries that Downing Street is facing, this is relatively low-key. But it is still worth noting that the Information Commissioner’s Office has now joined the list of organisations looking into complaints about Boris Johnson. In particular, the ICO is looking at an allegation that the Cabinet Office did not respond properly to a Freedom of Information request relating to Johnson’s WhatsApp messages relating to the Downing Street flat refurbishment. These are from the Times’ George Grylls. In his Q&amp;A on his subscription-only Substack account Dominic Cummings, who was the PM’s chief adviser in No 10 until he left and became one of his chief critics, predicted that Boris Johnson would be out of office by this time next year. Here are the key points. Cummings predicted that Johnson will be gone within a year, probably by next summer. Asked to explain how, he said: The polls will lead it, plus his inevitable continued flat spin, plus officials kicking him off the ice, plus rivals strategically intervening This tweet explains the ice reference. The trolley figure refers to Boris Johnson. Cummings calls him a trolley because he says Johnson veers all over the place on policy. Cummings praised Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, as a better politician than anyone in cabinet. Asked for his view on Case, he said: He’s much better at politics than anybody in the cabinet but he’s now in an impossible job: all he can do is quietly help shove the trolley off the ice and cut a deal with the replacement. Cummings claims SNP figures have privately told the government they do not want an independence referendum before 2024. Asked how the government should deal with Nicola Sturgeon and her call for a second independence referendum, he replied: Ignore it. She doesn’t even want it now she just wants to be boss up there and whinge. Her network have made quietly clear to Whitehall they are happy without a referendum pre-2024. She only wants it when confident she’ll win. Commenting on the four-nations meeeting of the Cobra emergency committee taking place this afternoon, Paul Givan, Northern Ireland’s first minister, said: The prime minister has called a meeting of the Cobra committee that will take place later this afternoon. It is to share information in terms of the current data analysis that is taking place. Also what kind of policy responses would be considered and to have a greater joined up approach across the United Kingdom. I am sure there will be an update from the UK government later this evening. The University and College Union has called for universities to move the term’s final week of teaching online to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, after outbreaks have been reported at several institutions. UCU said: “A clear direction to suspend in-person activities for the final week won’t disrupt education and will prevent needless spread of omicron among university communities. It will also allow essential activities such as lab-based research and medical teaching to continue on campus.” Imperial College London has already moved its teaching online after widespread outbreaks of the Omicron variant have been detected. The union also wants the government to mandate the wearing of masks in classes and seminars in England when students return in the new year. Jo Grady, the UCU general secretary, said: Last year, ministers moved too slowly, effectively denying there was a need to suspend in-person activities while new variants developed, leading to mass outbreaks. We can avoid that situation by moving the final week online. And here is a full summary of the Downing Street lobby briefing. No 10 said Michael Gove will chair a Cobra meeting on Covid with the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland governments this afternoon. (See 12.45pm.) No 10 is not telling people to cancel Christmas parties - but it confirmed that it has cancelled its own one. Asked if the government is advising people to cancel parties (as the Scottish government is advising - see 12.53pm), the PM’s spokesman said: We do not think there is a need to cancel people coming together in hospitality venues like that. But explaining why No 10 will not be having its own party, the spokesman said: I think we’ve made clear since the latest situation with Omicron, obviously that’s taking up great deal of time at the moment. There’s no plans for that in No 10. Asked when the decision was taken, the spokesman said: “Following the decision on plan B and the latest data that we’ve got.” The spokesman said Boris Johnson has full confidence in Jack Doyle, his communciations director. The spokesman hinted that No 10 is trying to persuade Christopher Geidt, the PM’s independent adviser on ministerial standards, that he was not misled during his investigation into the refurbishment of Johnson’s flat. (See 1.22pm.) The spokesman stressed that the plan being introduced is for Covid passports for some venues, not vaccine passports. He said the distintinction was important, because it means people will be able to get access to venues not just by showing they are fully vaccinated, but also, as an alternative, by showing evidence of a negative lateral flow test. In his interview this morning with BBC Radio Notttingham, Mark Spencer, the chief whip, made the same point. He said this might help persuade Tory MPs to vote with the government. The spokesman said there were “no plans” for the government to introduce even more new Covid restriction (plan C). “No plans”, of course, does not mean it will not happen. There are several reports in papers today saying the government is preparing to implement “plan C”. The Daily Mail says this could include “having to ‘check in’ with the NHS Covid app again to go to a pub or restaurant, using face masks in all indoor spaces, and having to show a vaccine passport at even more venues”. The spokesman said no final decisions have been taken on whether further restrictions would be needed in care homes in England. He said: We haven’t taken any final decisions on whether further measures in care homes are necessary, I think as you’d expect given the additional vulnerability, we’re keeping a very close eye on what may be required there. We have a responsibility to protect residents. The guidance as it stands makes clear that visits should be supported and we recognise that visits are a vital part for residents to maintain health, wellbeing and quality of life. In Wales regulations on care homes are being tightened. (See 1.29pm.) Keir Starmer has said Boris Johnson is “not fit for office”. Speaking on a visit to Northumberland, he said: [Johnson is] not fit for office and because he’s not fit for office, he won’t resign and the question really is for Tory members of the cabinet, Tory MPs, to ask themselves are they prepared to put up with this? He’s not fit for office. He’s not going to be fit for office. Are they prepared to go through the degrading of themselves and their party, to go out to the media, have to defend the indefensible for months to come? Or are they going to actually have the courage now to challenge him and say you’re not fit for office? Starmer also suggested that Jack Doyle should resign as the PM’s director of communications. He said: If the information that’s coming out at the moment about [Doyle] attending the party is accurate, then it seems to be pretty obvious that he’s got to consider his position ... Many people didn’t see loved ones over Christmas. Some people didn’t see their loved ones ever again. And for them to learn that whilst they were going through that, there were parties going on in Downing Street is contentious and insulting to them. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, has said details of a conversation he had with the minister for intergovernmental relations, Michael Gove, on the prospect of a lockdown were leaked to distract from the UK government’s troubles. There have been reports that Drakeford called for the a complete lockdown between Christmas and new year during a phone call with Gove and representatives of the devolved nations. At a press conference in Cardiff, Drakeford said the accounts were “distorted” and a “gross violation” of the terms of such meetings. He said the motive of the leak “was to cause a distraction from the many, many difficulties the UK government has experienced this week”. On the likelihood of a lockdown, Drakeford added: Do I urge the UK government to plan ahead? Do I urge the UK government to take the actions that are necessary in order to meet the challenge of coronavirus? I’ve done that time after time and am very happy to repeat it. Asked whether sporting venues had been told to prepare for restrictions next month, he said: It’s time to plan for what might be coming our way. While you have the chance you should be thinking and preparing. New restrictions on visiting people in care homes and hospitals may have to be introduced to counter the impact of Omicron, the Welsh government has said. Speaking at a press conference in Cardiff, the first minister, Mark Drakeford, said: We will be issuing new guidance for visiting in care homes and hospitals. We want to do all we can to support visiting where it is safe to do so but, if we see a new wave of cases, some strengthened measures to protect patients and residents may be needed. Drakeford also called for students preparing to leave college and university for Christmas to test before travel. No new restrictions are being introduced but the Welsh government is to start reviewing measures weekly from now rather than every three weeks as it has been doing. Drakeford said Wales was a week behind what was happening in England and Scotland but he expected cases of Omicron to rise “quickly and steeply”. He said he was planning to speak to the UK government today to make it clear that if hospitality venues have to close because of the variant, the UK Treasury would have to step in to help. At the Downing Street lobby briefing, Boris Johnson’s spokesperson hinted that No 10 was trying to persuade Christopher Geidt, the PM’s independent adviser on ministerial standards, that he was not misled during his investigation into the refurbishment of Johnson’s flat. Yesterday a report from the Electoral Commission implied Johnson might have lied to Lord Geidt about what happened. No 10 denies this, and Geidt is reportedly seeking reassurance that he was not misled. (See 9.39am.) Today the spokesperson confirmed Geidt had not resigned. And he implied No 10 was supplying him with new information. He said: We are liaising with Lord Geidt to answer any further questions he may have. But the spokesperson would not confirm that, if Geidt wanted to reopen his inquiry, he would be allowed to do so. He could only formally launch an inquiry with the prime minister’s permission. The spokesperson claimed Geidt had access to all the information he wanted to see when he conducted his original investigation, but he could not explain why Geidt did not appear to have seen WhatsApp messages found by the Electoral Commission. The spokesperson also refused to say whether or not Johnson had spoken to Geidt last night and asked him not to resign. While emphasising that it is crucial to following existing guidelines on regular testing, face masks and ventilation, Nicola Sturgeon backed the advice put out yesterday by Public Health Scotland saying that people should think about deferring work Christmas parties and avoid crowded places. (See 9.59am.) She said: There is a serious risk with Omicron, and we are already seeing the reality of this with parties and events with lots of people. We should all think about unnecessary contact in crowded places. Changing self-isolation rules, Sturgeon said any household contact of a positive case should self-isolate for 10 days even if they receive a negative PCR test, while non-household contacts can leave isolation once they receive a negative PCR result. Sturgeon said the guidance was focusing on work events “because we knew they are resulting in the rapid spread of infection”. She pointed out that there were 60 train cancellations on ScotRail today due to Covid absences, while 40 accident and emergency staff were isolating because of an Omicron cluster. The bigger the event, the more those risks are very real. My advice would be to consider deferring work Christmas events. The clinical director Jason Leitch pointed out the attack rate of Omicron was that if 100 people were in the room and there was a single case, at least 50 people would get it. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished, and No 10 announced that Michael Gove, in his capacity as minister for intergovernmental relations, will chair a meeting of the government’s emergency Cobra meeting today to discuss Covid. The first ministers and deputy first ministers of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland will participate. I will post more from the lobby soon. Nicola Sturgeon has just started her televised update on Omicron in Scotland with some sobering words and numbers: she says the country is facing “a potential tsunami of infections”, explaining that the new variant is showing “the fastest exponential growth we have seen in this pandemic so far”. There were 5,018 positive cases in Scotland yesterday, a sharp rise on the average of 2,800 daily cases that health officials have been reporting recently. There was a total of 110 Omicron cases in Scotland yesterday, which has risen from just nine when it was first detected here on 30 November. The Scottish government has just published an evidence paper on Omicron, which suggests Omicron is “rising exponentially” - officials believe the doubling time is closer to two than three days, and that Omicron is going to very quickly overtake Delta as the dominant strain, maybe as early as next week. The Office for National Statistics has published its latest weekly Covid infection survey. This is seen as one of the most accurate indicators of the prevalence of coronavirus, because it is based on a survey. Here are the figures. They cover the week ending Wednesday 1 December (except for Scotland, where they cover the week ending Thursday 2 December. Covid levels are going down in Scotland, the ONS says, but elsewhere the trend is stable, or unclear. England Covid levels: one person in 60 infected, equivalent to 891,500 people. Trend: Increasing over the past fortnight, but “uncertain” for the last week. Last week it was also one in 60. Wales Covid levels: one person in 50 infected, equivalent to 60,300 people. Trend: “Stable” over the past three weeks. Last week it was one in 45. Northern Ireland Covid levels: one person in 45 infected, equivalent to 39,300 people. Trend: “Uncertain” in the past week. Last week the figure was Scotland Covid levels: one person in 80 infected, equivalent to 65,200 people Trends: Decreasing. Last week the figure was one in 65. The Independent has a good scoop on the levelling-up white paper, which is now not being published until the new year. Levelling up is normally thought to be about spreading opportunity, but in their story Anna Isaac and Ashley Cowburn suggest it is now also largely about local government reorganisation. They say: The government plans to radically alter local government in England, replacing it with a single-tier mayoral-style system, according to a draft of the government’s levelling up white paper seen by the Independent. The document – marked “official sensitive” – states the government is setting out a “new devolution framework for England” based on a model of a directly elected leader “over a well-defined economic geography”. The ambition is to strip back layers of local government and replace them with a single-tier system, as in Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland. According to the report, the white paper will also set targets by which the success of levelling up will be measured. But they are targets for 2030, it says. The document lays out 13 missions with which to “anchor” the agenda, which the prime minister has described as the central purpose of his administration, and all come with a 2030 deadline ... The missions include targets from narrowing gaps in life expectancy to an undefined target to reduce the numbers of people renting “non-decent homes”. Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser, thinks Boris Johnson will want to keep Jack Doyle in post as communications director until the Simon Case report into the Downing Street parties comes out, so that at that point Doyle can take the blame. Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, the treasurer of the Conservative backbench 1922 Committee, told LBC this morning that Boris Johnson will be in trouble with his party if he continues to have “issues of judgment” problems. Asked about the government’s multiple difficulties, Clifton-Brown said: [Johnson has] got to come clean on a lot of the issues that you mentioned in your opening news. We’re all about to go for a Christmas break. If he comes back in the new year refreshed, able to differentiate between his private life and public life, and clarify all the issues and then start to do the really big issues that this country needs – restoring the NHS, dealing with carbon emissions and Cop26, how we deal with the economy, helping businesses – we can really get on to that agenda away from these other, sort of, personal issues, then I think he’s fine. But if we go on having these – what I call personal issues, issues of judgment by the prime minister – then I think that’s a very different scenario. In an article for the influential Conservative Home website yesterday, Paul Goodman, the former Tory MP who edits the site, said it was “more likely than not that another Conservative MP will lead [Johnson’s] party into the next election”. Explaining why, Goodman said: Very simply, because while Tory MPs will tolerate a leader who is not “on your side”, at least for a while, their patience with one who isn’t on theirs, as they see it, is very limited indeed ... What will worry them most is a growing view that N 10 can’t stick to anything and doesn’t tell the truth, not so much to voters – which I’m afraid they will take more or less for granted – but to them, whether the matter to hand is Downing Street wallpaper, parties, Afghan dogs, Paterson, “buyer’s remorse” or the football Super League. A different kind of prime minister might be able to offer the usual sort of evasion tactics: reshuffle the cabinet, change the No 10 team, relaunch the government. But Johnson isn’t that kind of conventional politician. His problem isn’t Dan Rosenfield. Or Simon Case. Or Ben Gascoigne. Or others who most voters have never heard of. Or the cabinet, come to that. No, Boris Johnson’s problem is Boris Johnson. Mark Spencer, the government chief whip, like all whips in parliament, tends not to give media interviews. But this morning he was on BBC Radio Nottingham (he is MP for Sherwood), where he got the prime 8.10 slot. No member of the government has managed to emerge from a media grilling about the Downing Street Christmas party last year with any credit, but Spencer deployed some novel arguments that civil servants might describe as “brave”. Here are the main points. Spencer said Boris Johnson might not have known about parties in No 10 because it was such a large building. When asked how Johnson could not have known what was happening, Spencer replied: Let’s be absolutely clear about this. When you describe it as a house, it is a department of government. This is a huge, huge building, literally with hundreds and hundreds of offices and rooms. No single person could account for what is happening in those buildings. They are huge buildings. Spencer is right about the Downing Street complex being larger than people might think looking at it from outside, but “hundreds and hundreds of office” is an exaggeration. Spencer also insisted that he was not aware of any parties taking place last Christmas, and he said he had been assured everyone followed the rules. He said: I am assured that everybody in that building played by the rules, and that’s why the prime minister has asked the cabinet secretary to do a thorough investigation to find out and establish the facts and that’s what I expected him to do. He argued that what was described as a party on 18 December was probably just a “meeting” and he claimed that the leaked footage of Allegra Stratton joking about the party was not evidence that a party took place. Asked by the presenter, Sarah Julian, why No 10 staff needed to have a mock press conference “to work out how they were going to lie to us about it”, he replied: Somebody made a joke about whether there was or wasn’t a party. And, actually, when you listen to what Allegra Stratton said, she actually said the imaginary party. Julian said that at the mock briefing Stratton was asked if the PM condoned holding a Christmas party, and she said if there was no party, Stratton should have been able to say no. Instead Stratton said, What’s the answer?” Spencer replied: Because there was no party, that’s where the joke was ... That’s my interpretation of what happened. Someone made a joke about a meeting that had taken place the night before, or a couple of days before, where they clearly were in the office discussing issues surrounding dealing with coronavirus, and some wag had said, ‘You were all in the office together, were you having a party?’ “C’mon Mark,” said Julian in response, making it clear she thought this was was implausible. Spencer said Johnson had a “miserable Christmas dealing with all of this [Covid]”. He was responding to Julian’s point about people being furious because they had a miserable time last Christmas. He claimed No 10 staff were not drinking alcohol in Downing Street. He said people in No 10 were working “day and night” trying to solve the problems the country was facing. And he went on: I am told that they were not, you know, drinking alcohol and having parties while that was going on. This is significant because, although some insiders have argued that what happened on 18 December was not a party, they have not challenged reports that some staff did have a drink in the office at the end of the day on some occasions during that period. With Paul Scully not appearing (see 10.27am), Wes Streeting, the new shadow health secretary, got the 8.10 slot on the Today programme. He used the interview to confirm that Labour would vote with the government on the new Covid regulations next week. He dismissed the idea that, given the potential size of the Tory rebellion, it would be better to vote against because that might lead to a defeat that would weaken Boris Johnson. He explained: Public health has always come first for the Labour party during the pandemic. Despite the trouble the government find themselves in, public health will still come before party politics ... It is more important for all of us to get ahead of this deadly pandemic and the variant, which is sweeping rapidly through our country and which threatens to overwhelm the NHS, and tempting though it might be to inflict a parliamentary defeat on the government, that would not be the right thing to do. He also said although Labour did not trust Boris Johnson, it did trust Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, and Prof Patrick Vallance, its chief scientific adviser, both of whom want the new rules in place. Paul Scully, the business minister, drew the short straw this morning and was doing an interview round on behalf of the government. Jack Doyle, the communications director, is normally the person who decides who gets put up by No 10 on the morning programmes, but when Scully was asked on BBC Breakfast whether Doyle should still be in his job, in light of reports that he gave a speech at a party at No 10 on 18 December last year, he would not comment on this. On LBC Scully got drawn into an argument about the definition of a party. When it was pointed out that he kept talking about a “gathering”, not a party, Scully implied that the absence of balloons could be a mitigating factor. He said: Look, ‘party’ suggests, and you see some of the graphics that go around with some of the coverage here, with balloons and poppers and these kind of things. It suggests that there’s big invitations going out and lots of people coming in from elsewhere and those kind of things, so I think it’s right to be proportionate until we know the detail. But Scully refused to appear on the Today programme. Justin Webb, the presenter, said that was because Scully was “was not prepared to come on the programme and face the kind of interview we might have conducted”, and Nick Robinson, Webb’s co-presenter, told listeners they had missed out on Scully saying, on another programme, that it had been a “difficult” week for the government and that he was “very comfortable about the prime minister’s integrity”. Robinson later posted these on Twitter. Britain’s economic recovery had almost come to a halt even before the onset of the new Omicron variant of Covid-19, official figures have shown. My colleague Larry Elliott has the story here. The advice to cancel or postpone Christmas parties, which was released from Public Health Scotland late yesterday afternoon, has been met with confusion and anger overnight. Scotland’s national public health body said it was “strongly urging” people to cancel Christmas parties after a number of Omicron outbreaks linked to festive get-togethers. This advice has no legal standing, of course, and does not constitute government guidance. There was immediate confusion because the press release came out just after the national clinical director, Jason Leitch, told Radio Clyde that people could still have parties if they were “careful”. Hospitality groups said they had no prior notification of the announcement and it was met with shock from the industry. UK Hospitality Scotland said the announcement had come “like a bolt out of the blue” with cancelled bookings flooding in overnight. There were also demands for clarity over what a “party” constituted. Nicola Sturgeon will give an unscheduled televised update on Omicron in Scotland at 12.15pm. Good morning. Boris Johnson has had a dire week and it shows no signs of getting any better. There are three stories around this morning, any one of which would be seriously difficult for No 10. Cumulatively, they confirm that there is an ongoing crisis. First, it is being reported that Jack Doyle, the PM’s communications director, was present and gave a speech at the Christmas party on 18 December last year that seems to have breached lockdown rules. You would expect a senior member of staff to attend a staff party, but until now this has not been reported as fact. Given that Doyle has been in charge of the communications response to this story (still, broadly, “there was no party, and no rules were broken”), this does not look ideal. Second, Christopher Geidt, the PM’s independent adviser on ministerial standards, is reported close to resigning after the Electoral Commission published a report yesterday that implied Johnson might have lied to him about what he knew about the No 10 flat refurbishment. The Telegraph (paywall) reports that Lord Geidt will “consider his position if Mr Johnson does not satisfactorily explain why he did not share vital evidence with him when he investigated the affair earlier this year”. This morning Laura Kuenssberg, the BBC’s political editor, cautions that a resignation is not imminent. And, third, Johnson is on course for a significant Tory revolt when MPs vote on the new Covid rules next week. This morning there has been another development on partygate; Labour is encouraging the Metropolitan police to reverse their decision not to investigate the No 10 Christmas do. The police are operationally independent in this country – rightly, most people seem to think – and Sadiq Khan, who oversees the Met as mayor of London, and Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, acknowledged this in their interviews this morning. But they also delivered an implicit message that in effect contradicted this, by making it very clear what they think the Met should do. In an interview with the Today programme, when asked if the police should be investigating the No 10 parties, Khan at first stressed the importance of police independence. He said: I think it’s very important when you’re the police and crime commissioner that you don’t interfere with the operational independence of the police. Just imagine if I was to direct the police and try to give the impression they should be following a particular path. You’d understand if somebody charged with a criminal offence accused the police of prejudice or bias. But then he changed tack. That being said, I think it’s really important for the police generally speaking, to investigate crimes without fear or favour, and to go wherever the evidence points them. Asked if he thought that was happening in this case, Khan said he thought he should not be directing the police. But he went on: It is really important, in all cases, for the police to follow the evidence, and often find the evidence. The police do a great job finding the evidence themselves. They don’t wait to be sent an envelope with the evidence, or send a tape ... I think there is a huge amount of concern. There’s a public interest in relation to the health of individuals but also the difference it makes if rule makers appear to be rule breakers. Khan said violent crime should be the priority for the police. But then he deployed another “that being said” (a verbal cut-off that brings to mind the famous quote about the word “but”), and argued it was bad for public confidence in the police if allegations of law-breaking were not investigated. He went on: Just imagine if the public stop having confidence the police will investigate crime. They’ll stop reporting crime, they’ll stop being witnesses. But also the whole fabric of trust and conference, which is crucial to policing by consent, breaks down. And later, on the same programme, when asked if he thought the police should be asking to see evidence about what happened at the Christmas party, Streeting said Johnson had already said he was willing to hand over evidence to the police, “so I assume they are waiting for it, and I assume he will be doing that very, very shortly”. Streeting acknowledged politicians should not direct operational policing. But he went on: All the public expects, and I speak for them, is that the Metropolitan police will act without fear or favour, because on 18 December 2020 some people in Ilford, where I’m an MP held an illegal gathering, and they were in court being prosecuted. And people expect the same standards to apply to everyone in this country whether you are the prime minister or whether you are just an ordinary citizen. Here is the agenda for the day. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 12pm: The Office for National Statistics publishes its weekly Covid infection survey. 12pm: Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser, takes part in an online Q&amp;A on Substack. 12.15pm: Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, holds a Covid briefing. 12.15pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, holds a Covid briefing. Also today David Frost, the Brexit minister, holds another meeting on the Northern Irish protocol with his EU opposite number, Maroš Šefčovič. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comI’m sure all those at the party were just testing their eyesight through the champagne glasses (PM accused of lying after No 10 officials caught joking about Christmas party, 7 December). Phil Sinnott Liverpool • Re Zoe Williams on dogs (The inner lives of dogs: what our canine friends really think about love, lust and laughter, 9 December), our family dog of years ago would greet a homecomer with bared teeth (grinning) and lots of sneezing. For us, that was definitely a dog laugh. Richard Griffiths Syderstone, Norfolk • With the solutions to four of Thursday’s Quick Crossword clues being mettle, nettle, settle and kettle, your compiler has undoubtedly shown himself to be in fine fettle. Adrian Brodkin London • Each time a travel insurer asks me if I have a pre-existing illness (Letters, 7 December), I feel like telling them that pre-existing means “before it existed”. Dennis Hawkins Leominster, Herefordshire • My bete noire is “pre-recorded”. A term used even in the television industry. It suggests that a programme is recorded before it’s actually made. John Huntley Letheringsett, Norfolk • In anticipation of the requirement of such a missive, I had this letter pre-prepared. Dr Martin Schwarz Oldham, Greater Manchester • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.It is a truth universally acknowledged that a billionaire in possession of a sprawling media empire must be in want of a steady supply of bullshit. With the recent purchase of a Montana cattle ranch, home to 7,000 head, Rupert Murdoch now has access to more of the stuff than even Tucker Carlson could hope to shovel. The ranch, located in the south-west of the state, not too far from Yellowstone national park, was bought from Matador Cattle Co, a subsidiary of Koch Industries, for about $200m, as reported by the Wall Street Journal. The ranch’s sale, between the two driving forces behind the conservative movement in the United States, is the largest in Montana’s history. “This is a profound responsibility,” Murdoch said in a statement. “We feel privileged to assume ownership of this beautiful land and look forward to continually enhancing both the commercial cattle business and the conservation assets across the ranch.” The property is reported to cover roughly 340,000 acres, and span 50 miles from north to south, including “4,000 elk, 800 antelope and 1,500 mule deer” as well as a “28-mile-long creek stocked with trout” and 25 homes for employees, according to a representative for the Murdochs. According to at least one neighbor and fellow rancher, John Jackson, the chairman of the Beaverhead county commission, the Koches “have been good neighbors”, as he told the Billings Gazette. He did not expect much to change with the Murdochs moving in, although it’s unclear how much time the 90-year-old media scion will be spending there (a spokesperson said the family do intend to spend time on the ranch). Many on social media were quick to joke about the parallels between the sale of the ranch and the HBO hit Succession, about a family loosely based on the Murdochs, as well as the Kevin Costner program Yellowstone. Another recent highly lauded work of fiction, the Jane Campion film The Power of the Dog, is set on a Montana ranch. In the film, head rancher and son of wealth Benedict Cumberbatch proves unable to connect with those around him and sets out to ruin the lives of everyone he encounters. Koch Industries has been busy selling off similar properties around the US of late, including one in Kansas listed for around $24m and one in Texas at about $124m. The prospect of the world’s richest families hustling to trade remote properties stocked with enough livestock and water to survive on for years is probably nothing to be alarmed about for the rest of us. • This article was amended on 13 December 2021 to remove references to the “Koch brothers” as sellers (via a Koch Industries subsidiary) of the ranch. Charles and David Koch were the two main owners of Koch Industries, but the latter died in 2019, since when his heirs have owned his share.I suspect there are other explanations as to why the ratio of types of chocolates available in variety boxes may be uneven (Why are there fewer of the best Quality Street chocs? The mystery solved, 4 December). As a student in 1973, I had a holiday job at Terry’s chocolate factory in York. My job was to move trays of chocolates from the production line to lorries. Purchasers of Neapolitans that Christmas may have noticed a significant fall in the proportion of blue Neapolitans (my favourite) and orange ones (close second favourite). Martin Judson Durham • This article reminded me of my late father. In the 1990s the manager of his local Woolworths banned him from the pick’n’mix for filling his bag entirely with purple caramels and green triangles. Molly Pollitt Mansfield, Nottinghamshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.We, the friends and relations of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi in England, would like to applaud the Guardian for your article (Myanmar’s junta condemned over guilty verdicts in Aung San Suu Kyi trial, 6 December). We cannot remain silent any longer about the situation there and that of Daw Suu in particular. Since the illegal coup on 1 February by the military, all the progress achieved under the National League for Democracy has been undone, leaving the country close to complete collapse. The farcical nature of the trial of Aung San Suu Kyi is reminiscent of a Whitehall comedy. She has been convicted of “incitement”, when her only offence was to oppose obedience to the illegal regime while she herself was gagged and held incommunicado in an unknown place of detention. This trial was judged fair by the army spokesman, who needs to be asked why the hearings had to be held in secret, with her lawyers banned from any reporting of proceedings. Prospect Burma’s Autumn 2021 newsletter says: “The health and education systems have collapsed. Schools and universities have been closed for some 18 months. Over 42,000 public health workers have been fired, or quit their jobs in support of the Civil Disobedience Movement; over 200,000 staff have quit or have been dismissed in the education sector; over 1.7 million people are refugees or internally displaced, plus a further 250,000 civilians forced from their homes.” We now ask that world bodies, particularly the UN and Asean, continue to boycott the regime; that all countries put pressure on the junta to step down and cease to terrorise their own people; that Aung San Suu Kyi, the legal president, Win Myint, together with an estimated 10,000 political prisoners, should be released at once; and that the army should hand power back to the democratically elected government. Marie-Laure Aris, Christopher Gore-Booth, Adrian and Lucinda Phillips • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Sylvia Rose, a former social worker, writes (Letters, 6 December) on the class-based reasons people choose junk food: “In part, it’s historical: manual labourers, post-Industrial Revolution, cramming in as many cheap calories as possible – white bread, sugar, jam. In part, it’s the misery of being poor or marginalised, of needing a little something to cheer you up, to blunt the edge of it all, be it biscuits or cigarettes.” I wonder if she has met anyone who works for the NHS? My husband is an NHS surgeon. The standard daily fare in his last doctors’ mess was white toast, jam, sugary tea and coffee. When he’s on call – and lucky to get a quick break in the middle of the night – it’s McDonald’s or a kebab. As my mum, an NHS midwife for 30 years, says, the NHS runs on sugary tea, tins of biscuits and boxes of chocolates. These aren’t marginalised, poorly educated people, with no knowledge about health or the consequences of lifestyle, but people (like thousands outside the NHS) doing stressful jobs, where there’s no time to take breaks, who are overworked and looking for a quick burst of calories to get them through their shift. So while class and education are a factor, they are only two, and it’s pertinent that those at the other end of the socioeconomic scale are also struggling. Perhaps our modern lifestyles, where time to eat and learn to cook are sadly scarce, across all classes, are to blame. Name and address supplied • How I agree with Sylvia Rose. Surely the solution lies in inspiring schoolchildren to love cooking? I am forever grateful for the basic cookery lessons that I received in the 1950s. It was these formal full days of “domestic science” every fortnight that inspired me to take for granted that I cook from scratch. Jen Fitton Ripon, North Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Good sex, like good comedy, relies on timing, and maybe, 17 years after the original show ended, 11 years after the second film departed cinemas, Sex and the City no longer has its finger on the clitoris when it comes to timing. “And Just Like That, It All Went Wrong” was the New York Times’s verdict on the wildly publicised, moderately anticipated SATC follow-up series, And Just Like That, which debuted its first two episodes this week. The Guardian’s Lucy Mangan described it as at times “excruciating”. Certainly the jokes are bad. Not “Lawrence of my labia” bad, as Samantha (Kim Cattrall) notoriously said in Sex and the City 2. But a far cry from the spit-out-your-wine-with-laughter-and-shock level of the original show, which ran from 1998 to 2004. And that’s the least of its problems. The show, once so brave, limits its discussions of women and ageing to whether Miranda should dye her grey hair, rather than confronting the more obvious issue of whether to have Botox and filler injections. The fashion, once integrated so beautifully into the show by stylist Patricia Field, now sits on the characters like costumes, the clothes wearing the women rather than the other way around. The characters always lived fantasy lives, but now they live ostentatiously, even repulsively wealthy ones, with Charlotte buying her children’s clothes at Oscar de la Renta and Carrie boasting that the fishmonger gave her the expensive kind of salmon, taking proceedings close to Dynasty territory. And Just Like That tries to be au courant, with Miranda worrying that she might be a “white saviour” and Carrie being castigated by her non-binary friend Che (Sara Ramirez) that she comes across like an “uptight cisgender female married lady … I know you got more”. Are “female” and “lady” now terms of abuse on SATC? Apparently so, and Carrie meekly agrees to try harder. It’s now fashionable to denigrate SATC as too white and too naff, but it was a genuine cultural phenomenon that changed how women saw their lives, and how an entire city – New York – saw itself. “I feel a little guilty that our show became the look for what New York is,” Sex and the City star Chris Noth, who plays Mr Big, told the Guardian this week. The once pretty barren Meatpacking District gentrified itself beyond recognisability during the show’s run, allowing women to brunch and shop down there, just like the characters. Women, too, took their cues from the show, which reassured them that going for cocktails with friends was far more fun than being married. Ever since the release of the increasingly appalling films in 2008 and 2010, and now the disappointment of And Just Like That, a common theory is that the show was too much of its time to endure. But like Friends, which has faced similar criticism, SATC has actually endured very well. The reruns still totally work, and that is because of a simple if often forgotten truth: the scripts were brilliant. Yes, the show was wrapped in a gauze of fantasy, and its depiction of women’s sex lives was revolutionary. But the reason it spoke to women so deeply was for neither of those reasons: it’s because it was soaked in emotional truth, and it was extremely funny. Never mind the discussions about cunnilingus and masturbation, although they were great, actually. It was the plotlines about Samantha’s breast cancer, Miranda caring for her mother-in-law with dementia, Charlotte’s infertility and Carrie’s affair with Big while he was married that stuck to the sides. The reason the movies and the new show don’t work isn’t because they’ve come out at the wrong time – it’s because their scripts are terrible. If the original show had been like And Just Like That, let alone Sex and the City 2, there would be no Sex and the City tour buses going around New York City today. It’s a mystery why the SATC spin-offs are so bad, given that they’re written by Michael Patrick King and executive produced by Parker, as the original show was. In truth, the original show lost its way in the last series, with its insistence that all the women end up shacked up with someone, betraying the courage of its original convictions, although at least the scripts were still good. Most likely, the huge success of the franchise cowed everyone involved into conventionality. It’s a shame. Some franchises cannot endure, it turns out. But, happily, old box sets live for ever.As co-chair of the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) for the 12-step programme for recovery from addictions, I am disappointed that Oscar Quine had been told that the 12 steps would cure his addiction (I was told the 12 steps would cure my addiction. Why did I end up feeling more broken?, 4 December). We do not claim that. The steps do not work for everyone, but they certainly do for many. The original 12-step programme for alcoholism has been successfully adapted over the years for drugs, food, gambling and many other addictions. The 12 steps are not a religious programme, but they are spiritually based. Addicts need to connect with a power in their lives greater than whatever has led to their addiction. Many addiction-free atheists and non-believers are among our fellows. They embrace, alongside those of many faiths, the simple spiritual principles of honesty, open-mindedness and a willingness to help others who suffer. Achieving change is most effective with daily diligent and disciplined practice of the steps. This can be challenging. Anyone can get recovery for free if they are willing to work for it to the best of their ability. There are hundreds of 12-step live and Zoom meetings running across the UK and worldwide on a daily basis. The APPG brings these facts to the attention of parliamentarians, government and public bodies, so that in turn those who suffer can find awareness of 12-step recovery. With public funding for addiction services so severely constrained, the entirely free and voluntary nature of 12-step recovery makes this work all the more important, particularly for addicts who cannot access private rehabilitation centres. Clive Brooke Labour, House of Lords • Oscar Quine is right that the 12-step model doesn’t work for everyone. It didn’t work for my sister, who died recently from a cancer related to prolonged alcohol abuse. But it does work for many others. I worked for five years at the Rehabilitation for Addicted Prisoners Trust, now the Forward Trust, which ran programmes based on the 12 steps. I met hundreds of people whose lives – and the lives of their families – were transformed by the programme. It’s not a panacea, it clearly takes hard work and commitment, but there was definitely nothing “joyless” about the people I met. As I haven’t been through the 12 steps, I don’t want to talk as though I know more about it than I do, but the impression I got was that the reference to a “higher power” was based on individual choice, not formalised religion. What I do know is that the people I met who were helped by it seemed to be not just clean and sober, but somehow more alive than the rest of us. Claire Wild London • Oscar Quine’s experience of working a 12-step programme for addiction is not unheard of but, in my experience, is by no means common. I am an atheist, and nearly 27 years sober as a reasonably regular attendee of AA meetings. I chose to attend meetings where there is neither a religious overtone nor prescriptive way of following the steps. Instead, I chose meetings where there is genuine kindness, empathy and fellowship. There are many such meetings. The 12-step programme works, as far as I can see, by bringing together people who share a common problem and are at various stages of recovering. The group’s experience of recovery is generally wiser than the individuals. That is the power. People find new friends with a common cause. The disease model of addiction is widely and internationally accepted. As is the success of the 12-step model in helping numerous people worldwide recover from substance addiction to lead clean, sober and contented lives. Inevitably, while it works for many people, 12-step recovery does not suit everyone. Outside professional help can often provide additional necessary support to resolve mental health and other issues, particularly associated with early-life trauma. I wish Oscar the same contentment, self-acceptance and happiness in his recovery that I have found on my journey in 12-step recovery. Peter North Winchester, Hampshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.This might prove the ideal occasion for Arsenal’s misfiring strikers to win some confidence back, given Southampton are beset with injury and suspension problems to the extent that they are likely to start the hastily signed Willy Caballero – now 40 – in goal due to injuries to Alex McCarthy and Fraser Forster. Mikel Arteta’s side tend to tick off this kind of assignment with minimal fuss, but there will be pressure on them to maintain that trend if they are not to enter a winter nosedive. Saints, fun but frustrating, would like to maintain daylight between themselves and the relegation zone. Nick Ames Saturday 3pm Venue Emirates Stadium Last season Arsenal 1 Southampton 1 Referee Jarred Gillett This season G3 Y15 R0 5 cards/game Odds H 13-19 A 47-10 D 3-1 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Hein, Okonkwo, Chambers, Marí, Holding, Soares, Tavares, Lokonga, Elneny, Maitland-Niles, Pépé, Balogun, Martinelli, Nketiah, Lacazette Doubtful Leno (groin), Martinelli (hamstring), Smith Rowe (groin) Injured Kolasinac (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y20 R1 Form WWLWLL Leading scorer Smith Rowe 5 SOUTHAMPTON Subs from Lewis, Obafemi, Simeu, Valery, McQueen, Long, Walcott, Perraud, Djenepo, Stephens, A Armstrong, Elyounoussi Doubtful Bednarek (calf), S Armstrong (calf), Adams (muscle) Injured McCarthy (hamstring, 4 weeks), Forster (hip, 1-2 weeks) Suspended Romeu (one match), Salisu (one match) Discipline Y28 R1 Form WWLLDD Leading scorers Adams, Broja 3We are spouses, living in Britain, who were born in different countries. One of us, whose grandfather was an immigrant, has only British citizenship. The other is a Briton with dual citizenship who could, under the nationality and borders bill, as highlighted by Zoe Williams (Cruel ministers have made citizenship a tool of dirty politics, 8 December), in future have their British citizenship removed at the whim of a Home Office minister or official. Why might such a thing happen? Well, bear in mind that government amendments to the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, also going through parliament, potentially criminalise most public protests, as pointed out by George Monbiot (As we turn away, Boris Johnson is grabbing more power. Where is the opposition?, 8 December). This double whammy of profoundly anti-democratic legislation will surely intimidate the newly created category of second-class British citizens, who may be moved to demonstrate on any issue whatsoever in the future. The entirely foreseeable next step will be to remove from all British citizens recourse to the European court of human rights. As Labour party members, we urge the Labour leadership to join with other parties in campaigning vigorously against both these bills. Vera da Silva Sinha and Chris Sinha Cringleford, Norfolk • George Monbiot writes: “Johnson is the most dangerous prime minister to have presided over the UK in the democratic era.” Fair and reasonable methods of opposition – including demonstrations and legal challenges – are the very stuff of democratic politics. Introducing legislation to suppress such actions is the route to dictatorship. Yet why should we be surprised, as this is just one of many such actions by this cynical and sinister government. The list is extensive – cronyism through the awarding of contracts to relatives and friends; appointing friends and supporters to key posts to introduce bias into the checks and balances; intimidating and denigrating the media that attempts to offer balanced news coverage; manipulating voting processes and constituency boundaries for party political gain; and interfering with and undermining the authority of those implementing judicial and disciplinary processes. This is a government that has no respect for democracy. It will go to any lengths to crush those who challenge or oppose it, and is indeed led by “the most dangerous prime minister”. Peter Riddle Wirksworth, Derbyshire • George Monbiot’s sobering article will be greeted with scepticism by those of an “it couldn’t happen here” persuasion, but it articulates what we have been feeling for some time now. Unfortunately, it can and is happening here, little by little, under a wholly corrupt government totally focused on keeping power and ignored by the wilfully ignorant bulk of the population who are concentrated on their own immediate concerns and not with wider issues until they rear up and bite them personally. Monbiot is right to feel there is a tipping point beyond which the change is unstoppable, and we may well be close to that point. We don’t apologise for thinking an analogy with Nazi Germany is appropriate. Brenda and Hugh Edwards Grange-over-Sands, Cumbria • Warm thanks to George Monbiot and Gina Miller (Boris Johnson’s ‘war on judges’ is a fiction – the truth is, it is an attack on all of us, 8 December) for highlighting the terrifying threats to our democracy posed by the government’s legislative programme. I recently wrote to my (Labour) MP expressing alarm at the – then relatively benign – judicial review and courts bill. She replied saying she shared my concerns. She did not, however, address my question: what is the Labour party, led, after all, by an eminent lawyer, doing about this? Dr Patricia de Wolfe London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Joe Joyce and Michael Conlan’s hopes of a 2016 Olympic medal upgrade have receded after the man tasked with investigating corruption in boxing said that proving which fights were fixed in Rio remained “elusive”. In the second of three reports into Aiba, amateur boxing’s governing body, Professor Richard McLaren said he had no doubts that there had been “significant” and “rampant” bout manipulation in Rio, with referees and judges discussing results beforehand. However, the subjective nature of boxing’s scoring system and “the fact that the predetermined result was often the correct result”, meant it was hard to prove the specific fights involved beyond reasonable doubt. In October McLaren had indicated that Joyce’s super-heavyweight final defeat against France’s Tony Yoka, and Conlan’s loss in his bantamweight quarter-final against the Russian Vladimir Nikitin, were among 11 bouts being investigated. That led both Joyce and Conlan to tentatively hope they could get upgraded to a gold and bronze medal respectively. But on Friday, McLaren said that despite reviewing 77 bouts, his team had been unable to figure out a methodology “that would allow us to be confident to meet the legal standard in order to discipline a person who would have been engaged in bout manipulation”. “The officiating in boxing is highly subjective as there are no real benchmarks by which to evaluate the bouts,” he added. “So while we tried a number of different methodologies so we could declare a bout was manipulated, we concluded that it’s not possible to do that to the level to bring disciplinary action in the sport.” McLaren was able to find more evidence of corruption in other areas of the sport as recently as the World Junior Boxing Championships in Poland in April. McLaren also cited the behaviour of the deputy supervisor at the World Junior Boxing Championships in St Petersburg in 2016, who he said had pressured referees and judges to score in favour of certain countries. “A number of witnesses expressed fear about speaking out against corruption,” said McLaren. “One said he would be dead.” McLaren also revealed that the former executive director Karim Bouzidi, who had led the scheme to manipulate judges in Rio, had continued to have influence in the sport even after leaving Aiba.The Guyanese poet Grace Nichols will be awarded the Queen’s gold medal for poetry for her body of work, in particular her first collection of poetry I Is a Long-Memoried Woman, her prose, and several books for younger readers. Buckingham Palace announced on Friday that the Queen has approved the choice recommended by the Poetry Medal Committee, chaired by the poet laureate, Simon Armitage. “Over the past four decades, Grace has been an original, pioneering voice in the British poetry scene,” said Armitage. “Her poems are alive with characters from the folklore and fables of her Caribbean homeland, and echo with the rhymes and rhythms of her family and ancestors … They are also passionate and sensuous at times, being daring in their choice of subject and openhearted in their outlook.” “Above all, Grace Nichols has been a beacon for black women poets in this country, staying true to her linguistic coordinates and poetic sensibilities, and offering a means of expression that has offered inspiration and encouragement to many.” Nichols, who moved to Britain aged 27, will become the 52nd recipient of the award, and the second in her own household – her husband John Agard won it in 2012. She is due to be presented with the medal in 2022. Nichols’ poetry, much of which is influenced by her Caribbean heritage, is on several GCSE syllabuses. I Is a Long-Memoried Woman won the Commonwealth poetry prize in 1983. “I was overwhelmed when I first got the news. It was both wonderful and humbling to be recognised in this way,” said Nichols. “As a poet you write your poems in solitude, never knowing whom they’ll reach. I feel so honoured and delighted to be given this award by her majesty and the committee.” She added: “In my own work I’ve celebrated my Guyanese/Caribbean/South American heritage in relation to the English traditions we inherited as a former British colony. To poetry and the English language that I love, I’ve brought the registers of my own Caribbean tongue. I wish my parents who use to chide me for straining my eyes, as a small girl reading by torchlight in bed, were around to share in this journey that poetry has blessed me with.” The Gold medal for poetry was founded in 1933 by King George V. Previous recipients include Philip Larkin, Siegfried Sassoon and WH Auden, as well as last year’s winner David Constantine, who was presented with the award by the Queen via videolink.Rupert Murdoch’s News Group Newspapers this week agreed a substantial settlement with the actor Sienna Miller, ensuring that her claims of phone hacking at the Sun did not go to trial. Why does the publisher of the Sun keep paying substantial sums of money to settle cases alleging illegality at the Sun? It is now 15 years since Murdoch’s News Group Newspapers was first having to address the use of illegal voicemail interception by its journalists. Initially, the company falsely claimed that phone hacking was the work of one rogue reporter at the now-defunct News of the World. Since then, the company has paid hundreds of millions of pounds to settle hundreds of cases relating to the scandal. New claims are still being filed by individuals who claim their personal information was illegally targeted. What is the legal position of the Sun? It is accepted that phone hacking was widespread at the News of the World during the 2000s, but Murdoch’s company has always insisted that the Sun, edited by Rebekah Brooks during much of this period, was not involved in illegality. Brooks was personally found not guilty of phone hacking in a criminal trial in 2014. Haven’t people claimed in court that phone hacking took place at the Sun? Yes, allegations that phone hacking was rife at the Sun have been aired in pre-trial hearings, while individuals have received large financial settlements after alleging illegal behaviour at the daily newspaper. However, no judge has ever ruled on the veracity of these claims and they are strongly denied by Murdoch’s company. How can claims of wrongdoing at the Sun be settled without accepting wrongdoing? Murdoch’s News Group Newspapers owns two outlets: the still-publishing Sun and the now-defunct News of the World. When an individual makes allegations of phone hacking at the Sun, the legal claim is made against this parent company rather than a specific outlet. Any financial settlements with phone-hacking victims are usually accompanied by a statement, agreed by both sides, stating there is no acceptance that wrongdoing took place at the Sun. Why haven’t any of these cases come to trial? The main reason is money. Murdoch’s company has shown an incredible willingness to pay enormous sums of cash to settle cases that claim illegal activity took place at the Sun. This also avoids public trials where potentially uncomfortable allegations about executives such as Brooks, now the head of News UK, could be aired in court – and reported by the media. News UK this week unsuccessfully attempted to block the media from covering part of a hearing, forcing the Guardian and the BBC to hire a lawyer to ensure proceedings could be reported. But why do the phone hacking victims accept these financial settlements? Once again, the main reason is money. Speaking outside court, Sienna Miller made clear she was unhappy with this state of affairs: “I wanted to go to trial. I wanted to expose the criminality that runs through the heart of this corporation.” Despite being a successful actor, Miller said she could not afford the “countless millions of pounds to spend on the pursuit of justice” to have her day in court. She is suggesting that Murdoch’s company – as it has done in hundreds of other cases – offered her more money than she could have expected to win at a trial. As a result, even if Miller had insisted on a trial and then emerged victorious, the court system would be likely to punish her financially, because she could have settled at an earlier stage for more cash. She would then face picking up much of the multimillion-pound legal bill for both sides, in effect as a charge for wasting the time and money of both the court and News Group Newspapers. Who would be able to force a trial on claims of wrongdoing at the Sun? Someone willing to risk losing millions of pounds on a legal case in the hope of proving a point. Prince Harry has a phone-hacking claim relating to the Sun working its way through the courts. If there was no illegal behaviour at the Sun, why does Murdoch’s News Group Newspapers continue to pay substantial financial settlements to people claiming there was illegal behaviour at the Sun, rather than fight the accusations at a trial? The answer to this question remains unclear.Time to wrap up for the week. Here are today’s main stories: Goodnight, and best wishes for the weekend. GW European stock markets have ended the day lower, with Omicron, inflation, and the UK’s faltering growth all occupying traders’ minds. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares in London ended nearly 30 points lower at 7,291, down 0.4% today. Cyber-security firm Darktrace was the top faller, down 4.2% (it’s already being ejected from the FTSE 100 in this month’s reshuffle, due to its value dropping this autumn). Online grocer Ocado (-2.9%), DIY retailer Kingfisher (-2.5%), and high street group JD Sports (2.2%) were also in the fallers. France’s CAC lost 0.25%, while Germany’s DAX inched down by 0.1%. Oliver Males of SpreadEx says: The UK GDP figures were released this morning, which disappointed many, as it showed minimal growth of 0.1%. Economists had forecast 0.4% growth, but the ongoing supply chain issues, and staff shortages have obviously negatively impacted this figure. Adding to the pessimism was Heathrow’s warning of further restrictions badly affecting the travel industry once more, as demand for November has already dropped 60%. The UK market in particular fell lower after a leading economist, Sanjay Raja, from Deutsche Bank, announced that Plan B will see GDP growth dip into negative territory for at least December and January. US consumer confidence is likely to come another pressure if America’s inflationary pressures don’t fade soon, points out Edward Moya of OANDA: Despite today’s rebound, consumer sentiment still looks vulnerable and will likely struggle if these widespread price increases continue. November’s headline month-over-month CPI reading increased 0.8% was higher than the 0.7% estimate but lower than the prior month’s reading of 0.9%. Some of the inflation is moderating but the year over year reading came in at 6.8%, the hottest since 1982. Broad based price increases had groceries (meat, poultry, fish, and eggs) skyrocket 12.8%, airline prices were up 4.7%, energy costs were 3.5% higher (gasoline delivered another 6.1% increase), new vehicles rose 1.1%, while used cars increased 2.5% and apparel climbed 1.3%. US consumer confidence has risen unexpectedly, with less-well-off families anticipating a jump in their pay that would cushion the impact of rising inflation. The University of Michigan’s closely watched Consumer Sentiment Index rose to 70.4 this month, up from the decade low of 67.4 in November. Readings of both current conditions and future expectations also improved unexpectedly. The increase in headline sentiment was driven by a 23.6% improvement among households in the lower one-third of the survey’s income distribution, the biggest monthly increase for that group since 1980, says Reuters. This was driven by expectations of improving incomes in the year ahead. Middle income and wealthier households became less optimistic, though. It’s been an expensive day for Spanish bank Santander. A Madrid court ordered Santander to pay Italian banker Andrea Orcel €67.8m after it withdrew its offer to make him CEO, the latest move in a long-running employment dispute that has gripped high finance. Santander originally announced Andrea Orcel’s appointment in September 2018, but dramatically changed its mind in January 2019 after concluding that compensating him for deferred pay awards built up at UBS would be too expensive. Orcel, who had already quit his post as head of UBS’s investment bank when Santander dropped its offer, sued Santander for €100m. Santander has said it would appeal against today’s decision. Orcel had been a star dealmaker before Santander’s approach and u-turn, a move which broke a close professional bond between Orcel and Santander’s chairman Ana Botin. The FT says: The ruling is a significant blow for Ana Botín, executive chair of the Spanish lender, whose tenure since succeeding her father Emilio Botín has been marked by the decision first to hire Orcel, long a confidant of her family, and then to drop him, with the resulting legal fight. LV= says it will swiftly reassess its strategic options, after seeing its Bain takeover sunk by its members today. The mutual insists it has an “appropriate capital position”, but that continuing as things stand isn’t in the best interest of members, due to the level of investment it needs, and its declining base of ‘with-profits’ members. Royal London, the UK’s largest mutual, has moved swiftly, revealing it is proposing a merger will let LV= customers have their life savings protected and invested by a mutual. An earlier approach from Royal London had been rejected by LV=. LV=’s chairman, Alan Cook, says he plans to step down as soon as a way forward is agreed. Back in the UK, members of the 178-year-old mutual insurer LV= have rejected a controversial takeover by US private equity firm Bain Capital. Just 69% of LV= members who voted today approved the £530m deal, which would have end the firm’s member-owned status and put it in the hands of Bain. The deal needed 75% approval, so this vote scuppers a year-long campaign by the LV=’s board to secure backing for its preferred bidder The rejection follows concerns that the former Liverpool Victoria was being sold too cheaply, and that the deal would lead to worse payouts for customers and poorer customer service. LV= says this result will have no impact on trading, as the business will continue to serve its customers as usual and member policies remain secure and protected by the same safeguards. LV= had argued that the deal would mean significant financial benefits for members. But the proposed demutualisation of one of Britain’s oldest and largest customer-owned businesses has attracted criticism, with policyholders set to receive just £100 and give up their ownership rights. Alan Cook, chairman of LV=, said the mutual was disappointed with today’s result: “We are deeply appreciative of the members who took the time to vote. Our priority has always been to put the interests of LV=’s members first, and, in particular With-profits policyholders, who share in the Group’s risks. Although 69% of voting members supported the Board’s recommendation and voted in favour of the transaction with Bain Capital, the Board is disappointed not to have achieved the outcome that we believed was in the best interests of LV= and its members.” Higher-then-expected inflation is the biggest risk to the markets in 2022, according to a survey of over 750 financial professionals conducted by Deutsche Bank. The poll found that: The biggest risk remains higher than expected inflation. Commensurate with that, an aggressive Fed tightening cycle came in at number two. Vaccine-escaping variants were close behind in the top three, after dropping out last month. Most respondents expect growth to decrease below consensus economists’ expectation in 2022 but still above trend, and for ten-year Treasury and Bund yields to increase but with Bund yields increasing more. The next US recession is expected by 2024 by most, but with only 4% thinking 2022. The average expected return for the S&amp;P 500 next year was just 4.2%, well below average annual returns over the last decade. US CPI is expected to remain above target at the end of next year (3.8%), and average expectations for the next five years continue to drift higher (2.7%). The poll also found that the US Federal Reserve is overwhelmingly expected to finish its asset-purchase stimulus programme in the first half of 2022. And bitcoin is seen as more likely to halve than double, although those under 35 had the opposite view, and there was broad agreement that the French presidential election won’t rock the markets. US inflation might be close to its peak, which would bring some relief to squeezed families. Paul Ashworth, chief North America economist at Capital Economics, explains: Consumer prices rose by 0.8% m/m in November, taking the annual CPI inflation rate up to a near 40-year high of 6.8% but, with energy prices falling sharply in recent weeks, last month probably marked the peak. The same is not true for core consumer price inflation, however, which accelerated to 4.9% last month and will peak at around 5.5% sometime in the first quarter of next year. US crude oil fell from over $85/barrel in late October to below $65 last week, when the Omicron variant threatened to hurt global growth. But crude price have risen this week, back to around $71/barrel today. Stocks have opened higher on Wall Street, perhaps on relief that the CPI report was broadly in line with forecasts. The Dow Jones industrial average has risen by 183 points, or 0.5%, to 35,938 points, led by enterprise software firm Salesforce (+1.9%), chemicals group Dow Inc (+1.5%) and Microsoft (+1.5%). Fiona Cincotta, senior financial markets analyst at City Index, says investors may have feared an even sharper jump in inflation. That could have led to an earlier rise in US interest rates to cool price pressures, slowing the economy. Cincotta says: The inline year on year reading plus the slight move lower in the monthly read appears to have eased bets of a sooner rate rise by the Fed. That or the market had built itself up for a much higher reading The initial reaction has seen the US Dollar fall and stocks rise with high growth tech stocks leading the charge; moves consistent with easing hawkish Fed expectations. However, the initial knee jerk reaction isn’t always the one that stays.... American inflation is now its highest since Ronald Reagan’s first term in the White House. And that puts more pressure on the Federal Reserve to wrap up its asset-purchase scheme more quickly, experts says. Dan Boardman-Weston, CIO at BRI Wealth Management, says strong demand and supply chain disruption pushed up inflation (plus, there’s a ‘base effect’ as some prices were dampened by the pandemic last year): “US inflation came in at 6.8%, up from 6.2% in October and in line with forecasts. The reading which is the highest level in nearly 40 years comes as little surprise to the market due to the ongoing supply chain issues, robust consumer demand and base effects from last year kicking in. This is likely to add further pressure to the Fed to quicken the withdrawal of quantitative easing and raise interest rates sooner than expected. There could be hesitancy from the Fed due to the potential impact that Omicron may have on the economy in the coming months but it’s unlikely this will significantly alter the growth trajectory of the economy. The US economy is in rude health and doesn’t require crisis levels of quantitative easing or interest rates and so it remains our view that policy will become tighter. It is important to note that whilst inflation is high and getting higher, the supply chain issues, the high levels of demand and base effects are likely to prove transitory and we continue to believe inflation will move lower over the coming year.” Greg Daco of Oxford Economics warns that inflation will get worse early next year, before cooling: The Fed meets next week to set monetary policy, and could well speed up the ‘tapering’ of its asset purchase program. Last month, it began cutting $15bn/month off its bond purchases (which had been running at $120bn/month). Robert Alster, CIO of Close Brothers Asset Management, thinks the Fed could accelerate the taper... but might also be concerned about the impact of the Omicron variant on the global economy. “Inflation has broadened out across the CPI basket, putting greater pressure on the Fed to address the so-called ‘transitory’ factors that are keeping prices high. While the cost of living is going up and up, all support measures have expired and no new ones have been introduced, which will likely dent consumer confidence. And rising rental equivalent costs continue to spiral in the background, indicating longer-term inflationary problems. “In this pressure cooker, the Fed isn’t afraid to be more hawkish. Powell has already made it clear that there’s a strong chance of accelerating tightening measures, which could mean quickly tapering purchases to facilitate an interest rate hike down the line. But the global economy is at a serious juncture thanks to the emergence of the Omicron variant this month. Only time will tell what the impact will be, and how far it will upset the Fed’s plans in the new year.” Core inflation, which strips out food and energy price changes, has hit its highest level in 30 years. The index for all items less food and energy rose 4.9% over the past 12 months, its largest 12-month increase since June 1991. That rise included the 31% jump in used US car and truck prices, a 3.8% increase in shelter (the cost of housing), and a 1.7% increase in medical care costs. Over the last 12 months, US energy prices have jumped by 33.3%, driving up the wider inflation rate. The price of food has jumped 6.4% annually, while food prices away from home (eg at restaurants and bars) are 5.8% higher. New vehicle prices are up 11.1%, while used cars and trucks are over 31% pricier than a year ago (partly because shortages of semiconductors have hit new car production). Here’s a breakdown of some of the key price moves: Some snap reaction: Inflation in the US has hit its highest level since June 1982, as rising energy prices, gasoline at the pumps and pricier food all hit American families. The consumer prices index jumped by 6.8% over the 12 months to November, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reports, meaning inflation is running at its hottest in almost 40 years. In November alone, prices jumped by 0.8%, having risen by 0.9% in October. Prices rose broadly, the BLS reports, with gasoline, shelter, food, used cars and trucks, and new vehicles all among the larger contributors. The energy index rose 3.5% in November, while the gasoline index jumped 6.1% as motorists paid more to fill up their tanks. Food became more expensive too - the food index increased 0.7%, with ‘food at home; rising by 0.8% during the month. Economists predict that US inflation could hit its highest level in almost 40 years in today’s report. Experts polled by Reuters predicted that US consumer prices rose at an annual rate of 6.8% in November, almost a four-decade high, up from 6.2% in October. Yesterday, President Joe Biden told Americans that rises in energy costs and other key goods were starting to ease, which wouldn’t show up in today’s CPI report, saying: The information being released tomorrow on energy in November does not reflect today’s reality, and it does not reflect the expected price decreases in the weeks and months ahead, such as in the auto market. That was taken as a sign that the White House was bracing for a high inflation reading for November.... European stock markets are quite becalmed today, as investors await November’s US inflation report in around 40 minutes, which is likely to show another jump in the cost of living in America. The pan-European Stoxx 600 is down slightly, while the FTSE 100 is flat following this morning’s weak GDP report. Jim Reid, strategist at Deutsche Bank, says the reality of the new Omicron restrictions in various places soured the mood yesterday (which seems to have carried through to today) He writes: Even as the news on Omicron’s severity has remained positive, concern is still elevated that this good news on severity could be outweighed by a rise in transmissibility, which ultimately would lead to a higher absolute number of both infections and hospitalisations. Even if it doesn’t, it seems restrictions are mounting while we wait and see. Here’s Bloomberg’s take on the UK public’s rising worries about inflation (see details here). The U.K. public’s expectations for inflation over the next year jumped by the most since 2016 last month, with Britons saying they were the least satisfied about how the Bank of England was doing its job in almost a decade. A survey commissioned by the central bank found the median estimate for price gains in the next 12 months was 3.2%, the most since 2019 and a jump from 2.7% in August. Looking over the next five years, the figure was 3.1%. Both those estimates are well above the central bank’s 2% target. When asked to assess the way the BOE is “doing its job to set interest rates to control inflation,” the net satisfaction balance – the proportion satisfied minus the proportion dissatisfied – was 14%, the lowest since 2012. More here. More details on the rise in inflation expectations.... ....and the drop in public satisfaction with the Bank of England: October’s GDP report shows that Britain’s economy was showing “worrying signs of weakness” even before the emergence of the coronavirus Omicron variant, our economics correspondent Richard Partington writes. And with worse likely yet to come, the government should offer more help to support the economy now, he explains: On the positive side, the latest figures show the economy is within a hair’s breadth of its pre-Covid position, at only 0.5% below February 2020 levels. The new restrictions announced so far remain relatively light-touch, while there are hopes that tougher measures may not be required, thanks to steady progress with the vaccine booster programme. However, pressure is clearly building on an economy that was already struggling for momentum before the new variant emerged, while there is heightened uncertainty over the next stage in a pandemic that is far from over. Faced with these risks, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said he had always acknowledged there would be “bumps on the road” to recovery but the government already had in place an “ongoing £400bn economic support package” to keep the country on track. That’s an odd way to describe a programme that has been largely dismantled over recent months, ostensibly because Sunak believed a return to economic normality was on the cards. The furlough scheme has gone, universal credit has been slashed and several tax breaks have been reversed. Business leaders are stepping up their warnings that failure to provide renewed support measures could squander the progress made in the economy since the easing of lockdown earlier this year; especially in the sectors most exposed to the Omicron wave, such as hospitality, travel and leisure. More here: Investing in Lego is more lucrative than gold, art and wine, according to a study which might send readers scrambling through their old toys. It found that the market for secondhand Lego rises in value by 11% annually, which it says is a faster and better rate of return than gold, stocks, bonds, stamps and wine. Researchers at the Higher School of Economics in Russia said that there could be lucrative gains to be made from investing in “more unusual goods whose purchase might seem less serious”, such as Lego sets, Barbie dolls, superhero mini figures, or model cars and trains. “We are used to thinking that people buy such items as jewellery, antiques or artworks as an investment,” said Victoria Dobrynskaya, an associate professor at the Faculty of Economic Sciences at HSE. “However, there are other options, such as collectible toys. Tens of thousands of deals are made on the secondary Lego market. Even taking into account the small prices of most sets, this is a huge market that is not well known by traditional investors.” The most expensive sets include the Millennium Falcon, Death Star II and Imperial Star Destroyer from Star Wars, as well as the Taj Mahal. Britons partial to a festive glass of port or sherry should nurse it carefully this Christmas as a shake-up of alcohol taxes threatens to add at least £1 to bottle prices next year. The chancellor announced a sweeping overhaul of alcohol duties in the budget, reducing the tax take on lower-strength drinks, such as draught beer, but increasing them on products, such as fortified wine, with an alcohol content above 11%. Andrew Hawes, the managing director of the wine importer Mentzendorff, said port and sherry fans were about to be hit with the “largest single alcohol tax rise in UK history”. UK shoppers buy 10m bottles of sherry and close to 9m bottles of port each year. More here: Sterling is wallowing around its lowest levels in a year today, after the UK’s disappointing GDP figures. The pound has dropped below $1.32, down 0.15% today, as investors digest October’s slowdown. That takes sterling towards the 12-month lows on Wednesday when news of new Covid-19 restrictions broke. With growth weak in October, Omicron hitting the travel sector, and ‘Plan B’ likely to hurt hospitality, there’s little cheer in the City today. Raffi Boyadjian, lead investment analyst at XM, says: Britain’s economy barely grew in October as supply chain issues capped industrial output. The data has further dashed expectations that the Bank of England will raise interest rates next week. The UK public’s inflation expectations have jumped, as the cost of living squeeze drives home the impact of rising prices on households. Inflation expectations for the year ahead have jumped to 3.2%, up from 2.7% in August, research conducted by the Bank of England shows. That’s significantly above the BoE’s target of 2%, and follows the surge in energy costs, petrol and food bills which pushed the consumer price index to a 10-year high of 4.2% in October. Long-term inflation expectations (say, in five years time) inched up too, to 3.1% from 3% in August. The survey also shows that the public are increasingly unhappy with the Bank of England’s control of prices. The balance between people satisfied, or dissatisfied, with the way the BoE is ‘doing its job to set interest rates to control inflation’ fell to +14%, down from +18% in August 2021 and +24% in May 2021. Just 33% were satisfied, the same as three months ago, which was the joint lowest level since the survey started in 1999. The proportion dissatisfied rose to 19%, from 15%. Discount fashion chain Primark says it hasn’t seen much impact from the Omicron variant. John Bason, finance director of Primark’s owner Associated British Foods told Reuters that: “In terms of the Omicron variant we haven’t really seen much of an effect on footfall. We’re trading well over Christmas.” Trading at Primark this financial year, since 19th September, has been ahead of expectations, ABF says, with like-for-like sales above the previous quarter despite supply chain disruption. Its grocery, sugar, ingredients and agriculture operations are being hit by delays at the ports and the shortage of lorry drivers, plus rising costs - some of which will be passed onto customers. ABF’s chairman, Michael McLintock, will tell its AGM today that: Trading to date in our new financial year across Grocery, Sugar, Ingredients and Agriculture has been in line with expectations. We are experiencing the impact of widely reported port congestion and road freight limitations and our businesses have been working hard to overcome these difficulties. We have seen an escalation in the cost of energy, logistics and commodities and we have been implementing plans to offset these through operational cost savings and, where necessary, the implementation of price increases. The Omicron variant has hit Heathrow airport, with some business travellers cancelling flights as governments around the world impose travel restrictions. Heathrow reported that new government-imposed travel restrictions had further dampened passenger confidence. Demand last month was 60% lower than pre-pandemic levels, despite the US reopening its borders to fully vaccinated passengers. My colleague Mark Sweney explains: Heathrow has said passenger numbers were 60% lower in November than before the coronavirus pandemic and there were “high cancellations” among business travellers concerned about being trapped overseas for Christmas as Omicron spreads. The UK’s largest airport said the government’s travel restrictions had dealt a fresh blow to travel confidence and predicted it was likely to take several years for passenger numbers to return to pre-pandemic levels. This week ministers said passengers arriving in the UK would have to take a pre-departure Covid test, as well as a post-flight test, because of fears about the spread of the new variant. Britain’s economic recovery had almost come to a halt even before the onset of the new Omicron variant of Covid-19, official figures have shown. The Office for National Statistics said in that October, the first month after the end of the government’s furlough scheme, output grew by only 0.1%. The slight monthly rise in gross domestic product was weaker than had been anticipated, with a poll of economists having expected growth of 0.4%. In September the economy grew by 0.6%. A breakdown of the data showed signs of a sharp drop in people going to restaurants, pubs and bars even before tougher curbs were brought in this month. Gross domestic product was still 0.5% below its pre-crisis peak in February 2020 at the end of October. Of the three main sectors of the economy, only services expanded in October, with higher spending in the shops and an increase in face-to-face GP appointments contributing to a 0.4% rise. However, production, which includes manufacturing, energy and North Sea oil and gas, was down 0.6%, while a shortage of materials because of supply chain problems resulted in a 1.8% drop in construction output, the steepest since the start of the pandemic in April 2020. Here’s the full story: Many experts are warning that the UK’s sharp slowdown in October shows the economic outlook has deteriorated. James Smith, research director at the Resolution Foundation, says the government may need to provide more economic support, as the pandemic crisis clearly won’t be over by Christmas: “Today’s GDP data shows a worrying slowing in growth in October, meaning that monthly output is still 0.5% below its pre-pandemic level as on-going supply-chain disruptions continue to hold back production in some sectors. “Weak growth in October and the more recent emergence of Omicron mean hopes that either the health or economic pain of this crisis would be all over by Christmas have been dashed. The possibility that restrictions will need to be tightened, combined with high inflation and rising energy bills, means Government should prepare for fresh targeted economic support that may be necessary in the months ahead.” Samuel Tombs of Capital Economics points out that many UK firms were struggling this autumn, even before the Omicron variant emerged. Andrew Sentance, a former Bank of England policymaker, agrees that the economic prospects for 2022 look weaker: Paul Craig, portfolio manager at Quilter Investors, also says the pace of growth is slowing, as the economy took another small step closer to pre-Covid levels. Unsurprisingly, some sectors continue to struggle, he says: October saw production output decrease by 0.6%, with electricity and gas lowering by 2.9% and mining and quarrying by 5.0%. Construction also struggled, as output dipped by 1.8% - the largest fall since April 2020. “Overall, the pace of growth appears to be slowing, and some downside surprises are emerging – partly as a result of the ‘catch-up’ already seen in the data, as well as the effects of labour shortages spurred on by Brexit, supply bottlenecks, and Covid more generally. October’s slowdown will further complicate the dilemma facing the Bank of England when it sets UK interest rates next week, says Mohamed El-Erian, chief economic advisor to Allianz: Debapratim De, senior economist at Deloitte, says the slowdown will encourage the Monetary Policy Committee to leave Bank Rate at 0.1%, “Economic activity grew at a slower pace than expected in October. The contraction in hospitality and accommodation services suggests that demand was already slowing, well before the emergence of the Omicron variant. “This, in addition to labour and supply shortages, makes for a weak start to the fourth quarter. Today’s data significantly increases the chances of the Bank of England holding off from a rate rise next week.” The TUC has repeated its call for the government to reboot the furlough job protection scheme to safeguard jobs, before new Omicron restrictions slow the recovery. TUC General Secretary Frances O’Grady said: The UK’s recovery was already in the slow lane. This week’s new restrictions will slow it further without financial support for the sectors that will be hit. Ministers should reboot furlough right now to protect jobs and livelihoods.” After peaking above pre-Covid levels in April 2021, output in the UK construction sector has fallen back in recent months. The sector is now 2.8% below its pre-pandemic level, due to delays obtaining building materials, and sharply higher prices: This reflects recent challenges faced by the construction industry from rising input prices and delays to the availability of some construction products (notably steel, concrete, timber and glass) over recent months. These charts from today’s GDP report show how the UK’s recovery has stumbled, after strong growth this spring when lockdown measures were eased: The UK’s supply chain issues, worker shortages and surging inflation all hurt economic growth in October, says Maike Currie, investment director at Fidelity International. Currie warns that “the steam has well and truly been taken out of economic recovery”. The months ahead look challenging, with rising prices and Covid-19 worries hitting consumer spending, and firms facing ‘ongoing headwinds’, she explains. At 0.5% below its pre-pandemic level, October might be the closest the economy gets to reaching ‘normal levels’ until deep into 2022. “With the government moving to implement its ‘Plan B’ over concerns on the Omicron variant, there is a creeping sense of déjà vu. Workers are heading back to their kitchen tables and the big festive season that retailers and the hospitality sector had their hopes pinned on - while starting on a high during Black Friday - might not have as much sparkle as hoped. “As we edge towards 2022, growth forecasts have been downgraded for the year ahead with GDP expected to reach just 4.2%. High levels of inflation and Omicron concerns are likely to limit consumer spending as businesses battle ongoing headwinds. With uncertainty in the air, the path ahead is becoming increasing difficult to navigate. The Bank of England will be acutely aware that it’s harder to dig an economy out of recession, than to cool rising inflation, which makes an interest rate rise next week increasingly unlikely.” Labour’s shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, says today’s UK GDP figures are “extremely worrying for an already fragile economic recovery”. Kitty Ussher, chief economist at the Institute of Directors, says the UK economy would have shrunk in October, without the healthcare sector. Manufacturing stagnated, she points out, as supply chain problems left factories struggling to obtain parts. “Economic growth would have fallen in October if it were not for the return of face-to-face appointments in the NHS and the ramping up of vaccination activity, both of which had a noticeable positive impact on the service sector. “Underneath this, manufacturing output was flat, with evidence coming through that while demand remains strong, production is being hampered by difficulties sourcing supplies. “Meanwhile consumers, who had enjoyed the opening of hospitality venues in the late summer, in October switched back to shopping – and booking holidays. The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak, has compared October’s slowdown to a bump on the road, saying: “We’ve always acknowledged there could be bumps on our road to recovery, but the early actions we have taken, our ongoing £400bn economic support package and our vaccine programme mean we are well placed to keep our economy on track. “We have still been recovering quicker than expected, with more employees on payrolls than ever before and redundancies remaining low.” However, business in the hospitality sector are warning that the new Plan B restrictions will hit growth and cost jobs, unless the Treasury provides more support fast, including restarting the furlough scheme to help hard-hit sectors. The disappointing 0.1% rise in GDP in October suggests that the economy had slowed to a crawl even before the Omicron COVID-19 variant was discovered in late November, says Paul Dales of Capital Economics. Dales is concerned that output at restaurants and hotels fell by 5.5% in October, even before Omicron worries hit the sector. The latest variant will probably mean fewer people visit their doctors in December, he adds, although Test and Trace services and vaccine centres may be busier. He says: Early evidence suggests growth in November might have been a bit better. Nonetheless, at such low rates of growth, the government’s “Plan B” COVID-19 restrictions could be the difference between the economy growing or contracting in December. Dales estimates that “Plan B” could reduce GDP by up to 0.5% in December, meaning it’s “touch-and-go” whether the economy will grow or contract this month. Here’s Keith Church, head of economic modelling at risk consultancy 4most, on the UK’s slowdown: Alpesh Paleja, CBI Lead Economist, says October’s slowdown is disappointing: “Growth disappointed in October, reinforcing concerns about the resilience of the UK’s economic recovery to the Omicron variant and the impact of further restrictions. We need to create consistency in our approach and build confidence by reducing the oscillation between normal life and restrictions as we learn to live with the virus and its variants. “Meanwhile, supply pressures remain acute and further rises in inflation are looming. We expect growth to build further momentum ahead, but more action is needed to address longer-term challenges, including “scarring” from COVID and poor productivity. More snap reaction, from James Smith of Resolution Foundation... Victoria Scholar of Interactive Investor says: Last month it looked as though the UK was on track to return to pre-pandemic levels of GDP by the first quarter of 2022. However, the dark cloud of Omicron now threatens the recovery as the government introduces tighter restrictions, weighing on the pound and Covid-sensitive stocks this week. The UK economy was hit by a drop in business at restaurants, shortages of raw materials for builders, and weaker extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas (after North Sea maintenance this summer). But a jump in visits to GP surgeries, strong demand for second hand cars, and a surge in business at employment agencies as companies struggled to hire workers pushed up growth. Here’s ONS chief economist Grant Fitzner: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The UK economy came to a near-standstill in October, raising concerns that the recovery has faltered just as new restrictions are introduced to combat Omicron. Data just released shows that GDP grew by just 0.1% in October, much weaker than the 0.4% which economists had expected, as firms struggled with supply chain problems and staff shortages. It leaves the economy still 0.5% below its pre-pandemic levels in February 2020. The Office for National Statistics reports that services output grew by 0.4% in October 2021, partly driven by human health activities due to a rise in face-to-face appointments at GP surgeries in England. Services output overall has now reached its pre-coronavirus pandemic levels. But other parts of the economy shrank during the month. Production output decreased by 0.6% in October, with electricity and gas down by 2.9%, and mining and quarrying down by 5.0%. And construction contracted, with output down by 1.8% in the month. More details and reaction to follow.... Also coming up today Inflation in America is expected to hit a new 30-year high today, putting more pressure on the Federal Reserve to end its stimulus programme faster. The cost of living is forecast to have surged by around 6.8% per year in November, beating the 6.2% seen in October, and the fastest pace since the early 1980s. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: With the Federal Reserve due to meet next week, there is some concern that a really hot number today could prompt the FOMC to go accelerate its tapering program more rapidly, from the current $10bn of US treasuries and $5bn of mortgage-backed securities that it started last month, in an attempt to give themselves more optionality in 2022 when it comes to raising rates. Currently markets are pricing the prospect of a doubling of the taper next week, and any number that hints at a bigger amount next week could prompt some choppiness. The fate of one of the UK’s oldest and largest mutual insurers will be decided on Friday as LV= members cast their ballots on a controversial takeover by US private equity firm Bain Capital. LV=’s leadership insists that the £530m deal is in its members’ best interests and will secure much-need capital. But, members, campaigners and politicians fear transferring power to an American private equity firm will put an emphasis on short-term profits, at the expense of customer service and returns for members. The agenda 7am GMT: UK GDP report for October 7am GMT: UK trade balance for October 9.30am GMT: Bank of England/Kantar survey of UK inflation attitudes 1.30pm GMT: US inflation report for November 3pm GMT: University of Michigan survey of US consumer confidenceThe journalists Maria Ressa and Dmitry Muratov received the Nobel peace prize on Friday at a ceremony that Ressa was almost blocked from attending because of travel restrictions related to legal cases filed against her in the Philippines. Ressa, 58, the chief executive and co-founder of the online news platform Rappler, praised for exposing abuses of power and growing authoritarianism under the Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte, is facing charges that could lead to about 100 years in jail. Having been awarded the prize alongside Muratov in October, she was granted permission to attend the ceremony earlier this month by the Philippine court of appeals, which ruled she was not a flight risk. Muratov, 59, the editor-in-chief of Novaya Gazeta, who shared the 2021 Nobel peace prize, was described as one of the most prominent defenders of freedom of speech in Russia today. “Novaya Gazeta is the most independent newspaper in Russia today, with a fundamentally critical attitude towards power,” Berit Reiss-Andersen, the chair of the Norwegian Nobel committee, said at the ceremony at Oslo City Hall. Reiss-Andersen said that Ressa and Muratov were “participants in a war where the written word is their weapon, where truth is their goal and every exposure of misuse of power is a victory”. Both laureates had been “the object of ridicule, harassment, threats and violence as a result of their work”, she added. Ressa, referring to the restrictions imposed on her travel, said that she had at least been permitted to attend the ceremony. This had not been the case, she added, for the last working journalist to be awarded the prize in 1935 – Carl von Ossietzky, who was detained in a Nazi concentration camp. “By giving this to journalists today, the Nobel committee is signalling a similar historical moment, another existential point for democracy,” she said, pointing to the disruptive impact of social media in fuelling the spread of misinformation, and creating fertile ground for divisive, authoritarian leaders. “Without facts, you can’t have truth. Without truth, you can’t have trust. Without trust, we have no shared reality, no democracy, and it becomes impossible to deal with our world’s existential problems: climate, coronavirus, the battle for truth,” Ressa said during her lecture to the ceremony. “Our greatest need today is to transform that hate and violence, the toxic sludge that’s coursing through our information ecosystem, prioritised by American internet companies that make more money by spreading that hate and triggering the worst in us.” Rappler was praised for documenting how social media is used to spread fake news, harass opponents and manipulate public discourse. Ressa called in her lecture for legislation to hold social media companies to account, and for greater overseas development assistance funds to be given to media in the global south. She also said independent media should be helped to survive, by “giving greater protection to journalists and standing up against states which target journalists”. The Nobel laureates both paid tribute to journalists who have been murdered, jailed or forced into exile for their work. “I want journalists to die old,” Muratov said. Six journalists working for Novaya Gazeta have been killed – Igor Domnikov, Yuri Shchekochikhin, Anna Politkovskaya, Anastasia Baburova, Stanislav Markelov and Natalya Estemirova. In the Philippines, a total of 89 journalists have been killed since 1992, she said. That includes the journalist Jesus “Jess” Malabanan, 58, who was killed in a drive-by shooting on Wednesday. Journalism in Russia was going through “a dark valley”, Muratov said. “Over a hundred journalists, media outlets, human rights defenders and NGOs have recently been branded as ‘foreign agents’. In Russia, this means ‘enemies of the people’. “Many of our colleagues have lost their jobs. Some have to leave the country. Some are deprived of the opportunity to live a normal life for an unknown period of time. Maybe for ever. That has happened in our history before,” he said. Muratov condemned the militaristic propaganda promoted by state-owned media, and made a grim warning of the possibility of war between Russia and Ukraine. “In the heads of some crazy geopoliticians, a war between Russia and Ukraine is not something impossible any longer. But I know that wars end with identifying soldiers and exchanging prisoners,” he said. Moscow has provoked alarm by amassing troops and weapons near Ukraine’s border. Describing journalists as an antidote against tyranny, Muratov added: “Yes, we growl and bite. Yes, we have sharp teeth and a strong grip. But we are the prerequisite for progress.”Let’s not forget the impact Matthew Vaughn’s original Kick-Ass movie made in 2010. Based on the comic book of the same name by Mark Millar and John Romita Jr, this was Watchmen’s punky little kid brother, a spiky, primary-coloured black comedy about real-life superheroes for the social media age. Its undoubted star was 12-year-old Chloë Grace Moretz as foul-mouthed, deadly preteen Hit Girl, a role you knew she’d absolutely nailed when the Daily Mail called her “one of the most disturbing icons and damaging role-models in the history of cinema”. Aaron Taylor-Johnson seemed perfectly cast (if a little overly buff) as the nerdy title character, who finds himself biting off way more than he can chew when he decides to become a real-life costumed vigilante on the streets of suburban Staten Island. Kick-Ass proved an outlandish success because its creative team, Vaughn and screenwriter Jane Goldman, had the freedom to adapt Millar’s graphic novel with the biggest of geeky, fanboy-friendly hearts. The entire movie was made for just $30m outside the studio system after Vaughn bought the rights and raised the budget independently. The result was a surprisingly raw and bloody paean to comic book culture that inspired one of Nicolas Cage’s finest performances of recent years as the Adam West-channelling Big Daddy, Hit Girl’s father and crime fighting mentor. At the time it would have been little surprise to see Kick-Ass go on to rival the then-burgeoning Marvel films for future box office glory. Unfortunately, the 2010 film was followed by a weak, studio-produced sequel from the previously unheralded director Jeff Wadlow. A listless, drab effort, it introduced Jim Carrey’s Colonel Stars and Stripes as the successor to Big Daddy, the casting director perhaps assuming that only the Canadian comic could match Cage’s furniture-chewing superpowers. Not a bad shout, you might think, except Carrey only gets 10 minutes of screen time, and subsequently refused to do the attendant publicity tour after denouncing his own movie’s “level of violence” in the wake of the Sandy Hook shootings. The sequel bombed at the box office after failing to inspire critics or audiences. So why are we even discussing Kick-Ass again, more than a decade on? Apparently Moretz, now 24 and having spent the previous decade cultivating a reputation as something of a minor scream queen, is open to a return. Teed up by Jimmy Fallon this week on The Tonight Show, she said: “I think it would be really fun to see where Hit Girl goes and what she is like as an adult. But I think it would have to be kind of perfect.” Moretz went on to suggest that this would require the return of Taylor-Johnson and Christopher Mintz-Plasse, who played villain Red Mist (later the Motherfucker), which seems reasonable. But I can’t help feeling she’s missing a trick here, because if Kick-Ass 3 ends up being another shallow, studio-produced retread, getting the old gang together (especially if that gang means the people who made Kick-Ass 2) really isn’t the answer here. Somehow, Universal (which now owns the franchise) needs to find a way of restoring the outlandish, anarchic insouciance of the original movie. Otherwise, Hit Girl is just another female superhero with attitude, while Kick-Ass is a rubbish Spider-Man knock off who never quite worked out how to get his webshooters going. That probably means getting Goldman to write the script and Vaughn to return to the director’s chair. At the very least the studio needs to find replacements with the renegade spirit to return this saga to its dissident roots. Without that basic investment in quality, the studio could bring Cage’s Big Daddy back from the dead and team him up with Christian Bale for a husky, deep-throated, Batman-themed shout off – and the result still probably wouldn’t be worth the price of entry.Almost eight years after her son, Anthony Walgate, 23, became Stephen Port’s first victim, Sarah Sak is shocked, angry and vindicated after listening to the evidence laid out during the two-month hearing. Shocked, “because it wasn’t just one little mistake, or a couple of mistakes, it was all of them”. Angry, “because the police felt you can just keep saying sorry and that makes it right”. Vindicated, “knowing that we were right all along”. “At one point, listening, I did actually cry. It was so sad. They [the police] just didn’t seem to care. To them, he was just a student who took drugs, and that’s what students do,” she said. When police shut down their initial investigation into his death, despite her and his friends insisting the circumstances had to be suspicious, she felt totally dismissed. “It was so frustrating and upsetting.” Sak said: “I went to my local MP. I went to my doctor and sat and cried for an hour. I was, like, nobody will listen. I didn’t know what to do, to be quite honest. I knew I was right.” It took Barking and Dagenham police 10 months to submit Port’s laptop for forensic examination after her son’s death, so they did not see the evidence of Port’s incessant obsession with drug-rape pornography involving young men, which would have raised significant questions from the start. “If they had done a check on Port instead of just Anthony, and looked into the police computer and seen what had been known before, and looked straight away at the laptop, the other three boys would have been saved,” she believes. Daniel Whitworth’s stepmother, Mandy Whitworth, said she felt “elated” that the families had finally been listened to and pleased that the jury agreed with them. Tom Walgate, Anthony’s father, said that if police had done basic checks on Port’s background and examined his computer earlier, “those other boys would have enjoyed Christmas with their families”. Donna Taylor, the sister of Jack, said she felt strongly about the issue of homophobia, which the coroner had ruled the jury could not make a finding on for legal reasons. She said: “Every one of the boys was not treated like individual humans and we have said that they were discriminated against from the very beginning. “The way they were seen as a druggie, homeless, gay. It’s not acceptable. Regardless of what you are in this world you should be treated as an individual.” Taylor said the police watchdog should “100%” reopen its investigation in light of the evidence given by officers at the inquest. Sak hopes this will be “a turning point”, and that lessons have been learned. She believes the Met’s major investigation team should have taken over the investigations into the deaths at the beginning, and not have declined Barking police’s request for them to take the lead in her son’s inquiry. To her, the cases have exposed “massive failures” over how “disjointed” the police investigations were, meaning no one “joined the dots”. “The mindset needs to be changed, so they are not thinking that all young gay boys go to orgies, or that all students are drug takers. They need to treat everybody individually and stop this preconception they have of people,” she said. Since he died, she has felt Anthony’s presence very keenly in her quest for justice. “I cope by the fact that I know Anthony would be very proud. If it was him, he would have been there banging on people’s doors saying: ‘No, this isn’t right.’”