A new show of western unity against Russia and China is being lined up by the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, as she hosts a weekend meeting of G7 foreign ministers starting on Saturday. The G7 meeting, held against the backdrop of a potential invasion of Ukraine, tensions in the South China Sea and the potential collapse of the Iran nuclear deal, is being billed by Truss as a “chance to show a united front against malign behaviour – including Russian posturing towards Ukraine”. Truss will also pledge security and economic support to defend “the frontiers of freedom” around the world, a reference to the array of western infrastructure investment vehicles being assembled by the US, EU and the UK in a bid to offer a rival to the Chinese belt-and-road initiative. It will also give Truss another chance to present herself as a businesslike modern-day Thatcher determined to get the west on the front foot – a portrait that will put her in good standing with her backbenchers if Boris Johnson were to lose their confidence. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, is also likely to offer reassurances that Joe Biden did not offer substantive concessions to Russia over the future role of Nato on the eastern front in his talks with Vladimir Putin this week , or the potential ceding of Ukrainian territory. The French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, is expected to urge Blinken not to rule out Ukrainian membership of Nato. Russia on Friday demanded that Nato formally rescind the commitment to Ukraine and Georgia made at the 2008 Bucharest summit that they could one day become a member of the alliance. At the same time, there are bound to be discussions on how the multiple crises can be dialled down, and whether the west is at risk of fighting on too many fronts simultaneously. France for instance has not joined some G7 partners – the US, UK and Canada – in backing a diplomatic boycott over human rights abuses in China’s Xinjiang province. The two-day meeting will be the first outing at a multilateral forum for the new German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, the co-leader of the Green party, who is being closely watched to see how she intends to apply foreign policy to Russia and China. “The aim is to expand the reach of freedom and democracy and we take on malign actors around the world who are seeking to challenge that,” Truss said. She said that if Russia invaded Ukraine, “it would be extremely serious, a strategic mistake and there would be severe consequences for Russia and what we are doing this weekend is working with like-minded allies to spell that out.” Truss said she wanted to work with Baerbock on the Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia to Germany to reduce the west’s dependence on energy and technology of authoritarian regimes. On human rights abuses in China’s Xinjiang province, she said: “It is a matter for the courts on the issue of genocide, but I am very concerned by the appalling human rights abuses against the Uyghur people, and have said this to the Chinese ambassador.” Germany takes over the G7 presidency from the UK in a fortnight and, in deference to the handover, there is not expected to be a long communique, but instead a relatively brief chair’s statement. Foreign ministers from South Korea and Australia, not G7 member states, will also attend, but plans to bring over all the foreign ministers from the 10 states in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) bloc have been heavily scaled back mainly as a result of Covid travel restrictions. They will instead be linked into the G7 meeting by video on Sunday. Britain had been planning to focus the agenda heavily on the tilt to the Indo-Pacific, and the threat posed by China, but the massing of Russian troops on the Ukrainian border has required an adjustment on an already packed agenda. There have been tensions in south-east Asia about the degree to which countries of the region will get sucked into making a choice between the US and China, as well as how to approach Aukus – the US, Australia and UK security pact largely focused on providing Australia with nuclear-propelled submarines. The surprise pact, announced in September and cancelling the previous Australian contract to buy French submarines, caused uproar in France, and it is unlikely Le Drian, the French foreign minister, will greet his Australian counterpart, Marise Payne, with huge enthusiasm when they meet for the first time since what France regarded as a great betrayal by Australia. However, Aukus is likely to be heavily endorsed by Yoshimasa Hayashi, Japan’s new foreign minister, on his first trip abroad.That’s all for today, thanks for following along. Some key links: The supreme court ruled on Friday that Texas abortion providers can sue over the state’s ban on most abortions, but the justices are allowing the law, the strictest such regulation in America to date, to remain in effect. Sonia Sotomayor, the liberal-leaning justice on the US supreme court, said lawmakers in the Republican-controlled legislature of Texas had “substantially suspended a constitutional guarantee: a pregnant woman’s right to control her own body”. The White House said that Biden is “concerned” about the Texas law staying in effect and is “deeply committed” to Roe v Wade. Responding to new inflation figures that cite US inflation at its highest level since 1982, Biden said that inflation is a “real bump in the road” and that current figures are at “the peak of the crisis” with positive change coming. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack issued new subpoenas on Friday against two Trump White House officials involved in organizing the rally and march that descended into the 6 January insurrection. Some areas in the US are facing shortages of pharmacy staff to administer vaccines. A federal judge has temporarily blocked a Tennessee law that sharply restricts public schools from requiring masks and prohibits local officials from making decisions about quarantines, the Associated Press reports. From the AP: The lawsuit against the state was filed on behalf of eight students between the ages of seven and 14 who have disabilities and who are deemed by federal health officials as being more vulnerable to serious illness or death if they get Covid-19. The ruling also blocks the law’s provision that says local health and school officials can’t make their own coronavirus quarantining decisions. “It is also in the public’s interest to slow the spread of COVID-19 in Tennessee’s schools,” Crenshaw wrote in his ruling. “Defendants have proffered absolutely nothing to suggest that any harm would come from allowing individual school districts to determine what is best for their schools, just as they did prior to the enactment of (the law.)” The judge, the Tennessean reported, raised concerns that the new law “offers no protection to students, let alone those that are disabled”, adding, “This does not serve the public interest ... Allowing children to safely attend school does.” The AP previously reported that the governor has faced scrutiny for signing the legislation even though his administration had allegedly warned lawmakers that the bill could violate federal disability laws and risk the state losing federal funding. The journalists Maria Ressa and Dmitry Muratov received the Nobel peace prize on Friday at a ceremony that Ressa was almost blocked from attending because of travel restrictions related to legal cases filed against her in the Philippines, the Guardian’s Rebecca Ratcliffe reports: Ressa, 58, the chief executive and co-founder of the online news platform Rappler, praised for exposing abuses of power and growing authoritarianism under the Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte, is facing charges that could lead to about 100 years in jail. Having been awarded the prize alongside Muratov in October, she was granted permission to attend the ceremony earlier this month by the Philippine court of appeals, which ruled she was not a flight risk. Muratov, 59, the editor-in-chief of Novaya Gazeta, who shared the 2021 Nobel peace prize, was described as one of the most prominent defenders of freedom of speech in Russia today. “Novaya Gazeta is the most independent newspaper in Russia today, with a fundamentally critical attitude towards power,” Berit Reiss-Andersen, the chair of the Norwegian Nobel committee, said at the ceremony at Oslo City Hall. More here: More US states faced with Covid-19 surges are calling on the National Guard and military personnel to provide assistance at hospitals, the Associated Press reports. From the AP: People who became sick after refusing to get vaccinated are overwhelming hospitals in certain states, especially in the Northeast and the Upper Midwest. New York, meanwhile, announced a statewide indoor mask order, effective Monday and lasting five weeks through the holiday season. “We’re entering a time of uncertainty, and we could either plateau here or our cases could get out of control,” governor Kathy Hochul warned Friday. In Michigan, health director Elizabeth Hertel was equally blunt: “I want to be absolutely clear: You are risking serious illness, hospitalization and even death” without a vaccination. Johns Hopkins university data shows that the seven-day rolling average for daily new cases in the US rose over the past two weeks to 117,677 by Thursday, compared to 84,756 on 25 November, which was Thanksgiving day, the AP said. A former Houston police officer has been sentenced to 45 days in jail for his involvement in the 6 January riot at the Capitol: In September, Pham pleaded guilty to parading, demonstrating or picketing in a Capitol building. He was caught on video saying, “We’re taking the house back,” according to sentencing documents. Pham had worked for the Houston police department for 18 years, but resigned after the department learned of his involvement, Fox 7 in Texas reported. He was off duty when he was at the Capitol. Sworn officers from across the country were caught traveling to the Capitol and participating in the protest and entering the Capitol while off duty. The mother of Austin Tice, the journalist who went missing in Syria in 2012, met today with the White House’s national security advisor, Jake Sullivan. The White House press secretary confirmed the meeting but did not provide reporters with an update on the status of the case: “I can’t give you an assessment. Obviously we’re going to do everything we can,” Jen Psaki said. “It’s our standard practice not to share any specific details about any potential meetings or specific cases out of respect for the families, and to preserve confidentiality.” Debra Tice criticized Biden earlier in the week in a press conference, McClatchy reported, saying: “We have not been able to get a meeting with him.: “He has never said Austin’s name publicly. And I wonder if he’s allowed himself to forget about Austin. I don’t have any indication otherwise.” Last week, Axios reported, Sullivan held a Zoom call with families of dozens of hostages after some of them reportedly expressed frustration that they had not yet been able to meet with Biden. Hi all – Sam Levin here taking over our live coverage for the rest of the day. Biden has released a statement on the reports that Kellogg’s is permanently replacing 1,400 workers who have been on strike since October: Permanently replacing striking workers is an existential attack on the union and its members’ jobs and livelihoods. I have long opposed permanent striker replacements and I strongly support legislation that would ban that practice. And such action undermines the critical role collective bargaining plays in providing workers a voice and the opportunity to improve their lives while contributing fully to their employer’s success. The full statement here: The 1,400 Kellogg’s workers at four plants in the US went on strike after their current union contracts expired. The workers across four plants are represented by the Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers International Union (BCTGM) and produce cereals for brands, including Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops, Frosted Flakes and Raisin Bran, at plants in Michigan, Tennessee, Nebraska and Pennsylvania. More on the latest developments: That’s it from me today! I’ll be handing over the blog to Sam Levin. Here’s a summary of today’s events: The Congressional Budget Office has released its score for the Biden administration’s Build Back Better agenda, saying the social package will add $3tn to the US deficit. Democrats dispute the figures. Biden addressed new inflation figures, saying inflation is at ‘peak of the crisis’ and ‘real bump in the road’, but that positive changes in the economy are expected and occurring. The White House said Biden is ‘deeply committed’ to Roe v Wade and ‘concerned’ following a decision by Scotus on the Texas near-total abortion ban. The US supreme court allowed America’s strictest abortion ban, in Texas, to remain in place, even as it permitted clinics to go ahead with legal challenges. Joe Biden spoke at the funeral for Bob Dole at the national cathedral in Washington, DC, calling the former senator “one of our greatest patriots”. The US president wrapped up the two-day inaugural White House summit for democracy, with world leaders attending virtually because of the pandemic, by defending fair elections and a free press. Here’s an excerpt from the Guardian’s Hugo Lowell on more information concerning the House investigating committee’s additional subpoenas issued today on the events of 6 January: The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack on Friday issued new subpoenas against two Trump White House officials involved in organizing the rally and march that descended into the 6 January insurrection, as they inquire into the extent of Donald Trump’s involvement. The select committee issued orders compelling documents and testimony to Brian Jack, Trump’s former White House director of political affairs, now working for the House minority leader Kevin McCarthy, and Max Miller, a former deputy manager for the Trump campaign. Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, said in the subpoena letter for Miller that the panel targeted him as he attended a 4 January meeting with Trump in a private White House dining room about who should speak at the rally on the morning of 6 January. Miller also communicated with the then deputy secretary of the interior and the then-acting director of the National Park Service to strong-arm career officials, who had declined to allow the rally from taking place on the Ellipse, to reverse course, Thompson said. Read the full Guardian article here. Earlier today, Joe Biden said that he will speak to West Virginia Senator Joe Manchin next week, but is unsure if he can get Manchin to support the Biden administration’s Build Back Better bill. While taking questions at his virtual Summit for Democracy, Biden responded to a question if he could get Manchin to vote for the bill given that inflation is at a record high: “Well, I don’t know the answer to that. I’m going to be talking to him at the beginning of the week,” answered Biden. Manchin is a key moderate holding up the Biden administration’s Build Back Better agenda, a social spending package, though some democrats don’t think that Manchin is willing to secure a vote on Biden’s agenda by Christmas, according to the Hill. During today’s press briefing, press secretary Jen Psaki responded to questions on Biden’s comment saying, “this is exactly the time to pass this bill and move it forward so that we can lower costs for the American people”. When asked if Joe Biden would consider a pardon of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, press secretary Jen Psaki said that Joe Biden is an advocate for free speech and freedom of the press. Psaki referred questions regarding the Julian Assange case to the justice department, noting that it is still an ongoing case. Additionally, Psaki responded to an inquiry about how some view prosecuting Assange as an attack on freedom of press, saying “the president has been an advocate for freedom of speech, freedom of press”, also noting the virtual Summit for Democracy the president is wrapping up today. The questions came after a ruling today that Assange can be extradited to the US to face espionage charges. Here is more on the case from the Guardian’s Ben Quinn: Julian Assange can be extradited to the US, according to the high court, as it overturned a judgment earlier this year and sparked condemnation from press freedom advocates. The decision deals a major blow to the WikiLeaks co-founder’s efforts to prevent his extradition to the US to face espionage charges, although his lawyers announced they would seek to appeal. Two of Britain’s most senior judges found on Friday that a then district judge based her decision earlier this year on the risk of Assange being held in highly restrictive US prison conditions. In their ruling, they sided with the US authorities after a package of assurances were put forward that Assange would not face those strictest measures unless he committed an act in the future that required them. Read the full Guardian article here. The House select committee overseeing the investigation into the January 6 insurrection just subpoenaed six more people, including an Ohio Congressional candidate who has been backed by Donald Trump. The committee says that Max Miller, the candidate and former Trump aide, met with Trump two days before the rally held outside the White House to discuss details of the event. Others included in the subpoena are Brian Jack, a former Trump aide and current adviser to House minority leader Kevin McCarthy, and Ed Martin, an organizer of the “Stop the Steal” rallies that claimed Democrats stole the election. In a statement, the House select committee say the witnesses “apparently worked to stage the rallies on January 5th and 6th”. “Some appeared to have had direct communication with the former president regarding the rally at the Ellipse directly preceding the attack on the US Capitol,” the statement reads. Following the Scotus decision on the Texas near-total abortion ban, the White House has said that Biden is “concerned” about the Texas law staying in effect and is “deeply committed” to Roe v Wade. The White House also said that the ruling today is a reminder that the right to abortion access should be codified. During a press briefing today, press secretary Jen Psaki spoke on the Scotus ruling today, saying that Biden is concerned that the abortion ban will remain in place. Psaki also noted “how much these rights are at risk” and the need to legislate on abortion access through Women’s Health Protection Act, which passed the House in September but has been stuck in limbo in the Senate. Psaki would not say how the bill would get passed through the Senate, saying there was nothing new to add on that. Psaki also said that a statement on the ruling on Biden’s behalf will be coming shortly as Biden spent most of the day at a memorial for former US senator Bob Dole. Responding to new inflation figures that cite US inflation at its highest level since 1982, Joe Biden today said that inflation is a “real bump in the road” and that current figures are at “the peak of the crisis” with positive change coming. During questions following closing remarks at his virtual Summit for Democracy, Biden responded to a question from a CNN reporter about inflation, saying that US consumers are seeing the peak. “I think you’ll see it change sooner, quicker, more rapidly than people think. Every other aspect of the economy is racing ahead,” said Biden. Earlier today, Biden provided a statement in response to new inflation figures, noting that prices for several goods are coming down, reported Bloomberg: “Today’s numbers reflect the pressures that economies around the world are facing as we emerge from a global pandemic -- prices are rising,” Biden said in a statement after a Labor Department report showed a 6.8% annual gain in the consumer price index in November... Biden said that “half of the price increases in this report are in cars and energy costs from November” and that since then, prices have begun to slide in both sectors. “Even with this progress, price increases continue to squeeze family budgets,” he said. “We are making progress on pandemic related challenges to our supply chain which make it more expensive to get goods on shelves, and I expect more progress on that in the weeks ahead.” Read the Bloomberg article here (paywall). Biden promoted the Freedom to Vote act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement act during his closing remarks at the virtual Summit for Democracy, saying that Congress will get the bills passed. “The sacred right to vote, to vote freely, the right to have your vote counted, is the threshold liberty for democracy,” said Biden. “Without it, virtually nothing’s possible.” Biden did not mention how the two key voting rights bills will get passed, as disdain mounts among voting rights advocates who say Biden is failing on addressing voting rights. The Guardian’s Sam Levine has covered anger towards the Biden administration among voting rights advocates with many noting that “time is running out” to get key legislation passed: Joe Biden will now be giving remarks for the last day of his virtual Summit for Democracy event that began yesterday. The Associated Press reported earlier that Biden will be focusing on election integrity and bolstering independent media during the today’s half of the summit. Press secretary Jen Psaki will be holding a press briefing afterwards. More information on what Biden said during the first day of the summit is available here in a piece written by the Guardian’s Julian Borger, Sam Levine and Shah Meer Baloch. It’s been a lively morning in US politics, stay tuned for all the latest coverage this afternoon, too. Here’s where things stand: The Congressional Budget Office has released its score for the Biden administration’s Build Back Better agenda, saying the social package will add $3tn to the US deficit. Democrats dispute the figures. Joe Biden spoke at the funeral for Bob Dole at the national cathedral in Washington, DC, calling the former senator “one of our greatest patriots”. The supreme court allowed America’s strictest abortion ban, in Texas, to remain in place, even as it permitted clinics to go ahead with legal challenges. The US president planned to wrap up the two-day inaugural White House summit for democracy, with world leaders attending virtually because of the pandemic, by defending fair elections and a free press. The Congressional Budget Office has released their score for the Biden administration’s Build Back Better agenda, saying the social package will add $3tn to the US deficit. The GOP-requested estimate, available here, provides data for programs in areas like housing, child care, and other social initiatives that Democrats say they have not committed to making permanent, reports Politico. Democrats have also said that any future extensions for programs will be fully offset. Republicans are hoping that these new estimates will entice moderates like Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia to help stop the spending package, but Democrats have pushed back, saying that estimates are in response to a bill that hasn’t been finalized, with majority leader Chuck Schumer calling the scores “fake.” Coming as a surprise to almost no one, Republican Senator Ted Cruz of Texas was reportedly not wearing a facial mask during the memorial service despite rising cases of Covid-19 nationwide and several older attendees present. For more information on rising Covid-19 cases and concerns sparked by the Omicron variant, check out the Guardian’s Eric Berger piece linked below. In other news, Joe Biden has just wrapped up speaking at the memorial for former US senator Bob Dole which started at 11 am ET. “My fellow Americans, America has lost one of our greatest patriots,” said Biden. “Jill and I will always be there for you... as you and Bob were always there for us in ways nobody knows.” During the eulogy, Biden spoke about Dole’s willingness to go against his own party, helping pass initiatives such as creating a federal holiday to commemorate Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and to continue funding Amtrak. Biden also spoke on Dole’s service during World War II, saying: “There’s something that connects that past and present, wartime and peace, then and now: the courage, the grit, the goodness and the grace of 2nd Lt. named Bob Dole.” “Bob was taking his final journey. He’s sitting back now, watching us. Now it’s our job to start standing up for what’s right for America. I salute you my friend, your nation salutes you,” said Biden during the eulogy. A number of pro-choice advocacy groups have reacted to the SCOTUS decision. Planned Parenthood tweeted out a statement, saying: The Supreme Court has once again failed to put an end to Texas’s bounty hunting scheme and protect our constitutional rights. They have failed to bring relief to Texas patients and providers who’ve suffered for 100 days under this unconstitutional law. We’ll keep fighting. NARAL Pro-Choice also posted a number of tweets about the decision, explaining what the ruling meant and the impact that Texas’s abortion ban has had on those seeking abortion care. #SB8 has caused untold harm—forcing those who can afford it to travel out of state for the care they need, and those who can’t to remain pregnant against their will. As it stands, SB 8 makes accessing abortion care in Texas nearly impossible. And #SCOTUS should have blocked it. The American Civil Liberties Union shared a statement via Twitter concerning the ruling: BREAKING: The Supreme Court has once again failed to block Texas’s extreme abortion ban. Make no mistake: SB8 continues to wreak havoc on people’s lives every additional day it’s in effect. More to come on what this means from our legal experts soon. The National Organization for Women called the decision a “partial win for reproductive freedom” while providing an explanation of the SCOTUS ruling. Democratic Representative Pramila Jayapal of Washington, who has spoken about her own experience getting an abortion with other congressional democrats, has reacted to the SCOTUS decision. “By allowing this cruel abortion ban to remain in effect, SCOTUS is turning a blind eye to the direct attacks on the rights of pregnant people in Texas and across America,” said Jayapal on Twitter following the decision. In the same tweet, Jayapal encouraged the US Senate to pass the Women’s Health Protection Act, writing, “Enough of the political games.” Previously, Jayapal has spoken about her decision to terminate a pregnancy after experiencing severe postpartum depression following a previous pregnancy. “Whether the choice to have an abortion is easy or hard, whether there are traumatic situations or not, none of that should be the issue. It is simply nobody’s business what choices we as pregnant people make about our own bodies,” said Jayapal back in September. Here is a breakdown of the effects of the SCOTUS ruling on the Texas abortion ban from Steven Vladeck, a legal scholar with the University of Texas School of Law. Vladeck, along with other experts, also discussed the implications of the decision. Here’s a take from Joyce Alene, former United States Attorney for the Northern District of Alabama. Lawrence Hurley, a Reuters reporter who covers the U.S. Supreme Court and related issues, also provided additional context for the decision as well as a breakdown of Justice Sonia Sotomayor’s partial dissent. This ruling on the Texas abortion case is separate from the pivotal case about a Mississippi law that is a direct challenge to Roe v Wade. The Supreme court heard arguments on the Mississippi law case last week, with conservative justices, who have a supermajority in the court, signaling that they are leaning towards curbing abortion access in the future across the country. A decision on that case is not expected til the summer. Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren reacts to the recent SCOTUS decision that leaves the Texas abortion ban in effect but allows providers to sue. In a tweet posted shortly after the decision, Warren echoed sentiments of many pro-choice advocates at the SCOTUS decision that allows the abortion ban to remain in place. “While SCOTUS has allowed challenges to SB 8 to proceed, it’s outrageous that the Court has again decided not to block Texas’ unconstitutional abortion ban,” tweeted Warren. “More Texans are harmed every day this law is allowed to stand. The Senate must pass the Women’s Health Protection Act.” In a blow to pro-choice advocates and those seeking abortion services, the US supreme court won’t stop the Texas near-total abortion ban from being enforced, but has voted to allow abortion providers to sue over the state’s abortion ban. The law, known as Senate Bill 8, bans the procedure after roughly six weeks gestation or before most women know they are pregnant. The outcome is, in the best case, a partial victory for pro-choice advocates and abortion providers, says the Associated Press. The law has been in place since 1 September. More details, including reactions to the ruling, coming shortly. Prices for US consumers in November increased by 6.8%, with US inflation hitting its highest level since 1982. The Labor Department also reported that between October to November, prices jumped by 0.8%. The rising cost of goods has put greater economic pressure on people across all incomes, especially for lower-income households. Everyday goods such as food and gas have also become more expensive, according to tracking indexes. Rising inflation has also mitigated the impact of higher wages many workers have received, complicating the Federal Reserve’s plans to reduce its aid for the US economy and coinciding with flailing public approval rates for Joe Biden, reports the Associated Press. Experts say that ongoing inflation in the US is due to a number of factors: increased government stimulus, continued supply shortages, and low rates manufactured by the Federal Reserve, reports AP. For more news on US inflation, follow the Guardian’s business blog here. Joe Biden will close out his virtual Summit for Democracy today with remarks about electoral integrity, fighting against foreign interference in elections, and bolstering independent media. Yesterday, on the first day, Biden announced a plan for the US to spend up to $424mn to support independent media around the world, anti-corruption work, and other initiatives. Here’s more on what happened during the first day from the Guardian’s Julian Borger, Sam Levine and Shah Meer Baloch: Facing video links with 80 world leaders arrayed on two oversize electronic panels, the US president said: “This is an urgent matter on all our parts, in my view, because the data we’re seeing is largely pointing in the wrong direction.” Biden cited studies that found that global freedom has now been in retreat for 15 consecutive years and that more than half of all democracies experienced a decline in the past decade. He acknowledged that one of those countries in democratic decline was his own. Since the November 2020 elections – the result of which is still not accepted by many supporters of the loser, Donald Trump – voting rights have been under assault from Republicans on the state level, where gerrymandering is still rife, carried out by both Republicans, and to a lesser extent, Democrats. Biden has been accused by American progressives of hosting a global summit while not doing enough to combat democratic backsliding at home. In New York, activists staged a “funeral for democracy” outside the United Nations, in protest of US voter suppression laws. Biden also repeatedly spoke on the value of democracies as better vehicles for governance than autocracies, with the ambassadors to the US from Russia and China releasing a joint statement that condemned the Biden administration for adopting a divisive “cold-war mentality.” The president will be finishing his remarks this afternoon and is scheduled to speak at 1:45 pm ET. Good morning, US politics live blog readers! Here’s what’s coming up today: The US president will be closing the virtual Summit for Democracy this afternoon. Biden will be focusing on election integrity and bolstering independent media, reports the Associated Press, with remarks at 1.45pm ET The president, the first lady, Jill Biden, the vice-president, Kamala Harris and second gentleman Doug Emhoff will be attending the memorial service for former US senator Bob Dole at 11 am ET. Biden will share remarks. A supreme court ruling will be coming out today at 10am ET. Most people are expecting a decision on the Texas abortion law. New data out shows that inflation is impacting people across all incomes, reports Axios. The consumer price index for November shows rising inflation despite economic data showing an increase in wages, falling gas prices, and other markers of economic recovery amid the Covid-19 pandemic.Firefighters are battling to contain a bushfire raging in Margaret River in Western Australia’s south-west with hopes milder weather conditions will help them bring the blaze under control. The fire in Leeuwin-Naturaliste national park has burned through 5,200 hectares, including karri trees, since it started on Wednesday morning in Boranup, WA. The blaze was “reasonably steady overnight” but remained uncontained and uncontrolled, a Department of Fire and Emergency Services spokesperson said on Saturday morning. Firefighters had reportedly secured the northern end of the blaze and were set to move southward, with a particular focus on the area around Caves Road. It was burning in an easterly direction, with more than 150 firefighters on the scene. An emergency warning remained in place for people in the national park bounded by Mammoth Cave Road to the north, Caves Road and the park boundary to the east, Grace Road and Bridle Trail to the south and the coast to the west. People in the area were urged to leave immediately. If they could not, they were told to shelter at home in a room with two exits and water, such as a kitchen or laundry. There were concerns for a missing Perth father of three, Jordan Marshall, who was last seen in Margaret River. A car linked to him has been found in the area. Operators of campsites, wineries and accommodation providers told the ABC they had been forced to close because of the blaze. Western Australia’s emergency services minister, Reece Whitby, said it was unclear how businesses would be affected by the fire long term. “The advice to tourists and potential holidaymakers to the region is to stay away from the area of the fire,” he said. An evacuation centre was set up at the Margaret River Recreation Centre. The cause of the fire is still unknown. The bushfire started near the intersection of Caves Road and Calgardup Road in Boranup, almost 300km south of Perth. Watch and act and advice warnings were in place for other parts of the Augusta-Margaret River shire. Bussell Highway had been closed between Forest Grove Road and the Brockman Highway due to heavy smoke in the area. A second uncontrolled blaze was being fought in nearby Yallingup, south of Margaret River, earlier in the week. It has since been downgraded.Former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows turned over to the House select committee investigating the 6 January Capitol attack a PowerPoint recommending Donald Trump to declare a national security emergency in order to return himself to the presidency. The fact that Meadows was in possession of a PowerPoint the day before the Capitol attack that detailed ways to stage a coup suggests he was at least aware of efforts by Trump and his allies to stop Joe Biden’s certification from taking place on 6 January. The PowerPoint, titled “Election Fraud, Foreign Interference &amp; Options for 6 Jan”, made several recommendations for Trump to pursue in order to retain the presidency for a second term on the basis of lies and debunked conspiracies about widespread election fraud. Meadows turned over a version of the PowerPoint presentation that he received in an email and spanned 38 pages, according to a source familiar with the matter. The Guardian reviewed a second, 36-page version of the PowerPoint marked for dissemination with 5 January metadata, which had some differences with what the select committee received. But the title of the PowerPoint and its recommendations remained the same, the source said. Senators and members of Congress should first be briefed about foreign interference, the PowerPoint said, at which point Trump could declare a national emergency, declare all electronic voting invalid, and ask Congress to agree on a constitutionally acceptable remedy. The PowerPoint also outlined three options for then vice-president Mike Pence to abuse his largely ceremonial role at the joint session of Congress on 6 January, when Biden was to be certified president, and unilaterally return Trump to the White House. Pence could pursue one of three options, the PowerPoint said: seat Trump slates of electors over the objections of Democrats in key states, reject the Biden slates of electors, or delay the certification to allow for a “vetting” and counting of only “legal paper ballots”. The final option for Pence is similar to an option that was simultaneously being advanced on 4 and 5 January by Trump lieutenants – led by lawyers Rudy Giuliani and John Eastman, as well as Trump strategist Steve Bannon – working from the Willard hotel in Washington DC. The Guardian revealed last week that sometime between the late evening of 5 January and the early hours of 6 January, after Pence declined to go ahead with such plans, Trump then pressed his lieutenants about how to stop Biden’s certification from taking place entirely. The recommendations in the PowerPoint for both Trump and Pence were based on wild and unsubstantiated claims of election fraud, including that “the Chinese systematically gained control over our election system” in eight key battleground states. The then acting attorney general, Jeff Rosen, and his predecessor, Bill Barr, who had both been appointed by Trump, by 5 January had already determined that there was no evidence of voter fraud sufficient to change the outcome of the 2020 election. House investigators said that they became aware of the PowerPoint after it surfaced in more than 6,000 documents Meadows turned over to the select committee. The PowerPoint was to be presented “on the Hill”, a reference to Congress, the panel said. The PowerPoint was presented on 4 January to a number of Republican senators and members of Congress, the source said. Trump’s lawyers working at the Willard hotel were not shown the presentation, according to a source familiar with the matter. But the select committee said they did find in the materials turned over by Meadows, his text messages with a member of Congress, who told Meadows about a “highly controversial” plan to send slates of electors for Trump to the joint session of Congress. Meadows replied: “I love it.” Trump’s former White House chief of staff had turned over the materials to the select committee until the cooperation deal broke down on Tuesday, when Meadows’ attorney, Terwilliger, abruptly told House investigators that Meadows would no longer help the investigation. The select committee announced on Wednesday that in response, it would refer Meadows for criminal prosecution for defying a subpoena. The chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said the vote to hold Meadows in contempt of Congress would come next week. “The select committee will meet next week to advance a report recommending that the House cite Mr Meadows for contempt of Congress and refer him to the Department of Justice for prosecution,” Thompson said in a statement.Donald Trump spat an expletive about his old ally, Israel’s ex-prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, for congratulating Joe Biden on his victory in last year’s election, according to a new book. Trump lashed out in an interview for a book on US-Israel relations during his presidency, the author Barak Ravid wrote on the Axios website on Friday. Trump’s remarks were also published by the English-language website of Israel’s Yediot Aharonot newspaper. “Donald Trump and Benjamin Netanyahu were the closest of political allies during the four years they overlapped in office, at least in public. Not any more,” Ravid wrote. “I haven’t spoken to him since,” Trump told Ravid in an interview. “Fuck him.” Ravid said that he interviewed Trump in April and July for his forthcoming book, Trump’s Peace: The Abraham Accords and the Reshaping of the Middle East. He said Trump, who appeared close to Netanyahu while president from 2017 to 2021, was repeatedly critical of him in the interviews. “The final straw for Trump was when Netanyahu congratulated President-elect Biden for his election victory while Trump was still disputing the result,” Ravid wrote. Netanyahu had congratulated Biden more than 12 hours after the election was called. He did not refer to Biden as president-elect in the tweet and followed it up with a post praising Trump. Trump appeared to be particularly incensed by a video released by Netanyahu on 20 January, the day Biden was inaugurated, in which Netanyahu said he and Biden had a “warm personal friendship going back many decades”. Trump has never conceded the election, falsely claiming that Biden won by voter fraud. Other foreign leaders congratulated Biden earlier than the Israeli leader, but for Trump, Netanyahu stood out. “The first person that congratulated [Biden] was Bibi Netanyahu, the man that I did more for than any other person I dealt with,” Trump said, according to Ravid. “Bibi could have stayed quiet. He has made a terrible mistake,” Trump said, using Netanyahu’s nickname. The Trump administration took unprecedented steps to support Israel’s government, including dropping objections to its settlements in the occupied West Bank and recognizing Jerusalem as the country’s capital. After proposing a Mideast plan that was adamantly rejected by the Palestinians, the administration brokered normalization agreements between Israel and four Arab states. “Nobody did more for Bibi. I liked Bibi. I still like Bibi. But I also like loyalty,” he said. Ravid writes that Trump was unhappy that Netanyahu did not help him remain in office. Netanyahu responded to the Axios story in a statement on Friday. “I highly appreciate President Trump’s big contribution to Israel and its security,” he said. “I also appreciate the importance of the strong alliance between Israel and the US and therefore, it was important for me to congratulate the incoming president.” Netanyahu was replaced as prime minister last summer after he was unable to form a governing majority in the wake of four hard-fought elections in less than two years. Both former leaders could return to power. Trump is keeping the option of running for president in 2024 open. Netanyahu is currently leader of the opposition in Israel’s Knesset. AFP and the Associated Press contributed to this reportAn EU deadline for the UK to grant licences to dozens of French boats in a post-Brexit fishing row has passed without an agreement being announced. There had been suggestions on Friday that negotiations over fishing licences for small French boats in British waters could lead to a breakthrough but sources said there was no announcement expected from the UK government as the midnight deadline came and went. France had threatened to push the European Union for legal action and trade restrictions against the UK if there was not a “sign of goodwill” in the fishing row in time for a Friday deadline set by Brussels. The European Commission had said it expected the dispute to be resolved by midnight. The main source of contention is the number of licences to fish in waters around the British coastline for smaller French vessels that can prove they operated there before Brexit. France says that 104 of its boats still lack licences to operate in British and Channel Island waters that should have been granted under a Brexit deal the UK signed with the European Union in December last year. The UK earlier denied discriminating against French boats and says many of the vessels are unable to provide the paperwork required to qualify for a licence. “This is a technical process based on evidence rather than deadlines,” a British government spokesman said. But France’s Europe minister, Clément Beaune, held out the possibility of the UK granting “a few dozen more [licences] as a gesture of goodwill”, which would mean talks could continue, and the European Commission said it was hoping for a breakthrough later on Friday. “If they stick to their guns, then we will ask the European Commission to begin a legal complaint,” Beaune told Franceinfo radio on Friday. “A legal procedure does not just involve papers and courts, it’s also measures, for example customs measures, that Europe can take collectively to tell the British in certain sectors, ‘since you do not respect the agreement, some of your products are not recognised’.” The UK environment secretary, George Eustice, held talks with the EU environment commissioner, Virginijus Sinkevičius, on Friday. “Intensive technical discussions over recent days have been constructive, however they have not yet reached their conclusion,” the UK spokesperson said. “Our position remains that vessels must provide sufficient evidence of historic fishing activity in order to receive a licence.” Brussels has said the dispute must be settled by 10 December but Downing Street said on Thursday it did not recognise the cut-off point. “We’ve never set a deadline. I recognise they [the EU] themselves have set one but it’s not one we’re working to,” a spokesperson for the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, said on Thursday. Beaune said the UK government’s comment was “surprising”, adding: “It’s not really a sign of trust.” France and the UK have clashed repeatedly this year over fishing as well as migrants crossing the Channel, post-Brexit trade arrangements and the sale of submarines to Australia. “The problem with the British government is that it does not do what it says,” the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said on Thursday, accusing London of failing to keep its word on Brexit and the fishing licences. With Press Association and Agence France-PresseIn January 2020 the world was a different place. The Australian men’s Test team had burned through a home summer against Pakistan and New Zealand - double centuries, triple centuries, innings victories, the works. Nathan Lyon, Australia’s off-spinner, finished it in style in the Sydney Test. Five wickets in the first innings, five in the second, 10 for 113 in the match, 27 for the season, and up to 390 in his career. Just around the corner lay 400, that huge milestone that at the time had only been passed by 15 players. Then the world was turned upside down. Australia’s next Test engagement in Bangladesh was cancelled, a place where Lyon took 22 wickets in two matches on his previous visit. Not in any overseas T20 leagues, he spent the winter cooling his heels. He played three Sheffield Shield matches towards the end of the year with plenty of overs returning nine wickets for 392 runs. Then it was into a series against India, the specialists against spin. Abruptly, the charge to 390 stalled. In Adelaide he got one in the first innings and didn’t get to bowl in the second, as the fast bowlers tore through India for 36 runs. In Melbourne he cleaned up the tail with 3 for 72, but bowled fewer than three overs second time around as India strolled a small chase to win. Sydney was where things really came apart: 31 fruitless overs in the first innings, even as India made a modest score, then 41 overs in the fourth innings, bowling through the final day but striking only twice, allowing India to escape with a draw. That meant 396 wickets coming into the series finale in Brisbane. One more in the first innings, tricking the opener Rohit Sharma in flight. Then once more the fourth innings, a big lead, an expected victory, and the tables being turned, India making 329 to win. Lyon got a slip catch and a chop-on, 31 overs for two wickets, a series loss, and a career tally of 399. The year to follow panned out like the one before. Australia cited the pandemic in cancelling three Tests in South Africa, not Lyon’s happiest hunting ground but another opportunity lost. No other tours were scheduled in its place. Another winter of sitting around, sorting the button box by colour and size, watching macrame tutorials on YouTube. It’s not as though Lyon had spent a lot of actual Test matches with 399 hanging over him, but he had spent nearly two years. So the number was there when the Ashes began in Brisbane - not quite a monkey on the back, but perhaps a lemur on the shoulder. It grew more simian on the first day - a day for the fast bowlers, yes, with cloud cover and English wickets tumbling in the gloom, but also a sufficiently limp batting performance that a spinner bowling nine overs would expect to pick up at least one frazzled shot to a catcher. No such luck. None for 21. As the third innings unfolded, the monkey started combing through the stubble on Lyon’s head for snacks. The first two wickets fell, but not to the spinner. He was brought on to target Dawid Malan, turning the ball sharply across the left-hander but never taking the edge. Then Malan settled in for the rest of the day with Joe Root. The pair cut and pulled Lyon when he dropped short, came down the wicket to drive him, swept him off a length. He was bowling faster, flatter, than his best. Marnus Labuschagne’s part-time spin came on. Lyon finished the day with none for 69, having bowled 24 overs. Well after the fact, the television cameras realised that a ball that had bounced back to the bowler off Malan’s pad had also hit the batter’s glove on the way. It would have been wicket 400, but there was barely an appeal. And so on to day four. The partnership up to 162, in the fourth over of the morning. The flight was there, the loop, some turn. An inside edge into Malan’s ankle, a deflection to the catcher under the batter’s nose. Monkey returned to the wild, ball held aloft to the crowd from among the white-clad throng. Just because numbers are arbitrary doesn’t mean they don’t mean anything. From there, things quickly broke Lyon’s way. Ollie Pope charged and swiped towards cover only to get an edge to slip. England were still behind Australia’s first innings on runs. Lyon had a break as the visitors kept sliding. He returned for Ollie Robinson to play a reverse sweep to backward point, then for Mark Wood to miss a straight ball aimed at his stumps. The stagnation of 399 had quickly given way to 403, Lyon now one of 17 in that club having been preceded to it by his Indian peer Ravichandran Ashwin. With four Tests to go, it is time to start towards the next number. For a spin bowler having just turned 34, the ambitions on that front need not be modest. The last two years may have been dry, but in Brisbane, the rains can come suddenly and fast.I think that will do for now on here. Stay tuned for insight from Geoff Lemon, Ali Martin, Andy Bull, and The Final World Daily podcast crew. Thanks for your company today. As usual, it was a blast. Catch you next week in Adelaide. On player of the match Travis Head: He can take the game away from win within a couple of hours. Seen him do it for South Australia. Our - everything we say to Trav is go out and play your own way. He’s still young, 45 now. Old pro, the amount of first class cricket he’s played. On Josh Hazlewood’s fitness: He’s a bit sore yesterday. So we’re trying to get him through. It’s a five taste Test match series. Didn’t want to break him today. Pulled him up OK today. On David Warner’s fitness: He’s fine. Didn’t want to risk him. He’s fine. Didn’t want to risk him. Right for Adelaide. Now it’s time for Pat Cummins for his debut postmatch presser as skipper... First of all really enjoyed it. Lot of things did go right from probably the toss. Overcast conditions. Wicket had a bit in it. Turned up Day 2 and blue skies. Someone was smiling over me. Really proud of everyone. I thought it was a really complete performance. The bowlers did their thing on Day 1. Marnus and David big partnership. All the way Trav, that’s a blueprint. Sign of really positive side. Really proud of everyone. I was really happy with how everyone stuck to it. I thought we bowled without much luck yesterday. Probably fair the amount of luck we got on Day 2. Everyone was really good. Really positive. Turned up today. Knowing we’re were ahead of the game. Didn’t think too much about trying to get the breakthrough. Any positives? There are a lot of good things to take from this game. And I think most importantly that bowling effort, as you say we created a huge amount of chances.We were on the wrong side of the weather breaks and 2.5 hour session up for the second morning. Made it quite difficult to keep the bowlers fresh and keep coming back. These things happen. You have to learn from these games like this. You become stronger for it. It’s what we’ll do ahead of the series. On the remainder of the series... As you know with five match series it’s important we don’t just feel too sorry for ourselves aft back of this. More than anything we have to remember there’s a huge amount of cricket to play. We should relish that challenge. Relish the opportunity to go out there and try and get back one on the ball for ourselves. On Jack Leach getting some tap... If anything that falls on me for giving him too aggressive fields early. Not letting him settle in. And giving him a chance early on. Jack is a fine spinner.He have shown over the 20 odd Test Matches he’s played he’s an instrumental part of the team. He’ll play a big part in the series moving forward. Asked about his team selection (no Broad or Anderson)... Easy to look back in hindsight. One thing we wanted is variation in our attack. We wanted to change the pace of the game. Move through different gears throughout the innings. And it’s easy to say in hindsight. If I’m being honest, we can’t create as many chances as we did and put it down. Our bowlers were excellent. Huge amount of times we banged out the areas that we wanted to on this wicket. We have to be better on the field. Similarly with the bat, 40 for four is not a position we want to start. We know where we need to improve. We know we need to get better. The way we responded in the second innings showed a great amount of character and fight which we’ll need throughout the series. Joe Root: We worked hard to get ourselves back in the game last night. We knew how important the first session was. We knew if we got to the new ball unscathed and carried the game forward we would have given ourselves an opportunity which would have kept us in the game. We saw how the pitch developed through the day. Started to become uneven. Sideways movement and dents and cracks appearing. It’s a shame we couldn’t quite manage to get through that initial phase. Because it could have been very different. Congratulations Australia. Dominant on days one, two, and four, and never allowed England’s ascendancy on day three to get out of hand. 5.1 over: Australia 20-1 (Harris 9, Labuschagne 0) Target 20 - Wood comes on and is immediately driven square for four by Harris. Game over. 5th over: Australia 16-1 (Harris 5, Labuschagne 0) Target 20 - At least it’s not a 10-wicket defeat. Robinson is lucky to get a third over, and he invites Harris to time a short wide delivery through the covers for three, then he’s down the leg-side to both batters in an over lacking anything resembling conviction... until the final ball, which is on a classic new ball line and length across Carey and the makeshift opener feathers a catch behind. 4th over: Australia 11-0 (Carey 8, Harris 1) Target 20 - Woakes has found a lovely rhythm in his couple of overs, shaping the ball back into the left-handers at a decent clip. Carey is watchful to the good balls and throws his hands at anything hittable, earning two for his troubles. 3rd over: Australia 9-0 (Carey 6, Harris 1) Target 20 - Carey scampers a run that invites a shy at the non-striker’s end, then Harris has another unconvincing swish at Robinson. He gets off the mark eventually though with a half-volley on leg-stump flicked away for a single. Carey shows his intent with a clart over the covers for three. It wasn’t timed, but there was width to swing his willow and it landed very safely. Carey wanted a fourth run but Harris, who dawdled early, sent him back and Carey was almost caught stranded but Robinson makes an almighty mess of his duties at the bowler’s end. Kim Thonger! It’s been a while, but always a pleasure to find you in my inbox. “I awake briefly and am appalled. At the risk of sounding Boycottesque, my Granny put up more of a fight when thieves tried to prize her rhubarb harvest from her. The Ashes should be cremated and we should ‘compete’ in future for the ashes of The Ashes.” 2nd over: Australia 3-0 (Carey 3, Harris 0) Target 20 - Chris Woakes finds some nice shape in the air into the left-handed Carey, but inevitably that leads to him straying onto the pads and being milked for a single. Harris struggles to his first delivery of the innings, Woakes again finding that swing into the left-hander, and England go to DRS appealing for LBW, but there’s a massive inside-edge. 1st over: Australia 2-0 (Carey 2, Harris 0) Target 20 - Australia off the mark with an Ollie Robinson no-ball - called on-field! You have to love cricket. It was so big an overstep, to be fair, it could have been called by third-man. The next delivery was also a massive no-ball, but not called. Carey doesn’t look completely at ease, and he’s beaten with a delivery that moves away from him and beats the outside edge, but he’s then off the mark with a single. 10% of the target achieved in one over. The teams are back out after lunch, and David Warner is not opening for Australia. The honour falls to Alex Carey on debut. “Is it a heat thing? An intensity thing? The one thing it definitely isn’t is a lack of prep thing cos we’ve seen this all before haven’t we?” asks Stephen Holliday. My two cents - right now, England’s batting just isn’t very good, and Australia’s bowling attack is exceptional. It comes as little surprise to see England struggling to make runs, and their best chance in the series was always going to be around winning a couple of pink ball shootouts. As for longer-term / systemic issues, you’re better asking the ECB, because these scorecards are no longer a surprise. Eight wickets for 77 runs. To say that was Australia’s morning would be one heck of an understatement. England arrived at the Gabba full of optimism but crumbled against the old ball, setting up a total collapse against the new. Australia bowled well, and Pat Cummins captained superbly, but the pitch was largely blameless and no batter faced an unplayable delivery. Nathan Lyon got the 400 wicket monkey off his back, Cameron Green took a big step forward in his Test bowling career, Josh Hazlewood proved his fitness, and Alex Carey completed a polished debut. Let the first Test post mortems begin... Formalities will conclude after lunch. Green, who bowled very well with the old ball earlier, returns, and he gets his reward! Heavy ball towards Woakes’ chest, the batsman rocking back trying to guide the ball to third-man, but all he can do is feather an edge to the safe hands of Carey. All over. A lead of just 19. 102nd over: England 296-9 (Woakes 15, Leach 0) That extra half-hour looked fanciful when Leach was posthumously late on a Lyon length delivery, but he survived, somehow. This session that started 30 minutes early, may yet continue 30 minutes extra while Australia pursue this final English wicket. Full from Lyon, Wood goes the big drive, misses, off stump rocks back. England nine down with a lead of just 18. 101st over: England 295-8 (Woakes 15, Wood 6) Starc again has Wood flinching at a short ball, but he gets his bat up in time to prevent any damage. Next ball the England bowler steps to leg to guide a premeditate shot over third-man for four. In more hilarious, and very cricket, news for England, their over-rate was so slow on day two, they seem likely to be penalised World Test Championship points, despite being on course to lose a match with at least four sessions to spare. 100th over: England 291-8 (Woakes 15, Wood 2) Couple of singles from a nondescript Lyon over that seemed a touch hurried. 99th over: England 289-8 (Woakes 14, Wood 1) Starc continues, and while he doesn’t get a wicket, he has Wood hopping on his crease a couple of times with some aggressive bowling at the paceman’s body. Absolutely. I’d say there’s little chance Warner will bat (or is eligible even after spending so long off the field). I doubt they’d risk an injury to a bowler though. If one of them strides out England will just send down nothing but bouncers. 98th over: England 286-8 (Woakes 11, Wood 0) Lyon had already demonstrated to Woakes earlier in the over that this pitch was showing signs of variable bounce. The attempted reverse sweep caught the outside edge and looped straight to Head at what was point. England *effectively* eight for eight. England’s No 9 is now out reverse-sweeping an Australian bowler who earlier took his 400th Test wicket. It’s that kind of day. 97th over: England 282-7 (Woakes 11, Robinson 5) Mitchell Starc with another burst, but he over-pitches to begin with and Robinson bunts him down the ground for a well-timed three. Ben Ellington has a question. “Now that we’re ahead, I can confess that I don’t mind losing by ten wickets. There is nothing in sport I can think of that is more humiliating than an innings defeat. But I’m open to fellow, insomniac sufferers suggestions of anything worse (in sports)?” Double/triple-bagel in tennis? Matchplay golf defeat without winning a hole? Listening to Shane Warne talk about pizza toppings? 96th over: England 279-7 (Woakes 11, Robinson 2) Nathan Lyon is recalled to the attack, and Robinson swishes an unconvincing single into the leg-side to put England in front! 95th over: England 278-7 (Woakes 11, Robinson 1) Cummins is again a handful, but Woakes smuggles an edge through the cordon for four that brings the scores level. It’s all gravy for England from here. “Why do you think England don’t have the patience of the Aussie bowlers?” asks Ruth Purdue. “They don’t seem to be as consistent and tend to get frustrated too quickly? They fear being driven at the Gabba? That’s what you want the batsman to try to do right? Am I being unfair?” I think there is an element of adjustment required in Australian conditions which has been tricky because of the absence of warm-up matches, and also the lack of pace and height of England’s seamers means they are at greater risk of being driven if they over-pitch. In this specific comparison, I think I would focus on the quality of Australia’s attack more than England’s deficiencies. This is a very very good seam lineup. 94th over: England 274-7 (Woakes 7, Robinson 1) This Hazlewood spell is now into its sixth over, and almost feels performative now, proving with every delivery that all the rumours of his fitness were greatly exaggerated. Again Robinson almost wears a shorter delivery, only just evading a bouncer in time. 93rd over: England 273-7 (Woakes 6, Robinson 1) Cummins is making the ball talk, hitting a length and having it spit towards Robinson’s gloves, then sending down a beautiful outswinger that Robinson almost ducks into! Robinson is all at sea. Cummins is remorseless, ripping a delivery right through the tailender that almost takes an inside-edge and bail on its way through to Carey. 92nd over: England 273-7 (Woakes 6, Robinson 1) Robinson is welcomed to the crease by a Hazlewood delivery that lifts off a length and flies past his outside edge. He trots to the safety of the non-striker’s end soon afterwards, allowing Woakes to counterpunch with a glorious backfoot drive, hitting the ball at the top of the bounce. Lovely cricket shot. Back of a length from Hazlewood, no footwork from the batsman, and Buttler just hangs his bat where an imaginary fifth stump would be. The ball clips the edge and Carey pouches the catch. The end is nigh. 91st over: England 268-6 (Buttler 23, Woakes 2) Cummins continues his excellent day and rips through Woakes with a delivery that looks destined to be a wicket one way or the other: bowled, caught behind or LBW, but it’s the merest fraction off all three. He then has the England No 8 flashing outside off stump and bringing the diving Green into place in the gully. A couple through the same region gets Woakes off the mark, but he does not yet have his eye in. 90th over: England 266-6 (Buttler 23, Woakes 0) Hazlewood has found his rhythm, and he almost does for Buttler who fences at a back-of-a-length delivery outside off. 89th over: England 266-6 (Buttler 23, Woakes 0) Pat Cummins certainly looks like a captain with the golden touch. This has been a dream debut as skipper. His returning over with the new ball came with extra impetus and intent. The delivery to Stokes was superb. Pat Cummins brings himself back on and he immediately gives Buttler the hurry-up. The strike gets rotated, then Cummins does for Stokes. Quick, straight, length, just enough seam movement away from the left-hander and an awkward skew aimed towards mid-wicket ends up flying off the outside edge to Green in the gully. Australia celebrated like that was a plan coming together. England’s morning goes from bad to disastrous. 88th over: England 265-5 (Stokes 14, Buttler 22) Full coverage back again - for now - and that allows us to witness a perfectly timed Buttler square drive from a length Hazlewood delivery. The Australian seamer does not look to be running through the crease at full pace. With only five wickets left to take (and Green looking in good nick) that shouldn’t overly matter any more. 87th over: England 260-5 (Stokes 14, Buttler 17) And that single fixed-camera is all we have, which means we are not behind Mitchell Starc’s arm as he bowls to Ben Stokes. It’s like the 1970s, the ball a blur as a hurtles towards the England batsman. Nope. Mid-over, that camera is a victim of the “massive power failure” and the picture goes down on Channel 7, while over on Fox there’s a wide low-angle that gives the effect of fielding at mid-off. England repelling the new ball for now, and they can have a breather while drinks are taken. William Vignoles emails: “Can confirm that BT Sport have a single camera frantically trying to catch the action while Cook and Harmison desperately fill (Alastair just said “that’s a good shot, or did he miss it) - it’s all very village and surreal but you really get a sense of the terrifying speed of the bowling that the standard cameras obscure somewhat. Really should go to bed but it’s very compelling.” 86th over: England 256-5 (Stokes 13, Buttler 12) We have one camera back! It’s a sketchy one that makes it look like we’re watching a county game from 2007 on a go-pro, but it’s better than nothing. Kev McMahon is also in attendance. “Hazlewood’s over produced a few ooohs from the crowd but nothing of substance. 5-260, Starc running in, weather clear, crowd happy...” Geoff is at the Gabba, and this is our temporary workaround. God bless Geoff, to the rescue. 85th over: England 252-5 (Stokes 13, Buttler 8) Apparently BT Sport in England have a boundary camera in operation, which is more than we have access to in Australia. In the absence of cricket, Damian Clarke emails in, suggesting footballers are not as polite as cricketers. “Morning. I was in a lift with big John Bond once back in the day. I proffered him some advice about managing the Man City defence problems. He told me to F the F off. I got off at the next floor. Top bloke, scary when angry, but a top bloke nonetheless.” 84th over: England 250-5 (Stokes 13, Buttler 8) A maiden, apparently, from Hazlewood. The Fox coverage has gone to a pre-record interview with Nathan Lyon. Our first look at Josh Hazlewood - well, almost, because the coverage has dropped out on the host and world feed. It was fuzzy for a couple of overs, and now it’s gone completely. Alison Mitchell and Damien Fleming are filling, desperately, and now we’ve gone to an ad break in the middle of the over. Added to the DRS shambles, this has not been a great start to the series for technology. 83rd over: England 246-5 (Stokes 9, Buttler 8) The new ball is now taken, and it’s Mitchell Starc who will get first use of it. He begins with a hint of swing into the right-handed Buttler, from over the wicket, then he rips a thunderbolt past Stokes’ outside edge and continues to make batting look awkward for England’s talisman. Until the final delivery of the over that is, when Stokes throws his hands at the ball and creams a cover drive that thunders into the boundary rope. 82nd over: England 245-5 (Stokes 9, Buttler 7) Apologies, perhaps the new ball wasn’t taken after all. I was going off the TV commentators, but Lyon is continuing, which suggests the old ball remains in use. Ben Stokes goes back to that slog sweep stroke, and this time he connects, thwacking a four to cow corner. More English cricket politeness via email. “A few of us went to the Port Elizabeth test in 1999 where a young Andrew Flintoff got out slashing widely when, crowd consensus had it, he might have done better for the team by bedding-in,” opens Mal. “We were staying in the same hotel as both the England and SA teams and, as we found ourselves in a lift with Fred at the day’s end, my (somewhat ‘relaxed’) friend Steve insisted on repeatedly demonstrating a forward-defensive to the England all-rounder, explaining that this was the stroke he ought to have been playing when he got out. Flintoff was extraordinarily polite, thanking Steve for his guidance before we got out on the floor below his. Fred was dismissed for even less in the second innings, scoring more slowly too. Steve’s coaching career never really got going after that.” 81st over: England 240-5 (Stokes 5, Buttler 6) The new ball is available - and taken - but surprisingly, captain Cummins continues his faith in Cameron Green, entrusting the youngster to continue his superb spell with the old ball. And he’s nearly rewarded, with a back-of-a-length delivery that beats Buttler for pace. Perhaps this early collapse is all part of the masterplan? “On the plus side,” emails Paul, “having Stokes in early will improve our run rate and therefore allow us more time to bowl at them following our declaration...” 80th over: England 239-5 (Stokes 5, Buttler 5) Buttler does not look comfortable playing Lyon in conventional fashion, so he unfurls a whipcrack reverse sweet that rockets away for four. Terrific skill form both players. “Given that we shan’t be able to witter on about the Doctor in Perth this time round, is there anything similar about Hobart?” Lots and lots of cutaways to little boats bobbing about on the river Derwent, John Starbuck. 79th over: England 234-5 (Stokes 5, Buttler 0) Excellent over from Green around the wicket to Stokes, full, on or around off-stump. This has been exactly the type of spell that should become the allrounder’s template. 78th over: England 234-5 (Stokes 5, Buttler 0) Pope was too busy to get going against Lyon and tried to cut a ball that was too full and too straight. His industry is a strength but this was not the right time to manipulate runs. Just for good measure Lyon does Buttler all ends up with the final delivery of the over. Oh England, never change. Pope is the third to go this morning with a dreadful shot, trying to cut Lyon off the back foot and chopping a simple catch straight to Steve Smith at slip. England fans - go to bed. Australian fans - go to the beach tomorrow. 77th over: England 233-4 (Stokes 4, Pope 4) Pope off the mark with a gimme four down to fine-leg, not that Green will be overly concerned, still buoyed from his massive wicket. Now seven fifties, no tons, for Joe Root in Australia. Perfect outswinger from Green. Root nibbles, Carey holds. A delivery, nick, and catch seen thousands of times in cricket history. This version of the scene means England’s Test is all-but over and yesterday’s optimism has evaporated in seconds. 76th over: England 229-3 (Root 89, Stokes 4) Another over, another early single to Root, who has spent most of the morning at the non-striker’s end. Stokes then takes a wild slog sweep to Lyon that he is fortunate doesn’t catch an edge. The goat then hits Stokes’ pads twice in a row as the energy around the bat ramps up. Australia are as a effervescent this morning as they were flat yesterday afternoon. 75th over: England 228-3 (Root 88, Stokes 4) Just a two over spell from Cummins to start the day, and now it’s time for some dirty old ball overs from Cameron Green. Root keeps the scoreboard ticking over with a single, then Stokes is happy to acclimatise to the light with some sighters, until he jabs an angled bat at a shorter wide one that flies streakily to the third-man boundary. 74th over: England 223-3 (Root 87, Stokes 0) All that early English optimism evaporates in an instant. And it probably wouldn’t be too hyperbolic to now suggest this match rests on this partnership between England’s two best batters. Australia have the wicket before the new ball they so craved. That’s the crucial early breakthrough, and Lyon has 400! A nice over of flight from around the wicket to the left-hander, who was trying to use his feet, but on the fourth ball he doesn’t get to the pitch and a bat-pad prop forward lobs up to Labuschagne at short-leg. The goat is cock-a-hoop. 73rd over: England 223-2 (Malan 82, Root 87) Cummins persists with his angle of attack from around the wicket to Malan, who defends a couple, then rides the bounce for an easy single. The England captain then gets in line and defends some textbook line and length right-arm over from his Australian counterpart. 72nd over: England 222-2 (Malan 81, Root 87) Nathan Lyon, who bowled nicely yesterday for figures of 0/69, takes the old ball from the Vulture Street end. His first ball is nudged behind square by Root who is off the mark in typically busy fashion. Malan is untroubled and eventually beats the infield for a single from the final ball of the over. Here’s the full story about Hobart securing the fifth Test: 71st over: England 220-2 (Malan 80, Root 86) Captain Cummins takes responsibility for the first over of the day. Just two slips and a gully for the skipper, and you can see why, with the first delivery staying very low wide outside Malan’s off stump. The right-arm paceman comes over the wicket for four deliveries, trying to angle the ball across the left-handed batter and draw him into an outside edge, then he switches around, targeting the pads. Malan is watchful and happy to see out a maiden. Meanwhile, TV coverage focuses on Hazlewood’s warm-ups from earlier, which looked very ginger. Right, let’s get down to business. The teams are out. Day four is about to begin. Huge first hour coming up. Ok, so not all England internationals are unfailingly polite. “Apropos your video of Norbert Philip, I was attendant at the B &amp; H final of 1979, with my father (whose 107th birthday would have been today),” begins Peter Walker. “At the lunch break, we had a wander around Lord’s, neither of us having been there before. As we walked behind the pavilion, who should turn up in his primrose yellow 3.5 litre hatchback Rover but Mr. J. M. Brearley, the then England captain. He clearly had business to attend to. As soon as he emerged from his vehicle, he was surrounded by small boys with pencils and scraps of paper. ‘Sorry, boys, I’m not signing autographs today. It’s my day off.’ With that, he disappeared into a brick outbuilding, which had a sign on the door indicating that it was the Middlesex Club Office. A short while later, he emerged, and the small boys surrounded him once again. A little more emphatically, but still with courtesy, he sad ‘No, lads! I am NOT signing autographs today. It’s my day off!’ As he climbed the steps at the back of the pavilion, I didn’t catch what the small boys said, but several hundred people thronged below heard the Great Man’s stentorian response: ‘You are rude little buggers! Sod off!’.” Josh-watch 👀 Tom Bowtell has sent in a teasing email, underlining Joe Root’s Annus mirabilis. “Joe Root has so far taken infinitely more wickets than Nathan Lyon in this match. This confirms his status as the form off-spinner on either side: Root in 2021: 113.3 overs, 11 wickets at 29.82 Lyon in 2021: 168 overs, 5 wickets at 88.20 (Root is also on course for an all-time great batting/bowling average difference for the year: currently 66.99 with bat and 29.81 with ball, so +37.18).” ENGLISH SPINNERS CONTINUE TO BE POLITE IN PUBS SHOCKER! Matthew Hayden - a Queenslander - reckons the pitch is at its best for batting today. “Absolutely perfect... there’s got to be some early breakthroughs or it could be a long day for Australia.” Still no update on Hazlewood not bowling much yesterday. At this stage we have to presume it’s tactical. It is a picture perfect day in southern Queensland: clear, dry, and with temperatures in the high 20s throughout. Here’s the deck: Still on the trail of polite (or otherwise) cricketers. Dan Woodward emails: “In Keith Fletcher’s testimonial year my brother and I went far too far over the boundary at South Weald in pursuit of Nobby Phillip’s signature. ‘I’m playing a game boys’ he said. Kind man, still makes me blush.” Breaking news: confirmation this morning that the fifth Test will be played in Hobart. Hello, David Horn. “The absolute worst thing about Australia-based Ashes series is the fact that whatever happens by 9am completely colours your day. Up and down the country on Wednesday and Thursday, people were miserable. Grumpy breakfasts, tetchy workmates, unforgiving partners - quick to snap at bemused loved ones. But one partnership ... one fragile shaft of light ... and we’re all giddy. I’ve had a lovely day today. It’s been tip top. And it was destined to be just that, because of something that happened mostly while I slept. Hopefully the colour of Saturday will be similarly bright &amp; cheerful.” Time for a crickety remake? If you ever wondered what Geoff Lemon’s prose sounds like in the author’s voice, here he is, alongside Adam Collins and Emma John as they discuss the day three action on The Final Word Ashes Daily podcast. Graeme Swann’s urinal courtesy has really set you all off... “On the subject of apologising cricketers,” emails Ben Mimmack, “Chris Tavaré apologised to me once when he was fielding at Hove because he said he said the captain didn’t want him signing autographs on the boundary. Graham Dilley did sign my scorecard though because he was a gentleman and clearly had no respect for authority.” In other Ashes news, the fifth Test of the series, to replace the cancelled Perth Test, looks set to be played in Hobart. Ben Carter has emailed in, “re: Paul Blakeman’s meeting at the toilet door with Graham Swann. It’s good Swanny was polite. As a seven-year-old, I ran onto the field at the start of a John Player League match between Gloucestershire and Northants, offering Mike Procter a pencil and a scrap of paper. He looked at me and growled, “F off, little boy! We are here to play cricket!” Mike Procter is someone I would not have wanted to upset, back in the day. “Hallelujah! One partnership, and the whole sodding winter cold dark freezing lockdown Omicron Christmas mess somehow feels like it might be bearable. I don’t care who wins. All I want for Christmas is as close to 25 days of stickball as possible, to take my mind off, well, everything else...” Sentiments from Henry I’m sure many readers will agree with. All too often sport, and Ashes series in particular, become too crotchety and stressful to actually enjoy. Right now the best they can be is a distraction. Geoff Lemon ensures Travis Head’s magnificent century doesn’t get lost amongst the noise of an England’s fightback. If you were playing the Bat For Your Life sweepstakes, a player you would be terrified to draw would be Travis Head. A one-way ticket out of the Hunger Games for you. If Waugh epitomised obduracy, Head has epitomised looseness, constantly fiddling around off stump like a teenager who has just discovered the habit. He has hopped and chopped and prodded. Even his strike rotation to length balls uses an angled bat, risk where none is needed. He may not be the only player caught twice in a Test match off a top edge at deep third man, but they could probably fit in one carriage on a Ferris wheel. Day four of the opening Test and already it’s impossible to be an England supporter. Andy Bull rhapsodises about someone standing up alongside Joe Root for a change. All of which is another way of saying that the man who may be England’s greatest-ever batsman is playing in what is probably England’s weakest-ever batting line-up. They have put on 32 fifty-run partnerships this year, Root has been involved in 20 of them. They’ve put on 10 hundred-run partnerships, and Root has been involved in eight of those. He has scored six centuries, his 24 teammates have managed one. The business of captaincy, selecting teams, switching bowlers, picking out fields, managing people and handling the press is enough of a burden without the back-breaking load of carrying such a deadweight batting unit. “I’ve just had Graham Swann apologise to me in a Nottingham bar as we both tried to use the toilet door at the same time,” begins Paul Blakeman. “This has to be a Good Sign (™️) for the match. No cricketing celeb has ever spoken to me never mind apologised to me before. VICTORY IS ASSURED (Not a guarantee - no refunds). May be reaching a bit here but don’t we all feel this is in the air now? #OohTestCricket.” *Very RuPaul voice*: “Brendan is coming down the runway flaunting some long-suffering England supporting realness.” Thanks Dan, shantay you stay. “Evening Jonathan,” good morning Sam Cope, and thank you for a pertinent email so early in the piece. “The big question is, what’s going on with Josh Hazlewood? Was he a) being held back for the new ball, and will thus steam in in 15 overs time? Or b) injured. Meaning the Aussies are a man down, possibly for this innings and beyond? Or C) neither of the above, and he just had wind or something?” According to Marnus Labuschagne: “Hoff is fine. We’re just making sure we prepare really well. We know there’s times at the Gabba where not as many wickets fall and to hold in that period and rotate our bowlers well.” I guess we’ll find out in about 30-45 minutes after play resumes, but it certainly raised eyebrows yesterday, especially considering Hazlewood’s superb record against Root. Missed anything yesterday? Here’s Ali Martin with his close-of-play report. By stumps it felt as if their tour had finally begun in earnest. Root was unbeaten on 86 from 158 balls, fresh from overtaking Michael Vaughan’s record of 1,481 runs in a calendar year and smiling once more, while Malan was 80 not out from 177. England appeared to need snookers when 147 proved their maximum on day one but through the pair’s unbroken stand of 159, one that took the tourists to 220 for two, just 58 behind, the gloom had lifted. Hello everybody and welcome to live coverage of day four of the opening Test of the 2021-22 Ashes from the Gabba. The day’s opening delivery will be bowled on the stroke of 9.30am local time in Brisbane (10.30am AEDT / 11.30pm GMT). It’s amazing what one good partnership can do isn’t it? From Watson and Crick decoding the mysteries of life, to Morecambe and Wise perfecting comic timing, and Mavis and Rita turning a Post Office into a theatre of the absurd (I don’t really know about that last example). To that list can now be added Joe Root and Dawid Malan, because their partnership has not only taken this match into a fourth day, it may well have saved an entire series. At the end of day one - the first of a possible 25 stretching into the new year - England’s tour appeared all but over. An historic toss decision, a first ball calamity, and a routine collapse conspired to send the tourists staring at a defeat inside three days at the Gabbatoir. Day two brought no respite, and at 61-2 midway through day three, tickets for the weekend’s action seemed as irredeemable as one of the British government’s secret Santas. It was not an unfamiliar humiliation. But then came a stand worth 159 runs - and counting - over 49 overs, between England’s outlier Root, and one of his colleagues who must find a way to hold up an end long enough for belief to emerge. That teammate happened to be Malan, whose laconic technique appears as suited to Australian conditions as anywhere in the world. Australia should still win this match (WinViz gives them a 75% chance of doing so) but they will now have to earn it on a fourth, or possibly even fifth day. And Pat Cummins will have to answer the first questions of his captaincy, Nathan Lyon will have to continue his odyssey through the nervous 390s, and who knows, perhaps the hosts may yet have more Ben Stokes shaped demons to slay? Thanks to yesterday’s partnership, England can take a modicum of confidence into the rest of the tour that, if the bowling attack continues to create opportunities as they did on day two, there may be enough runs in the batting lineup to make a fist of the series after all. I don’t really know, but that’s a damn sight better than being certain of calamity so early in the summer. I’ll be back with more shortly, but if you would like to join in, you can reach me by email or Twitter (@JPHowcroft).It was not quite the grand switching on ceremony that Downing Street had anticipated for its Christmas lights. A Labour MP has admitted she unwittingly turned on the lights early after mistaking the switch for a doorbell. Carolyn Harris, MP for Swansea East, attended a meeting at No 10 last Wednesday but said that, when the door failed to open, she pressed a grey button nearby. The door then opened at the same time as the Christmas tree lit up, an hour earlier than scheduled. Ironically Boris Johnson’s first attempt at switching on the festive lights was unsuccessful in front of an audience of children who sang carols. After a countdown, footage posted on social media showed the prime minister pressing the switch only for the lights to flicker on for a second before turning off again. The lights remained on after a second press of the button. Harris told BBC Radio Wales: “I got to the door and I’m waiting for the door to open and it doesn’t. I think ‘that’s odd, I thought the door automatically opened’. “So I looked on the wall and there’s this grey box, so I think it’s a doorbell, so I press the grey box – the front door does open – but the Christmas tree lights came on at the same time. I get inside and I say ‘the tree looks lovely’ and they say ‘yes, the prime minister is going to switch them on at five o’clock for the carol service’. “So I said ‘I think you’ll find I’ve already done that’, so I had to go back outside to turn the tree lights off, which was quite funny, especially when the prime minister did turn them on an hour later and they didn’t work the first time he tried it.” Harris said she “cried laughing” with fellow MPs afterwards, adding: “I don’t know if the prime minister will be very happy that somebody beat him to it after the week he’s had.”After a breakdown in the broadcasting of the first Ashes Test normal service eventually resumed. England’s meek collapse on the fourth morning in the face of a rejuvenated Australian attack condemned them to a nine-wicket defeat and a 1-0 series deficit heading into the pink-ball encounter in Adelaide. As Marcus Harris and Marnus Labuschagne finished off a target of 20 runs in 25 minutes after lunch, the latter striding in after the fall of the promoted Alex Carey, it subjected England to their 10th defeat in their last 11 away Ashes Tests, handed Pat Cummins a first victory as captain and restored the Gabba’s status as Australia’s fortress. They may have lost to India on the ground back in January, but England? This was a seventh victory over the old enemy in their last nine encounters in Queensland as part of an unbeaten Ashes record that stretches back to 1986. “Gabbattoir” references have thankfully been light over the past week but it still deals in butchery. No wonder Cricket Australia was so keen to start this unique Ashes series on Vulture Street, despite the logistical issues thrown up by the pandemic and Queensland’s hard border. That led to a lack of engineers and technicians on the ground, with the third umpiring technology reduced throughout and even the television pictures dropping out for 25 minutes during what proved the final morning. As it happened, the gap in transmission did well not to miss a wicket on a morning that saw England lose eight of them for 77 runs in 33 overs, and bowled out for 297. This wasn’t a rushing cascade of dismissals, rather the slow, inevitable decline of a batting lineup that has regularly crumbled all year. Once Dawid Malan had become Nathan Lyon’s 400th Test victim on 82, and Joe Root edged a beautiful outswinger from Cameron Green on 89, resistance proved worryingly fleeting. There is plenty for England to stew over during the next four days although the omission of both Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad has felt overplayed in Australia. Anderson’s preparation suffered a two-week delay at the start, meaning Adelaide was a sensible target, while Broad could only really make the XI if they played a five-pronged seam attack. Given Ollie Robinson’s rapid ascent this year, the threat of Mark Wood’s pace and Chris Woakes status as the only realistic No 8, one of four was unlikely. Perhaps five seamers and bowling first was the play. It would have capitalised on the conditions, eased Ben Stokes the bowler into the tour and spared Jack Leach (13 overs, one for 103) being possibly hit out of the series already. Granted a shoddy over-rate that saw them docked five World Test Championship points and fined 100% of their match fees might have been worse, although even all-seam attacks should really be able to send down 15 overs per hour. Even bowling second, the extra seamer might have sustained the pressure on the second evening when England reduced Australia to 195 for five, their lead just 48 by that stage. Instead with the underprepared front-liners leggy by this stage, and Stokes struggling for rhythm, Travis Head lit the afterburners with 152 runs from No 5 that continued the turmoil for Leach and swelled the eventual difference to 278. Although dwelling on the attack also would also be ignoring an all-too-familiar sloppiness in the field - one that saw Rory Burns drop a dolly off Warner midway through his vital 94, and two run out chances go begging - and, most tellingly, their shortcomings with the bat. Because whichever way the decision at the toss is argued, being rolled for 147 inside two sessions - sparked when Burns was cleaned up by Mitchell Starc’s first ball - went a long way to sending the Test match on its path. Even greater intent on the fourth morning, after Root and Malan showed the way 24 hours earlier, could similarly have set up a possible first innings versus fourth innings contest. Once again it comes down to a batting line-up that has been propped up by Root’s remarkable form in 2021 and struggled to adapt to the bounce. Rain badly damaged England’s pre-series work in Queensland, so too late arrivals from the T20 World Cup, but having to face deliveries that can climb 20cm higher than back home should not have surprised a side that has been talking about this tour for two years. England’s issues should not detract from what Australia did so impressively either, be it their collective ferocity on the opening day, the resolute stand of 156 between Warner and Labuschagne on the second, or the way Cummins regrouped his side after a challenging third. This saw England resume on Saturday on 220 for two, 58 behind, with Root and Malan eyeing centuries and Josh Hazlewood nursing a side issue. Key here was the fall of three wickets before the second new ball, with the introduction of close fielders helping to end Lyon’s 326-day wait for his 400th Test wicket when Malan danced down the pitch, edged onto his pad and ballooned a catch to silly mid-off. With Root undone by late movement from Green - his hunt for a first century on Australian soil thwarted at the 19th attempt - and Ollie Pope offering an injudicious cut shot to Lyon that flew to slip, England were 234 for five, still 44 runs in arrears. Then came the blackout in pictures, during which time Ben Stokes and Jos Buttler managed to get themselves in against the new ripe Kookaburra, and chiselled the deficit down to 12 runs. But, as has so often been the case, Cummins delivered the breakthrough, some extra bounce twisting up Stokes like a pretzel on 14 as a catch flew to gully. When Hazlewood gritted his teeth to dismiss Buttler caught behind on 23, the tail could only nudge a slender lead while being summarily picked off. Carey holding his eighth catch of the match to end the innings - Woakes the last man out off Green for 16 - equalled the record number of dismissals for a wicketkeeper on Test debut. The South Australian didn’t quite get a fairytale finish of hitting the winnings, however, when he deputised to Warner up top. “We couldn’t find him,” joked Cummins at the presentation when asked about Warner’s absence with a rib injury. “We looked everywhere in the stadium. [But] we just didn’t want to risk him and he will be alright for Adelaide.” Whether England will be after their latest gutting at the Gabba remains to be seen.Banksy says he has made T-shirts that he will be selling to support four people facing trial accused of criminal damage over the toppling of a statue of slave trader Edward Colston. The anonymous artist posted on Instagram pictures of limited-edition grey souvenir T-shirts, which will go on sale on Saturday in Bristol. The shirts have a picture of Colston’s empty plinth with a rope hanging off, with debris and a discarded sign nearby and the word “Bristol” written above. He said proceeds from the sale will be given to the four people facing trial next week in the city accused of criminal damage “so they can go for a pint”. Bristol-based Banksy said sales would be limited to one per person and each T-shirt would cost £25 plus VAT. The “Colston Four” – Rhian Graham, 29, Jake Skuse, 36, and Sage Willoughby, 21, all from Bristol, and Milo Ponsford, 25, from Bishopstoke, Hampshire – are accused of “with each other and others unknown without lawful excuse” damaging the statue and plinth, a listed monument belonging to the city council. They have all pleaded not guilty to charges of criminal damage and face trial this month at Bristol crown court. The bronze memorial to the 17th-century slave merchant was pulled down during a Black Lives Matter protest on 7 June last year, before being dumped in Bristol Harbour and later recovered by Bristol city council. Colston’s legacy had for a long time been controversial in Bristol, the south-west’s most multicultural area. The city’s wealth was built on the profits of the triangle trade, which kidnapped Africans and transported them to the Americas as slaves, then shipped the cotton and sugar they produced there to Britain to fuel the industrial revolution. With Press AssociationNew South Wales has recorded the highest number of daily Covid cases since early October while Victoria reported 13 Covid deaths and 1,193 new cases on Saturday. The news came as the Aacta awards were named as a Covid exposure site after a hospitality worker at the Sydney Opera House tested positive for the virus. Victoria is now managing more than 11,400 active Covid cases. There are 323 Covid patients in Victorian hospitals, 68 of them in intensive care and 29 who require ventilation. The latest six fatalities were of people aged in their 50s-90s. The others reported on Saturday died in November. This means the total number of deaths in Victoria since the pandemic began stands at 1,414. NSW recorded 560 new Covid-19 infections and three related deaths on Saturday, with health authorities concerned that cases will continue to surge in the lead-up to Christmas. It was the highest number of daily cases in NSW since 9 October. NSW also confirmed three more cases of the Omicron variant overnight, with that number expected to rise as the results of ongoing genomic testing are finalised. This brings the state’s total number of Omicron cases to 45, of which 31 were spread via community transmission. No new cases of the Omicron variant were confirmed in Victoria on Saturday. A Sydney Opera House spokesperson told Guardian Australia on Saturday they had been advised that an “employee of a food and beverage operator who worked at the Opera House from 8-9 December has tested positive for Covid-19”. The Aacta awards were held on 8 December. “A thorough cleaning of affected areas has been carried out and we are taking all necessary steps as required by NSW Health,” the spokesperson said. “The Opera House currently has a number of measures in place in line with our Covid safety plan and our commitment to the health and safety of everyone on our site. “Opera House patrons who attended the site on those dates are not required to take any action unless advised by NSW Health via the Service NSW check-in notifications.” On Friday night, NSW Health listed two new exposure sites that had been visited by confirmed Covid-19 cases likely to have the Omicron variant. Anyone who attended the Albion Hotel in Parramatta from 4.30pm on Sunday 5 December is considered a close contact and must immediately get tested and isolate for seven to 14 days, depending on their vaccination status. Meanwhile, anyone who attended the Albion Hotel on Friday 3 December between 11am until 3am, or the Cult nightclub in Potts Point on Saturday 14 December from 9.45pm until 3am, is considered a casual contact, and must get tested and isolate until a negative result is received. There have been a number of recent outbreaks in Sydney. As of Friday, South Eastern Sydney Local Health District confirmed 17 Covid cases had attended the Golden Sheaf Hotel on 20 and 27 November. There have also been 44 cases linked to a pub trivia night held at the Oxford Tavern in Petersham on 30 November. At least 11 people who attended a weekend party boat cruise on Sydney Harbour have tested positive for the virus, at least three of them with the Omicron variant. Dr John Hall from NSW Health said authorities were “concerned about the increase of Covid-19 transmissions taking place in large social venues such as pubs, clubs and party settings”. “Transmission in these types of settings is contributing to the increase in NSW, and we reiterate just how important it is for people to not attend social functions if they have any symptoms, even if mild,” he said. The federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said on Saturday that the government was still waiting on medical advice around its response to the Omicron variant, but that the data so far looked “encouraging”. “The virus is certainly highly transmissible but perhaps not as severe as other variants,” he said. “We have not seen the mass hospitalisations in South Africa, for example. The vaccination rates are lower than a country like Australia, and there is no evidence, as yet, that the vaccine is not a defence against Omicron.” But epidemiologists are concerned that La Niña could cause a spike in Covid-19 cases, as a cool and stormy summer forces more people indoors at the same time the Omicron variant is spreading. NSW is set to ease restrictions for unvaccinated residents on Wednesday, giving them the same freedoms as those who are fully vaccinated. The state will no longer require people to wear masks indoors – other than on public transport or planes, and at the airport – regardless of their vaccination status. But Mary-Louise McLaws, a professor of epidemiology at the University of NSW and adviser to the World Health Organization, told the Guardian on Friday that it was too soon to ease restrictions and allow unvaccinated and vaccinated people to mingle unmasked in indoor venues. “It’s definitely unwise to push ahead with the relaxations,” she said. “It is so much easier to ask Australians to continue wearing a mask and to wait until we know more about Omicron, and for those who are not yet fully vaccinated to wear a mask until we know more. “It’s too cavalier to throw away these really successful infection prevention strategies.” The ACT recorded 11 new Covid infections on Saturday, meaning there are now 76 active cases in the territory. In Queensland, the health minister, Yvette D’Ath, reported one new case of community transmission on the Gold Coast, and announced changes to quarantine rules, starting January. From 1 January, fully vaccinated Queenslanders who are deemed close contacts will only have to quarantine for seven days, instead of two weeks. They will need to continue wearing a mask and avoid high-risk settings such as hospitals, aged care and correctional facilities for a further seven days, once they are released from quarantine.There are places in the Welsh hills where I’m assailed with a sense of unease. Often they are hill-passes. Below Garn Prys, the descent from Bwlch Blaen y Cwm alongside the Nant Llan-gwrach – “stream of the witch’s enclosure” – always brings an involuntary shiver; as does that from Bwlch y Ddwy Elor – “the pass of the two biers” – into Cwm Trwsgl, the “rough cwm”, and thence into Cwm Pennant. I walked this way recently in bright wintry weather and still felt a certain dread that only faded as I emerged from the cwm and started the rattly descent over slate spoil to the old tramway that contours round the western slopes of Moel Lefn and Moel Hebog. If anywhere in Wales is my milltir sgwâr, my own square mile, this is it. I lived here alone in a remote farmhouse through the most formative years of my life, walked these hills in all weathers, at all seasons. Bwlch y Ddwy Elor is one of the places I then mostly avoided. Was it just the quality of suggestion implicit in the name? Whatever it was, I’d hurry away. In Cwm Trwsgl, perhaps the physical form shapes the atmospherics? The huge, vegetated, falcon-haunted cliff that towers above the frozen llyn shadows the mountain hollow, acts as a sounding board for wind and rattle of stone. I’ve had doppelganger experiences here. Were they just amplifications of my own anxious heartbeat? Once, when hanging on a rope in the mist to clean a prospective new rock-climb on the fine, diamond-shaped slab above the pass into Beddgelert forest, all day I sensed voices drifting up from bronze age hut-circles below. Dusk thickened the mist. I coiled my ropes and hastened away. The name I gave to the climb, when completed, was the Exterminating Angel, from certain inescapably anxious moments experienced on it when faced with a fall on to boulders from the crux at 60ft. That feeling again hovered at my back this week as I gained the tramway’s sublime grassy belvedere, which contours round into Cwm Ystradllyn and a waiting car. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryGoing Out: Cinema West Side Story Out now Steven Spielberg takes on the classic musical (above), pitting Sharks against Jets in 1950s New York. His star-crossed lovers are played by Ansel Elgort and Rachel Zegler, but the real appeal here is the lavish, push-the-boat-out musical entertainment. Being the Ricardos Out now A biopic of I Love Lucy actor Lucille Ball seem like offbeat territory for the politically minded writer-director Aaron Sorkin, but when we recall Ball was investigated for her supposed Communist party membership, it all begins to make sense. Nicole Kidman and Javier Bardem star. Clifford the Big Red Dog Out now A family adventure treading similar thematic ground to Being the Ricardos in some ways, as gigantic hound Clifford is subjected to a witch-hunt by nebulous authority figures. Lamb Out now Here’s an unconventional trip to the cinema for anyone sighing that the three films above aren’t doing much to advance originality in the seventh art. Noomi Rapace stars as an Icelandic woman who adopts a part-human, part-lamb hybrid in this peculiar thriller. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Bat for Lashes batforlashes.veeps.com, 17 Dec Natasha Khan, AKA alt-pop star Bat for Lashes (below), is hosting her very own Christmas party. The livestream promises renditions of her songs performed with a string quartet, as well as special guests. There will also be “original costumes” on show, so dig out your naffest Christmas jumper. MC Tim Garland’s Lighthouse Trio Pizza Express Jazz Club, London, 11 Dec, 7pm, 10pm Jazz, folk and classically fluent reeds player Tim Garland formed the Lighthouse Trio in the 2000s with future UK contemporary jazz luminaries pianist Gwilym Simcock and eclectic drummer Asaf Sirkis. Garland reconvenes this supergroup for a one-off celebration of those adventures. John Fordham Barbican x Boiler Room Barbican Hall, London, 12 Dec Mercury-nommed singer-songwriter Berwyn is joined on this lineup of rising UK talent by the likes of multi-instrumentalist Mansur Brown and 90s R&amp;B-inspired newcomer Ojerime. Keep an eye out for genre-destroying rapper Nayana Iz, too. Michael Cragg Vespers of 1610 Barbican Hall, London, 14 Dec There are myriad ways to perform Monteverdi’s choral masterpiece, but few match the freewheeling energy and originality of Christina Pluhar and her group L’Arpeggiata. Now they bring their unique interpretation of the Vespers to the Barbican, using just one singer to each part, and improvisation an essential part of their realisation. Andrew Clements * * * Going Out: Art Prix Pictet V&amp;A, London, 16 Dec to 9 Jan As the climate crisis intensifies, this global prize for photography appositely takes “Fire” for its theme. But this is not solely an exhibition of disaster reportage – or conventional photojournalism. Christian Marclay, Sally Mann, Brent Stirton (work above) and more mix reality and imagination. Alvin Baltrop Modern Art Bury Street, London, to 22 Jan Powerful monochrome photographs of gay life around the ruinous Hudson River piers in 1970s and 80s New York. Baltrop captures casual sexual encounters against a backdrop of rusting metal and decaying warehouses. His funny, lyrical pictures are only now, after his death, getting their due. 2021 Open Exhibition Gallagher and Turner gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne, to 22 Jan Lockdown led many people to take up art, so this is a chance to see the creativity it uncovered in north-east England. It’s got everything from a clay creature called Ugly Bird by the sculptor Julia Roxburgh to Steve Dales’s intriguing painting of toes poking out from a blue silk sheet. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage Best of Enemies Young Vic, London, to 22 Jan No panto here! Instead, a new play from political powerhouse James Graham. Set in 1960s America, it focuses on an electric series of televised debates between conservative William F Buckley Jr and liberal Gore Vidal. Charles Edwards and David Harewood star. She Loves Me Crucible theatre, Sheffield, to 15 Jan This Christmas musical from the songwriters of Fiddler on the Roof is directed by musical maestro Robert Hastie. The story unfolds in a parfumerie in a Hungarian town: is that the whiff of romance in the air? Miriam Gillinson Live at Christmas Birmingham Town Hall, 14 Dec; The Forum, Bath, 15 Dec For standup fans and lovers of efficient cultural consumption, a festive show featuring four of the country’s best comics. David O’Doherty and Lou Sanders provide inimitable oddness, Phil Wang fuses the cerebral with the scatological, while John Robins mines uncomfortable emotions for laughs. Rachel Aroesti Carmen Edinburgh International Conference Centre, 17 Dec &amp; 18 Dec The brilliant and surprising ballerina Natalia Osipova takes on the lead role in a contemporary version of Carmen by the choreographer Didy Veldman, joined by Jason Kittelberger and Isaac Hernández. Lyndsey Winship * * * Staying In: Streaming Landscapers Available now, Sky Go and Now Olivia Colman and David Thewlis have spent the past 16 years getting away with murder in this darkly comic drama (above), inspired by a real double killing long concealed in a Mansfield garden. Directed by the multitalented Will Sharpe, expect more than just a grisly true-crime caper. David Baddiel: Social Media, Anger and Us 13 Dec, 9pm, BBC Two Having focused on unsavoury internet interactions in his recent tour, Trolls: Not the Dolls, Baddiel deep-dives into online hate, cancel culture and the real-world repercussions of social media discourse. He doesn’t get many answers, but the comic is certainly asking the right questions. I Literally Just Told You 16 Dec, 10pm, Channel 4 Masterminded by Richard Bacon and presented by Jimmy Carr, this new gameshow will not rely on the same old tired general knowledge questions; to win, the contestants will also be quizzed on events that have occurred since the show began filming, from banter to celebrity cameos. The Witcher 17 Dec, Netflix Streaming platforms seem fixated on fantasy adaptations – and that’s partly due to the phenomenal success of The Witcher. Henry Cavill’s titular monster-hunter returns for more questing in this drama based on Polish writer Andrzej Sapkowski’s books. RA * * * Staying In: Games Trash Sailors Out Thur, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, PC, Nintendo Switch You and a few friends try to keep a ramshackle raft afloat while madcap things happen in this hand-drawn sailing game (above). Potentially a real friendship-ruiner, just like actual sailing. Startup Panic Out now, PC, Android, iOS It’s nearly a new year! Quit your job, be your own boss and start a company from your bedroom! It’s all good until the global tech CEOs start sabotaging you in this absorbing wee sim game. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Jlin – Embryo Out now Electronic music contortionist Jlin (above) has had a busy 18 months or so. She recorded a set for the Met museum in New York, worked with Martin Gore, and remixed Beethoven. While work continues on her third album, she’s created this four-track EP. Juice WRLD – Fighting Demons Out now Released alongside Juice WRLD: Into the Abyss, a documentary charting the life and tragic death of the Chicago rapper (below) in 2019, Fighting Demons marks his estate’s second posthumous release and offers an uncomfortable insight into his life. Angèle – Nonante-Cinq Out now Huge in her native Belgium and in France, singer-songwriter Angèle came to global attention last year due to Fever, her sleek single with Dua Lipa. She returns with her second album, led by the sophisticated synthpop of Bruxelles Je T’Aime. Green Day – The BBC Sessions Out now The evergreen pop-punkers have raided the BBC’s archives for this 16-track run-through of their live sessions at Maida Vale Studios. It spans their early career from 1994’s Dookie to 2000’s more experimental Warning. MC * * * Staying In: Brain food Deck the Hallmark Podcast Christmas is nearly upon us and that means bingeing straight-to-TV Christmas films. This zany podcast sees its three hosts reviewing trashy holiday movies to reveal their inner wisdom – such as the ethics of time travel in A Christmas Treasure. Why Movies Tilt the Camera Like This vox.com Beloved of film noir and, for some reason, the first Thor film, the wonky Dutch camera angle used to portray jeopardy is the focus of this fascinating explainer from Vox. We learn how it originated from expressionist art. Welcome to Earth Available now, Disney+ Will Smith leaves the film studio behind and does his best Bear Grylls impression in this travelogue, produced by Darren Aronofsky. He journeys to some of the most extreme landscapes on earth, from volcanic terrain to the tropics. Ammar KaliaWhen my mother installed solar photovoltaic panels on her roof in the Scottish borders, I was sceptical that they would produce much energy. But in the decade or so she has had them they have easily paid their way. Now research in the journal Weather confirms what my mother already knows: it’s not just hot countries that can harvest solar energy. We are going to need solar energy to reach net zero, so it is important we find the best places to situate solar farms. Cloudy locations are pretty hopeless, for obvious reasons, but places that tend to be cold, sunny and breezy (like much of the UK and Ireland) are surprisingly good. Cool temperatures and a gentle wind help to prevent the panels from overheating, optimising efficiency. “Even though these locations are not known for their sunny climate, long daylight hours during summer can still generate large amounts of solar energy,” write Eadaoin Doddy Clarke and Conor Sweeney, of University College Dublin. So where should we put these solar farms? Previous research has shown that cropland and grassland areas tend to have the greatest potential for solar energy; after all, that is why the plants grow so well there. But that doesn’t mean we have to lose farmland: experiments have shown that crops can be grown successfully underneath solar panels.The big cherry tree in the garden clung to its yellowing foliage throughout the damp, still autumn, then shed the lot in two days. Beyond the branches lie vistas unseen for months. I spend a half-hour watching a man repoint a chimney 100 metres away. I switch over to check on a loft extension going up nearby, just by swivelling in my chair. I don’t do this because I have nothing else to do; I do it because I have too much else to do. Once it gets dark there is nothing to watch. My wife and I sit in front of the TV, taking turns to change channels. We use the other remote to swap between the two black boxes that provide different, if largely overlapping, programme selections. “Why aren’t we watching this?” my wife says, showing me a text recommendation from a friend. “We don’t have that,” I say. “I thought we had everything,” she says. “Our package doesn’t include that channel,” I say. “I can’t believe there’s nothing on,” she says. “What about that other thing?” “I know the exact thing you’re talking about,” I say. “The critically acclaimed thing.” “Yes,” she says. “We don’t have that either. We’d have to download the app, open an account, and pay,” I say. “Oh,” my wife says, crushed. “Or,” I say, “we could sign up for a free trial, watch the shit out of it for seven days and then cancel.” “Yes,” she says. “Let’s do that.” After an hour’s investigation with the remote in one hand and my phone in the other, followed by a mildly humiliating consultation with our youngest son, I concede defeat. “What’s the problem?” my wife says. “The problem is the smaller of the black boxes – let’s call it Box B,” I say. “It’s too primitive to support the relevant app, which is a bit of a dead end. Unless.” “Unless what?” “Unless we get a new box for £40, opening ourselves up to a whole new world of costly viewing.” “That sounds like a complete waste of money,” my wife says. “I agree,” I say. “And that’s before we even start signing up to … oops!” “Oops what?” “I accidentally pressed Buy Now.” The next morning the chimney man is gone, his repointing work evidently completed. I can hear someone using a saw on a nearby roof, but my line of sight is obstructed by a large and still leafy oak. It is immensely frustrating; I have no choice but to work. In the afternoon a small package arrives for me: the new Box B. It takes me until nightfall to connect it to the television and the internet, before I encounter a major stumbling block. The old Box B, I learn, was linked to an account that belonged to my wife. “What was the password?” I say. “For what?” she says. We spend a further half-hour trying the kinds of passwords my wife favoured in 2015, before hitting on it. “The two exclamation points at the end,” she says, “that was for security.” Downloading the relevant app is simple, but signing up for the service is a task has to be completed on another device, which proves insurmountable. I call the middle one. He picks up his mother’s iPad and sets to work. “It says you’ve already used your free trial,” he says. “Did I?” my wife says. “When?” “In 2019,” he says. “Have you been paying since then?” “I don’t know,” my wife says. “You’ve spent two years paying for a service we were technologically incapable of accessing?” I say. “Possibly,” she says, smiling. But it proves not to be the case. A fresh account is created, after which the middle one drops the iPad on the sofa and leaves the room. “Ready to start the seven days?” I say, thumb hovering over the remote. “Are you joking?” my wife says. “It’s half past 10. I’m going to bed.” Left alone with the new box, I try to find something else to watch, maybe a channel devoted to people working on chimneys. This proves impossible. Eventually I go upstairs to the youngest one’s room. “Sorry if this sounds insane,” I say. “But do we have a password for Channel 4?” The level gaze he fixes on me is withering in its mockery, without giving even a hint of whether the answer is yes or no.Knitwear is a winter staple – but just because it’s practical, doesn’t mean it has to be drab. Colour is a good place to start. Brights such as geranium pink or primrose yellow are easy to wear, because they look good with other winter favourites – jeans and colours like black, charcoal and khaki. Premium brands often experiment with knitwear. Rent designs like the Shrimps jumper or the floral pattern by Peter Pilotto – they can be worn for a day at work, but are special enough to transition to the evening, too. The real prizes might be discovered in vintage stores. In decades past, knitwear tended to be more fun. So wearing something like 1980s pastels, 90s sportswear or a classic 60s après-ski-ready fair isle will ensure you exude festive spirit, too. Lauren Cochrane * * * Buy Green colourblock, £115, kitristudio.com This knit is a modern way to wear colour. Yellow turtleneck, £180, samsoe.com Wear a bright chunky polo neck with a midi skirt and knee-high boots. Pink embellished, £110, boden.co.uk An embellished jumper should be your go-to for the festive period. * * * Rent Diamond print, from £69 for a month, onloan.co A classic style by Joseph that will never be out of fashion. Floral embellished, from £24 for four days, mywardrobehq.com Rent this embellished Peter Pilotto showstopper for festive drinks. Cream with flowers, £29 for four days, rotaro.co.uk By Shrimps. Style this white jumper by Shrimps with jeans and black boots. * * * Thrift it Cream fair isle, £8, thrift.plus A traditional winter classic. White turtleneck, £37, beyondretro.com Embrace the 1980s with a pastel-patterned polo neck. Blue-and pink-patterned, £65, stcyrvintage.co.uk Vintage and oversized is having a style moment.April on Jake What were you hoping for? Someone based in London with similar interests, who was laid-back but up for trying new things. First impressions? He seemed very friendly, but a bit nervous at first. What did you talk about? The usual family, work, where we live, then moved onto to how awkward it is to be photographed, how he’d never been on a bus and my hatred of mushrooms. Any awkward moments? When he said he was a little old-fashioned about some things. He also wasn’t 100% sure what a vegan was. Good table manners? Yes. He is a slower eater than me. Best thing about Jake? He was very laid-back and easy to chat to. We didn’t run out of conversation and it was a nice evening. Would you introduce him to your friends? Probably not, I don’t think they would have a lot in common. Describe Jake in three words? Friendly, chatty, sweet. What do you think he made of you? I think we got on well, so hopefully he thought I was good company. He was quite complimentary and kept the conversation going. Did you go on somewhere? No. And … did you kiss? No. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? I probably wouldn’t have stayed for the last drink, since it was a work night. Marks out of 10? 5/10. Would you meet again? No for me. Jake on April What were you hoping for? A nice evening with great food and even better company. First impressions? April looked very nice and had a friendly smile. What did you talk about? We spoke about our work, where we both had lived, Harry Potter, cocktails and, of course, Marvel. Any awkward moments? Yes, when April revealed that she had never seen a single Star Wars film … Good table manners? Very good. Best thing about April? She has a great sense of humour. Would you introduce her to your friends? Definitely! Though after hearing my rugby stories, she may not want to meet them… Describe April in three words? Polite, likable, affable. What do you think she made of you? I would like to think nothing too negative. Maybe she thought I was chatty and enthusiastic? Did you go on somewhere? We did not. My last train home was fast approaching and both April and I had work the next day. And … did you kiss? On this occasion, we didn’t. But we did hug. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? The evening went well. I enjoyed myself and I hope April did too. I wouldn’t change anything. Marks out of 10? 8.5/10. (I took off points for the Star Wars thing.) Would you meet again? Yes, but as friends. April and Jake ate at Le Garrick, London WC2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comReel Stories: Sting 9.25pm, BBC Two A cheerfully nostalgic documentary that sees Gordon Sumner, AKA Sting, the former geordie primary school teacher made good, sit down with Dermot O’Leary in an empty cinema and ponder some nicely chosen clips telling the story of his life. There’s a formative trip to New York. A play-fight with one of his Police bandmates that starts to look a little bit more fight than play. The once-in-a-lifetime buzz of Live Aid. And, eventually, a Police reunion, with decidedly mixed feelings all round. Phil Harrison Strictly Come Dancing 7.05pm, BBC One At time of writing, the delightful Rose Ayling-Ellis was the bookies’ favourite. But by this stage in the contest, anything can happen. The competition has been of an exceptionally high standard this year – as Tess Daly and Claudia Winkleman present the semi-final, a spot in next week’s final feels achievable for almost everyone. PH 48 Hours to Victory 8.25pm, Channel 4 More military history from that renowned military historian Dermot O’Leary, this week examining the 48 hours before the Battle of the Somme. O’Leary visits a reconstructed trench and meets the descendants of a soldier who survived the carnage. Meanwhile, Lucy Betteridge-Dyson meets a bomb disposal team who are still uncovering shells. PH The Mountbattens: A Scandalous Marriage 9.25pm, Channel 5 When the great-grandson of Queen Victoria married a millionaire heiress in 1922 they became a formidable power couple. But Louis Mountbatten and Edwina Ashley’s union was an open marriage that generated endless society gossip, even if their social clout kept most indiscretions out of the papers. This film revisits the torrid story. Graeme Virtue Capital Jingle Bell Ball 2021 10pm, Sky Max If you somehow failed to secure a ticket to this pair of sell-out popaganzas at London’s O2 Arena, Sky has two highlights packages – there’s another on Sunday night at 10pm. On the bill across the weekend are Coldplay, Years and Years, Lil Nas X, Ed Sheeran and Justin Bieber. Jack Seale The Jonathan Ross Show 10.05pm, ITV An intriguingly motley crew of guests this week, as Usain Bolt, Joanna Lumley, Holly Willoughby, Jamie Dornan and Shalom Brune-Franklin (Our Girl, Line of Duty) settle down on Wossy’s armchairs. Damon Albarn of Blur and Gorillaz fame provides the soundtrack to this most random of TV chatshow gatherings. Hannah J Davies Film choice Wild Rose (Tom Harper, 2019), 9pm, Film4 For those unable to catch Jessie Buckley on stage in London in Cabaret, this 2019 film is more than enough evidence of her singing talent. She plays Rose-Lynn, a would-be country singer released from prison and returning to her two young children in Glasgow. The strain between her desire to make it big in Nashville and her parental responsibilities is constant, and her mother (a nicely underplaying Julie Walters) is left to deal with the fallout. Buckley is exceptional here, in her element on stage but giving coherence to Rose-Lynn’s wilfully destructive streak off it. Simon Wardell Kill Bill: Volume 1 (Quentin Tarantion, 2013), 9pm, TCM Movies You could never accuse Quentin Tarantino of cinematic restraint, and his 2003 action film (split into two halves) is the apogee of his maximalist approach. Largely a homage to the Shaw Brothers’ martial arts films, but also chucking in blaxploitation movies, spaghetti westerns, the samurai genre and anime, it stars Uma Thurman as the yellow-jumpsuited Bride. Betrayed and left for dead by her fellow assassin squad members, she takes revenge in bloody fashion. Vivica A Fox and Lucy Liu are her targets in a stunning flurry of slicing and dicing. SW Live sport Champions Cup Rugby Union: Cardiff Rugby v Toulouse 12.30pm, BT Sport 2. From Cardiff Arms Park. The first of four back-to-back live games today. Premier League Football: Norwich v Man Utd 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From Carrow Road. Test Cricket: Australia v England 11.30pm, BT Sport 1. The final day of the opening Test.I have bundles of cash stuffed into my socks, and my passport strapped flat against my chest. The passport has a dangerous word in it: reporter. This is the reason I am in disguise, holding a bundle of clothes and sitting in a wheelbarrow in the middle of a huge crowd trying to cross through a Taliban checkpoint into Pakistan. Dozens of people are arriving at the border town of Spin Boldak each minute from across the country. The main focus of the Taliban and international forces is Kabul airport where a chaotic evacuation is under way. Spin Boldak is the only other way to get out of Afghanistan. A Reuters reporter was killed by the Taliban in the same town in July. Taliban fighters with black turbans are beating people with pipes; they keep opening and closing their part of the border as people push each other to get out. As I am pushed towards the border, I think about the dreams and memories I have left behind in Herat, the city in western Afghanistan I have called home for about 10 years. It is 20 August 2021 and Afghanistan has fallen, once more, to the Taliban. As I inch towards freedom, I don’t know when, if ever, I will be able to come back. The fall happened very quickly. The Taliban took over most of the countryside in May, after Joe Biden said all US forces would withdraw by the 20th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks. On 5 August, I told my editors in London that the situation in the south-western province of Nimroz did not sound good. The following day, the first provincial capital fell to the Taliban, and the entire country was on the brink. Seven chaotic days followed as I reported the fall of province after province, updating stories through the night. I hear one sentence a lot: “Kabul did not send help.” Herat fell into Taliban hands on 12 August; Kabul three days later. *** I was born in Iran, but grew up there as a refugee. My grandparents left Afghanistan in 1980 after the Soviet Union’s invasion. I spent my childhood in a refugee camp in a city south of Tehran, where some of my relatives still live today. Last year, the camp got a telecommunications tower, and now its residents can video call from their houses rather than having to drive somewhere 30 minutes away. When I returned to Afghanistan a decade ago, to go to high school and study journalism at the government-funded university in Herat, I realised I liked to tell people’s stories. In the first week of my course, a friend and I launched a student magazine that, with the backing of university officials, we published weekly. In August 2017, I began contributing reports on the war in Afghanistan for the Guardian from Herat. The war seemed to produce a different atrocity every day, but I liked the work, telling the world what was happening in Afghanistan – to make people think about it. I never thought I would be leaving in such circumstances – taking nothing with me, with no opportunity to say goodbye to many of my friends, who were themselves looking for ways to get out – just for telling the truth through my career. Before my dash to the Pakistan border, Herat was besieged by the Taliban for more than a month, with fighters attacking security forces and trying to break through the frontlines almost every night. The actual frontline of war is only a 10-minute drive from downtown. We frequently check on our friends. My phone rings after each explosion. As the Taliban close in, many of my friends delete their social media accounts to remove any trace of anti-Taliban posts. After dark, we watch American B-52 bombers flying over the city, and one night hear huge explosions in the distance, probably airstrikes against the Taliban positions. If the Americans were hitting the Taliban, we later ask ourselves, how did they take over the city in a matter of hours? I refuse to leave because the story is right here, and I want to tell the world what life looks like in a city besieged by extremists. The price of goods rises every day. Some government employees are being told to hide important documents. Reporting becomes even more challenging. To file stories to London I have to switch between several sim cards as the Taliban have destroyed most of the internet lines in Islam Qala, the border town with Iran where the internet infrastructure is located. I find myself spending hours on the roof of my flat, trying to get a better signal, to work out what is happening in a country that has become a battlefield. While talking with local officials around the country over the phone, I often hear heavy gunfire as they try to resist the Taliban; sometimes they tell me they will “defend” Afghanistan, but some switch sides and join them hours after talking to me. Herat has almost no power because the electricity lines have been damaged in the crossfire. I go to a cafe with a generator, hoping to charge my phone and laptop, but its doors are shut; they only allow in people they know. There is a 10pm government curfew to contend with. Nights are hot and dark, and often filled with the sound of explosions. *** It’s the morning of Thursday 12 August and I’m reporting on the fall of Ghazni, a city 150km south of the capital. The Taliban are advancing towards Kabul; they have also taken some main government buildings in Helmand overnight, as well as Kandahar prison. I buy a spare phone. The Taliban have a record of checking mobile phones, so mine, a three-year-old Samsung Android that is full of foreign contacts, could be deadly. As I walk around, the city feels deserted. Shops are shut and the roads full of Afghan army Humvees. But I am used to seeing it like this; Herat has been completely militarised since early July. For more than a month, almost everyone has been walking around with a gun on their shoulder, as street clashes grip southern parts of the city. I go back to my house and update the Guardian’s foreign desk about the situation in several other conflict-stricken provinces. I ring officials in Helmand; they are concerned, the Taliban are freely walking around Helmand’s police headquarters. Sitting by a window with my laptop on a pillow in front of me, I report on the fall of my country, with a view of the street and a soundtrack of trucks rumbling past. By the afternoon, Taliban militants have closed in on Herat’s main government offices, and I can hear heavy gunfire nearby. Within a few hours, the shots get closer. The Taliban have broken through the frontline of the city, which Afghan security forces and local uprising forces have been trying to hold for more than a month. *** Email to the Guardian foreign desk, 16.04, 12 August Taliban are inside Herat city, Herat may fall soon. I’m moving to a safer place. I may need to destroy my laptop and phone. *** I put my laptop into a backpack, and prepare to go out and find a rickshaw that will take me towards the provincial governor’s compound, and from there to a friend’s house in the city’s safer southern part, away from the provincial prison and intelligence headquarters, which are near my home. But before leaving, I get a call from a journalist at another British newspaper. He is worried about the potential “flood of Afghan migrants to the west”, and asks me to help him draw a map showing smuggling routes. I tell him to listen to the gunfire, that the city is falling and I am trying to leave before the Taliban can get close to the jail and release their imprisoned fighters. “But I’ll pay you,” he says, calmly. When I reach the governor’s office, the war has already arrived. People are driving on the wrong side of the road, and rushing away to avoid getting shot; gunfire can be heard in all directions. The hot summer wind is blowing sand and rubbish across the streets. A Taliban fighter in one corner cradles a machine gun, while another holds a belt of bullets for him. They fire towards the compound as other fighters advance. In Afghanistan, whoever has control over the provincial governor’s office controls the entire province. I’m frightened, and so is the rickshaw driver. We can see people running back as rounds of bullets throw a cloud of dust up into the sky. I realise I have no other option but to continue if I want to reach my friend’s house. The sound of gunfire is overwhelming: bullets rain down from all sides, and I feel in constant danger of being shot. Life suddenly feels very cheap. The driver keeps going towards the compound. Then, just before we reach it, we change direction and head via a nearby park, where I had been for a relaxed gathering with friends only two days before. Finally, I reach my friend’s home. Then the explosions start, followed by a mass retreat. More than a dozen government Humvees and 4x4s speed towards the city centre. Minutes later, the Taliban motorcycles arrive. The neighbourhood has fallen. I hear someone say: “Raise the flag.” *** Email to the Guardian foreign desk, 19.17, 12 August Huge: Taliban took over several key parts of the city. Police HQ fell, they are freely walking in it. Huge explosions inside the city. They are advancing towards the prison … The entire city is on fire. That night, on the roof of my friend’s home, I watch the sky over the city light up as the Taliban fire celebratory rounds into the air. I think about what the provincial governor said that morning: that the city was secure and would not fall. He and his forces retreated after a few hours of fighting. *** Email to the Guardian foreign desk, 20.38, 12 August Subject: Herat falls to the Taliban Only intelligence headquarters is resisting now. They broke into the prison, released thousands of inmates. They also captured governor compound. I can report that Herat city falls to the Taliban. I’m also hearing reports about fall of Kandahar and Helmand. I’ll be updating. After this, two sources tell me “Helmand falls” and “Kandahar will fall in the coming hours.” *** On Friday 13 August, I wake up after two hours’ sleep and walk through the downtown area of Herat, from Darwaza Malik Square to the governor’s compound. Taliban gunmen have flooded into the city, patrolling with captured US army Ranger vehicles and Humvees, laughing and congratulating each other. Their joy is in sharp contrast to the deep grief of the city’s people at the disappearance of 20 years of achievements and freedom. I can see the loss in their eyes. For now, Kabul and about half of the country’s provincial capitals are still under government control. Taliban fighters are advancing in Mazar-i-Sharif, the biggest city in the north. I find myself walking through a Taliban patrol, treading on pieces of glass from windows blown out by explosions. I am wearing a Kandahari hat and long shalwar kameez – traditional Afghan clothes – to avoid their attention. Elsewhere in the city, hundreds of government employees clamour to obtain the “public amnesty” forms that the new rulers are offering to members of the old guard, to buy trust. Many are sceptical, seeing it as a way to identify the former ruling class and then take revenge. While walking among them, I wonder at how a modern army could be defeated by people on motorcycles wearing sandals and carrying broken and mostly old weapons. They entered the city as if they had been at the gates waiting for the call, with music playing from loudspeakers on their pickup trucks. Now, suddenly, there are men with beards and white Taliban flags everywhere. I sit down in front of an ice-cream shop, in the downtown area of Herat, and watch them continue to flow into the city. This part of the city is usually crowded with men, women and children, but now, at 11am, I can see no ordinary people. The girls and women disappeared from the city streets in a matter of hours; half of society now effectively behind bars. Happiness has deserted Herat. *** Two days later, I return to my house. It has been hit by several bullets. The windows are smashed, and there are pieces of glass on the pillow I’d been using to balance my laptop on. One of the bullets has hit the window I usually sit by. If I had been there, the bullet would have hit me in the back. I don’t know whether my home was the target or just caught in crossfire. From then, my only contact with the Guardian in London is checking in daily at 8am and 8pm to let them know I am safe. Desperate efforts are underway by senior members of staff to secure safe passage out of Taliban territory for journalists and translators, including me. By 15 August, the entire country, except for Kabul airport and Panjshir valley, has fallen to the Taliban. On 19 August, the decision is made that I should leave on the first available bus. The next evening I find myself on the road to Kandahar, the biggest city in the south of Afghanistan, and the Taliban’s traditional stronghold. I have been reading Jason Burke’s 2006 book On the Road to Kandahar, about reporting on conflict in the Islamic world. Following his lead, I stuff cash into my socks. *** Texts to colleagues in London. After midnight, 20 August I’m safe in Shindand. I’m already in Helmand as I can see lights of camp Bastion. Safe *** I don’t tell them about the many checkpoints along the highway, to avoid worrying them. Neither do I tell them about the Taliban man telling me: “Kholi vo makh di na sara vaei” – that my Kandahari hat and my face don’t match. I am speechless with fright. I thought I looked like one of them. I tell the Taliban man in Pashto that I am going to a relative’s home in Kandahar and have owned this hat for as long as I can remember. He moves on and says something similar to someone a few seats away. On the road to Kandahar, I think about what has happened, and how quickly. I had so many hopes for myself in Herat. Some of my friends and I were planning to open a cafe for university students: we had a business plan, and had even searched for premises just two months ago. I think about my memories of the city, the park over the hill, the afternoons spent there. I think about my years at the university. I have left my degree certificates behind. I have memories from every inch of this city, and I am leaving it in the knowledge that I might never get back. In Herat I felt free, something I’d never experienced in Iran. I know this city better than any other place in the world. It is part of me. The rest of the journey is torture. The road has been battered by roadside bomb explosions from the war, and every 100 metres or so the bus bounces in and out of holes. I need to sleep, but keep getting woken by the shaking. I arrive in Kandahar at about 4am. I go up to the roof of a bus station to try to rest and read my emails in a safe place. There is some good news: an email from the Chevening scholarship programme, telling me that I have been selected to study international journalism at the University of Kent. I had been to the British embassy in Kabul to be interviewed for the place in March. I had promised my friends in Herat a dinner in a luxury hotel if I won the scholarship. It dawns on me that this is now impossible. After half an hour, I leave in a taxi for Spin Boldak. It is dawn and I can see Taliban flags everywhere in Kandahar. It strikes me that this is a modern place, at least in comparison with other Afghan cities. The Taliban left this city in ruins 20 years ago, and they have now returned to a metropolis, ready to be governed. At checkpoints, their fighters sit on chairs in the middle of empty roads. They glance at passengers’ faces, and then let the drivers go. I finally arrive at the Pakistani border after two hours of driving through Kandahar and am confronted by a scene of complete chaos: thousands of desperate people running, rushing and pushing each other to try to cross into Pakistan. Children are screaming, the dust in the air is unbearable, and Taliban fighters are beating people with pipes. I’m nearly 2 metres (6ft 5in) tall. I wonder how I can sneak through this chaos inconspicuously. A man in his 30s with a short beard and a wheelbarrow comes up to me. “Do you want to cross?” he asks. I pretend I don’t hear him, but he keeps offering me a passage. Ten minutes later, I find myself sitting in his wheelbarrow being pushed through the crowd. His plan is to say I am a patient in dire need of care, in the hope of getting me into Pakistan without a visa. The man is a smuggler, who will sneak people into Pakistan for about £2. As I am pushed through the crowds of desperate families, I can’t stop thinking about my family, my lovely sisters, although they are in a relatively safe country far from me. The air is hot and full of dust; I can feel it on my teeth and face. I know that my colleagues in London will be worried. Hours have passed since my last message to them. After more than three hours, I cross to Pakistan. Sitting in the wheelbarrow, I notice Pakistani forces are banning Hazara people from entering the country. Hazaras are the most discriminated against minority in Afghanistan. They have always been attacked and murdered by the Taliban and Islamic State. Speaking Pashto, a language that few Hazaras speak well, is a privilege on the border. I see about 10 Hazara people, including women and children with masks on, a rare sight here, where everyone thinks only about getting into Pakistan and no one cares about Covid. Pakistani border forces push them back. A girl in a yellow shirt, about eight years old, screams. Others plead with the border forces to let them go. My wheelbarrow moves on, my driver telling me to pretend to be sick. As soon as I cross to Pakistan, I buy a big bottle of water, I’m extremely thirsty and drink most of it. *** Last message to London before going offline Just crossed into Pakistan, but, wow. I have never ever ever seen such a scene, even in movies. Main story is here, not at the Kabul airport. Thousands of people, women, men, children, rushing, running, pushing each other. Children scream, Taliban beat with pipe. Air full of dust. I was lucky. Paid 500 rupees to a man, he put me into a carriage, pretending to be an emergency patient. Could cross after 3 hours. Unbelievable *** The Guardian has arranged a car to move me from the border to the city of Quetta, but with my patchy internet connection (I have to log out of my email account after sending each message, for security reasons) I am unaware of this. Instead, I climb into a rickshaw and head to the centre of Chaman, the border town on the Pakistani side. From there, I take a taxi to Quetta. Even deep inside Pakistan, I can still see Taliban flags and convoys everywhere. In Quetta I walk around, exhausted, for three of the worst hours of my life. I desperately search for a phone to call the Guardian and tell them that I have arrived. I haven’t eaten for more than 24 hours. Nobody will sell me a sim card, or rent me a hotel room, as I don’t have a visa in my passport. They won’t lend me their phones for any price. Eventually, a hotel owner relents and I use his phone to call a contact in Islamabad. His friends pick me up. I spend the afternoon with a friend of my contact, before he arrives in the evening. As soon as I am able to, I charge my phone and open my emails. I feel guilty for the worry I’ve caused. To straighten out the paperwork, we drive back to Chaman the next morning. With a letter from the Guardian, I obtain my Pakistan visa, valid for 30 days. In the hotel in Quetta, I celebrate my safe journey with the team in London on a video call. The next day I fly to Islamabad. And it is here, on 6 September, exactly one month after I reported the fall of the first provincial capital, that I cover the fall of Panjshir, the very last hope for millions of Afghans. *** Four weeks after entering Pakistan, I am at Islamabad airport, ready to leave for London. But even here, nothing is straightforward. At passport control, everyone with an Afghan passport is being questioned and referred to management. Because I don’t have a visa, just an entry stamp on my passport, I am sent to a more senior officer. By this point I am nervous, staring at a big clock on a wall as it inches closer to the 3am departure time, and answering to a man in his 40s with a trimmed beard and a big thick moustache. I explain to him that I am a reporter for the Guardian, as is written on my entry stamp to Pakistan. He calls people and types on his computer before, finally – after seeing the Guardian’s letter to the Pakistani immigration office – he allows me to pass. I am the very last person to board. Ten hours later, the plane touches down in London. *** In August, when I was running through bullets and explosions, seeing the fall of Herat and Afghanistan with my own eyes, all I was thinking about was whether a bullet or piece of shrapnel might have my name on it. I could never have imagined that three months later I’d be walking through the streets of London with my Guardian colleagues, enjoying the rain and good conversation. People in Islamabad often talked to me about my “escape” from Afghanistan, but I can’t stand the word. I did not escape Herat. I wanted to stay and report. I will never “escape” my beloved city; my own memories, achievements, hopes, friends. The war correspondent Anthony Loyd was right when he wrote in one of his books that “when an aircraft suddenly plucks you from a war situation and deposits you into the confusing slipstream of peace it leaves you very alone”. This feeling of loneliness is particularly oppressive when you have no one around to talk to. Now, I still struggle to get my thoughts straight. Sometimes I hear a voice asking for help. Some nights, I am plagued by nightmares about being shot or stabbed, though I’m not scared of death, and find I cannot sleep for more than a few hours. Very small things make me happy, angry or sad. I have a constant headache. When I hear police or ambulance sirens, or even a knock on the door, I become nervous. My hair is falling out. I don’t feel comfortable being out, but when I stay in my room I don’t feel any better. A lot of the time, I don’t eat. My phone is always on silent – I find that any notification, even from other people’s phones, makes me nervous. I hope these feelings will pass. When I read a few paragraphs of this story to a lovely American friend who lives near me, she cries, hugs me and says how horrible it must be to live in a war zone. As an American, she sometimes feels guilty for what has happened to Afghanistan, but I try to convince her that whatever decisions her politicians take have nothing to do with her. As a journalist, I have spoken to parents who have lost their children, sought out witnesses to explosions and atrocities. I have written about newborn babies shot dead, and teenage girls and boys who have witnessed their parents’ murder. But reporting on conflict is still something I love to do. I spent years in a refugee camp that had no running water and electricity. Looking back, I can remember witnessing so many incidents that, had a reporter been around, would have ended up on the front pages of world newspapers. I became a journalist to try to tell the stories of people who are rarely heard. I have made a career reporting on war, but what I always wanted to report on was peace. Peace is an emotional word for every Afghan; we have no sense of how it would actually look. It is in every Afghan’s destiny to witness war. A deadly guarantee to every generation.Brussels sprouts grow in nodules attached to the side of a tall stem with a cluster of leaves perched on top. The stem and tops are usually left to compost in the field or fed to farm animals, but both are edible. The tops, in particular, are delicious – sweet and fragrant, like the best spring cabbage – so it’s both fun and frugal to buy the plant whole. Roasted, it makes a grand centrepiece for the festive table. You can buy whole plants (ie with the sprouts on the stem and the top attached) and sprout tops at good greengrocers, farmers’ markets and box schemes. Keep your purchase somewhere cold, otherwise plan to cook it within 24 hours; alternatively, remove the sprouts and top, and store unwashed in the crisper drawer of the fridge for up to a week. If your brussels start to wilt or spoil, roast them as in today’s recipe, cooking them on a high heat until they char around the edges and turn bitter and delicious. Roast sprouts and sprout tops with pomegranate molasses, orange and chilli This is a delicious way to use up past-their-best sprouts and sprout tops. The bittersweet sprouts, super-sweet pomegranate molasses and sharp oranges make for a dreamy combination of flavours, while the chilli brings the whole dish to life. I like to roast sprout tops until they are well charred, so they turn crisp on the outside and chewy and caramelised on the inside. If you prefer less colour, roast them at 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 for half an hour instead, until soft and how you like them. While I was working on this column, Harry Dyer and Sam Best at wholesale grocer Shrub Provisions put up a post on their Instagram with a caption that read: “Topping or pruning the top of ... sprout or kalette stems ensures the plant matures at the same time, producing abundant and well-formed sprouts or kalettes. Only relatively recently have the often discarded tops made it to markets and kitchens, which is a shame and a revelation.” I rang Harry to find out more, and he described the tops as huge, mild-tasting brussels sprouts and added that even if you don’t like sprouts, you will probably like sprout tops, because they are milder than sprouts or cabbage. He especially likes them blanched, chargrilled and dipped in (or dressed in) hollandaise sauce. Serves 4 as a side dish 1 brussels sprout top, or 300g brussels sprouts 2 tbsp olive oil 2 tbsp pomegranate molasses, plus extra to serve Sea salt 40g chopped nuts – hazelnuts, almonds, walnuts To serve Plain yoghurt (plant-based or dairy) 1 orange cut into slices Chilli flakes Heat the oven to 210C (190C fan)/410F/gas 6½. Cut the sprout top in half vertically from top to bottom and put in a roasting tray. Drizzle evenly with the oil and molasses, then season with a pinch of sea salt; if you’re using regular sprouts, too, cut them in half, then toss in the oil and molasses. Either way, roast for 20 minutes, until they soften and start charring at the edges; after 12 minutes, scatter the nuts into the tray and roast for the final eight minutes, to toast. Serve straight from the roasting tray splattered with your choice of plain yoghurt, orange slices, a pinch of chilli flakes and a final drizzle of pomegranate molasses.Since Monday, a group of 20 college students from the University of Arizona and Arizona State have been on hunger strike in an effort to pressure one of the most heavily criticized Democratic senators, Kyrsten Sinema, to take action on the passage of crucial voting reform legislation. The students say they will be striking indefinitely until Arizona’s Sinema agrees to support the Freedom to Vote Act, a bill that would ensure fair election measures like automatic voter registration and the protection and expansion of vote by mail. Their target is not easy. Sinema, who was once active in the Green party, has drifted far away from the progressive wing of her party and is now widely seen – along with West Virginia’s Joe Manchin – as a centrist roadblock on much of Joe Biden’s agenda. As such, she has earned the anger of many Democrats, from her fellow elected officials to grassroots organizers. The Freedom to Vote Act would directly benefit those most affected by voter suppression laws and gerrymandering, especially Black and brown communities, immigrants and young voters, and voters with disabilities. The students are working with Un-Pac, a non-partisan group organizing in the hope of restoring the Voting Rights Act through the Freedom to Vote Act and eliminating gerrymandering, dark money and other threats to fair representation. Since its introduction, the bill has been consistently opposed by Republican lawmakers and is held up in the Senate where it has been blocked by Republican senators. Despite his promise to restore the Voting Rights Act during his campaign, Biden and the Democratic majority have failed to advance any voting rights legislation this year, despite a broad push by Republicans across the US to pass laws restricting access to the ballot. In 2021 alone, US Republicans have taken full advantage of the filibuster – the Senate rule requiring 60 votes to advance most legislation – and deterred voting rights bills on four different occasions. According to a recent report from the Brennan Institute for Justice, 19 states enacted 33 different laws that make it more difficult for citizens to vote after the 2020 election, in which record numbers of citizens went to the polls. At the same time there has been widespread gerrymandering in mostly Republican states, chipping away at Democratic seats and splitting up voters from communities of color. Last week Sinema agreed to a private meeting with the students via Zoom, where she listened to their concerns and said she supported the passage of the legislation. However, she has a history of supporting the filibuster. “We are very clear from that meeting that Senator Sinema understands our message – that we are hunger striking until the bill passes and we would rather make this sacrifice than suffer the consequences of inaction on federal voting rights and campaign finance reform now,” said Shana Gallagher, executive director of Un-Pac. “We now believe it is incumbent upon President Biden to call another vote before the end of the year.” The students are now traveling to Washington DC, where Biden held the Summit for Democracy. Student organizers Brandon Ortega and Georgia Linden said the protestors will shift the pressure from Sinema and plan to continue striking indefinitely outside the White House in an effort to persuade Biden to talk to them and ultimately, pass the Freedom to Vote Act into law before the end of the year. “We are honestly confused and disappointed that President Biden hasn’t prioritized this more,” said Gallagher. “We don’t understand why he’s not treating this existential issue with the urgency that we are, but we are still hopeful that he has time to change course and our sacrifice will help the administration to act.” As of now, the group is hopeful of drawing the attention of the White House. “We did not originally request a meeting with Sinema but when she found out about our action, she wanted to meet with us to express her commitment to this legislation,” said Gallagher. “Our remaining demand is a meeting with the Biden administration but as of now, we have not heard a response.” The group is well aware that their hunger strike could last longer than they hope, but they are prepared for the hardships. “It’s definitely been difficult, but we do have a medical team and a support team that is taking care of all of us,” said Ortega. “We’re grateful that we have dozens of people across the country doing solidarity fasts and vigils and there has been a lot of support, most notably from a group of veterans who came to the Arizona state house to thank us and to tell us they were humbled by our actions. 84% of Arizonians support this bill, so we’re united as a generation and as a state.” “I would just say, what’s far more dangerous than putting our bodies on the line is losing our democracy forever,” said Linden.As Omicron cases are on the increase and a new wave threatens to overshadow Christmas, the scientists working on Covid are also making calculations about which of their own festivities to go ahead with and which to scale back. Prof Jennifer Rohn, cell biologist at University College London I was supposed to be flying to the US, but the airline cancelled the flight and the town is in total lockdown, so the agonising decision about whether or not to risk it was taken neatly out of my hands. I find I’m relieved to be grounded at home, given the current uncertainties about the impending Omicron wave. Unfortunately, the university cancelled all work parties, and the usual personal invitations haven’t materialised this year. This weekend, my book club is meeting up in a pub for Christmas drinks. I was wavering about whether or not to attend until I saw the latest results for how well the Pfizer booster fights Omicron – which makes me think I’m going to chance it. We are looking forward to seeing a Christmas play in the West End. I haven’t been to the theatre since before Covid times and I’m so relieved that plan B hasn’t scuppered this. This year we plan to keep our holidays mostly in the immediate family, though we expect a few flyby visits from some relatives. We’ve been so busy and stressed for so long that the thought of just being together enjoying all the Christmas rituals and food is strongly appealing. As is lounging around in my jim-jams working through the stack of novels that have been gathering dust on my bedside table all year. Prof Tim Spector, professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London We cancelled our university and Zoe [app] Christmas parties, which was disappointing, but I’ve still been socialising. I had a celebration day out at Windsor Castle last week to get my OBE from last year. I had to get a lateral flow test within a few hours of meeting Charles and there was lots of social distancing and mask-wearing. Afterwards, I had a night at the opera and a meal with the four of us. I’m meeting my brother and his family – again doing lateral flow tests that morning and checking that nobody has any cold-like symptoms. We’re trying to socialise in small groups. Over the holidays, I’m planning to go to the Spanish Pyrenees to do some walking and skiing. At the moment Spain has very low levels – about 10 times lower than the UK. But there’s always that worry travelling at the moment. Until you’ve arrived, you’re thinking, will I catch Covid before I go or will they suddenly change the regulations? I’m looking forward to having a few days off and not talking about Covid. It will be time to turn off the mobile phone and not look at the news for a couple of days. Prof Eleanor Riley, immunologist at the University of Edinburgh I’m staying close to home in Edinburgh for the duration of the holidays and not planning to attend any particularly large or loud parties. A few friends at home or in the pub will be the limit, I expect. We’re not having any extended family gatherings, it will be just immediate family and a friend or two. I’m looking forward to hunkering down in front of the fire, catching up on some great books and films I missed during the year and, with a bit of luck, some crisp walks in the winter sunshine. Prof Neil Ferguson, epidemiologist at Imperial College London I always have a small Christmas. I was hoping I could see my parents over a holiday season for the first time since the pandemic started. Now somewhat weighing that up at the moment. At Imperial College, we’ve now stopped Christmas parties. It’s a decision I support here, but people make their own judgments about what is appropriate. All [my parties] have been cancelled. Contact rates over the Christmas period are generally much lower than they are either side of the Christmas period – people, children, are not in school people are not in work. Whether people have relatives around for Christmas lunch will not make an enormous difference. If lots of people have wild parties that may make a difference. I think people can be sensible and judge the risks.Travel gift sets Kip Hideaways, a members-only boutique staycation site, has two new gift sets: the travel set and the sleep set. Each includes a year’s membership (the company plants a tree for every member), plus Bramley toiletries and Elizabeth Scarlett embroidered accessories. From £53, kiphideaways.com Adventure rucksack A thoughtfully designed 42-litre rucksack with multiple pockets – for laptops, cards, shoes, water bottles, valuables – but small enough to take as carry-on. Made from recycled plastic by a sustainable British brand with an in-house repair service. £185, stubbleandco.com Limited-edition prints The Woods sells limited-edition fine art photography inspired by travel, nature and adventure, printed in London. Gift cards are also available, so the recipient can choose their own photograph. From £70, thewoods.co Washbag made of plastic bottles Designed in the Lake District and ethically made in Vietnam from recycled plastic bottles (four per bag). Millican also sells recycled plastic backpacks. £18, homeofmillican.com Speckly passport cover The passport cover from Liga’s Beach Clean collection is made from recycled flip-flops and sustainable cork – perfect for disguising a post-Brexit blue British passport. £14.95, loveliga.co.uk Great white shark towel Padi, the diving organisation, has a range of clothes, accessories and towels made from recycled ocean plastic. This limited-edition towel was designed for shark week 2021. £27, padigear.net Wild swimming scented candle Different Kind is a new ethical online store stocking products by brands such as Goldfinger, which uses recycled materials and provides training for disadvantaged young people. The scent of its soy-wax candle evokes “the cold shock of water under a glorious sky”. £32, thedifferentkind.com Sending Hugs gift box This includes a “random recycled wool” rug from Atlantic Blankets, made from leftover wool and ideal for picnics, plus a caramel sea-salt chocolate bar. £38, atlanticblankets.com Let’s Get Lost photography book Subtitled “the world’s most stunning remote locations”, this new landscape book curated by Finn Beales contains more than 200 images of beaches, mountains, forests, wildernesses, lakes and rivers by 21 photographers. Inspiration for adventurers and armchair travellers alike. £23.25, UK.bookship.org Hat and fingerless mittens Designed in Orkney and knitted in the Scottish Borders from luxury-grade, cruelty-free lamb’s wool, using environment-friendly dyes. The company also makes scarves, blankets and throws. From £47, hilarygrant.co.uk Planet-friendly coffee subscription The Mayni community in Peru grow coffee using agroforestry techniques, which protect the Amazon, and Easy Jose pays them a premium for it. It sells three-, six-, nine- and 12-month subscriptions (two 250g bags a month). £18 a month, easyjosecoffee.co.uk Sustainable sunnies Sunglasses made from recycled “ghost gear” – lost or discarded fishing nets – collected from UK beaches. Purchases also support Waterhaul’s recycling workshops in schools and communities. From £60, waterhaul.co Deluxe festive hamper A handmade basket containing 17 wild UK products, from hogweed salt to dried hen of the woods mushrooms, and lots of booze: damson wine, currant vodka, sloe cider, medlar liqueur and sweet cicely fizz. Smaller hampers (£35/55) and Secret Santa boxes (£20) also available. £100, Foragebox.co.uk Herb teas, honey and pot Crate contains four seasonal Wild Infusions teas made of herbs, fruits and flowers either grown on Wild Cornwall’s regenerative farm or foraged, plus jars of raw wildflower honey and honey pearls, and a teapot and teacup. The crate can be repurposed as a planter; seeds are provided. £65, wildcornwall.net Wild Remedy poetry pills Handmade at the Poetry Pharmacy in Bishop’s Castle, Shropshire, these pills are not for swallowing but contain poetic extracts on the theme of nature, such as a few lines from The Peace of Wild Things by Wendell Berry. Other poetry prescriptions available. £5.50, poetrypharmacy.co.uk Vitamin Sea calendar Designed and printed in the UK on recycled paper, using 80% renewable energy, delivered in minimal and plastic-free packaging. One of a range of nature-inspired wall calendars. £16.50, onceuponatuesday.co.uk Atlas of Forgotten Places The latest title in the Unexpected Atlas series, this book by Travis Elborough tells the story of 40 abandoned destinations around the globe, from a ghost town in the Arizona desert to the exclusion zone around the Soufrière Hills volcano in Montserrat. £18.60, uk.bookshop.org Suit for winter dips Women’s long-sleeve swimwear made from regenerated nylon yarn and designed to “survive a dive, pull off a cliff jump and handle a waterfall”. It’s reversible too, with black and ocean green sides. £150, davyj.com Handy hip pack Made from recycled nylon and polyester in a fair trade factory. Can be worn around waist or bandolier-style, and fits essentials such as phone, keys, cards, sunglasses and face mask. Stows in its own pocket when not in use. £25, eu.patagonia.com Bellyboards to last Promising surfing “without all the fuss, with all the fun”, these bellyboards are handmade from sustainable birch plywood at a workshop in Newquay, Cornwall – an eco alternative to throwaway polystyrene boards. From £55, dickpearce.comGhislaine Maxwell has long been accused of luring teenage girls into Jeffrey Epstein’s orbit for him to sexually abuse, but whatever motive for allegedly doing so has long remained a mystery. The answer hinges somewhat on the nature of their relationship. Did Maxwell serve as the late financier’s consigliere, or act as his girlfriend and procurer? Over the past two weeks, Maxwell’s Manhattan federal court sex trafficking trial has shed more light on her alleged financial and emotional ties to disgraced financier Epstein and how their lives seemed intimately interwoven. What that might mean for the trial is uncertain. Prosecutors might hope Maxwell’s closeness to Epstein might horrify the jury, who could conclude she was an accomplice. The defense team might see Epstein and his known crimes as a shield. Trial evidence over the past two weeks, including a now infamous photo of a cleavage-baring Maxwell massaging Epstein’s foot, also reveals an apparent romantic connection that elevates her role in his life beyond that of a mere fixer and friend. Maxwell, 59, is the daughter of the late British publishing mogul Robert Maxwell. She was apprehended at a luxurious New Hampshire rural estate in July 2020. She is now being tried for six counts in relation to her alleged involvement in Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor teenagers. She maintains her innocence of all allegations. Epstein, a convicted sex offender whose powerful and wealthy circle of associates included Prince Andrew and former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump, killed himself in a New York City federal jail more than two years ago, pending his own sex trafficking trial. The first witness, Lawrence Paul Visoski Jr, Epstein’s pilot from 1991 to 2019, quickly provided jurors a description of their relationship, saying: “I thought it was more personal than business.” While Visoski didn’t see them hold hands or kiss, they struck him as “couple-ish”. They remained close into the 2000s, he said. David Rodgers, who also worked as Epstein’s private pilot over the same time period, said that he first met Maxwell in July 1991. “Early on, they were romantically involved.” Both Visoski and Rodgers said that Maxwell was integral in addressing Epstein’s quotidian needs, managing his expansive properties, hiring house staff, handling their expenses, and sometimes scheduling flights. They both described Maxwell as “No 2” in the hierarchy of Epstein’s employees. “Ms Maxwell was the girlfriend of Mr Epstein; I understand she was the lady of the house,” recalled Juan Alessi, the former house manager at Epstein’s Palm Beach home between around 1990 and 2002. “From the day she came to the house, she right away took over, and she mentioned to me she was going to be the lady of the house. Also, she was in charge of other homes, other properties.” Maxwell, who warned him to “never” look Epstein in the eye, went so far as to give Alessi a handbook toward the end of his time there, which featured mandates such as “try and anticipate the needs of Mr Epstein, Ms Maxwell, and their guests” and “remember that you see nothing, hear nothing, say nothing, except to answer a question directed at you. Respect [guests’] privacy.” Prosecutors have contended that Maxwell had a strong motive in maintaining a relationship that blurred these lines of life and work. In a discussion with judge Alison Nathan about the admissibility of testimony, prosecutors claimed that Maxwell “was not a particularly wealthy person when she met Epstein” in 1991. The government has discussed Maxwell’s monetary interest in open court as well. Prosecutor Lara Pomerantz said in her opening: “These girls were just a means to support her lifestyle, a way for the defendant to make sure that Epstein – who demanded constant sexual gratification from young girls – remained satisfied so that the defendant could stay in the lifestyle to which she was accustomed.” Several witnesses’ testimony suggested that Epstein was bankrolling Maxwell handsomely. Kate, the second accuser to testify against Maxwell, recalled: “She told me that she owned her house in London; and that at a later time she told me that she owned her house in New York City, and that Jeffrey had got it for her.” Prosecutors also called an officer from JP Morgan bank to discuss cash transfers from Epstein’s accounts to Maxwell’s. This banker, Patrick McHugh, explained documents which showed that Epstein transferred more than $30m to Maxwell’s accounts between 1999 and 2007. Allegations of Maxwell’s involvement in Epstein’s abuse have portrayed her as being so transfixed that she enthusiastically did his bidding. Kate, who said that Maxwell lured her into Epstein’s orbit in 1994 at age 17, recalled sexualized conversations with her. “She would talk a lot about the nature of … she would say boys, and boys and their willies, which was a euphemism for penis … how demanding Jeffrey was,” Kate recalled. “And she would ask me if I knew anybody who could come and give Jeffrey [oral sex] because it was, it was a lot for her to do.” “She said, ‘You know what he likes: cute, young, pretty, like you’ … She said he needed to have sex about three times a day.” Accusers also described Maxwell as assessing their encounters with Epstein, and claimed that she relished in satisfying his needs. “She said, ‘I’m so glad you’re here. You did such a good job last time, he wanted you to come back,” Kate recalled of one encounter. “Did you have fun? You’re such a good girl. I’m so happy you were able to come.” Carolyn, who testified that she was 14 when Maxwell started scheduling sexualized massages with Epstein, recalled receiving praise. “I was upstairs setting up the massage table and at that point I was kind of comfortable because I’d been there so many times,” Carolyn said. “I was getting fully nude, and she came in and felt my boobs and my hips and my buttocks and said … that I had a great body for Mr Epstein and his friends.” The first accuser who testified, Jane, said that there were times when Maxwell was present when Epstein abused her. At times, Maxwell touched Jane’s breasts, she alleged. “There were hands everywhere,” Jane recalled of one incident with Maxwell. Jane alleged being in group sexual encounters with Maxwell, Epstein and others. And then there are the photos. CDs that were taken from Epstein’s Manhattan home during a July 2019 search contained numerous images that showed him and Maxwell posing together. In several pictures, she is kissing him. Several images reveal Maxwell giving Epstein a foot massage, beaming as if that act gave her incomparable joy. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlOnly two months ago, the talk among Tory MPs – echoing some newspaper front pages – was about how Boris Johnson wanted to “go on and on”, lasting longer than Margaret Thatcher’s 11 years in power. At that time, they dismissed the idea that he was a dilettante prime minister who really wanted to retire and write books, give after-dinner speeches on how hard the job was and make loads of money in the process. But that has all changed, with successive scandals over his handling of sleaze allegations and Tory insiders now openly questioning his future. Backbenchers are not just fuming about Christmas parties and Downing Street refurbishments, but also about the way, in their perception, Johnson has squandered the party’s poll lead and put their seats in danger. All eyes are on the byelection in the formerly safe seat of North Shropshire next week. It would take more than 50 MPs writing a letter of no confidence in Johnson – 15% of the 361 Tory seats in parliament – to trigger a leadership challenge. But an unexpected byelection loss could trigger more submissions to the 1922 Committee, the keeper of the letters. One MP summarises the situation thus: “Are there more than 50 MPs who have submitted a letter of no confidence in the prime minister? No. Are there more than 50 MPs who think he is doing the job extremely badly? Undoubtedly yes.” Most believe it is a long way off, with no knockout blow to Johnson yet so far, but any leadership challenge would be likely to come from a so-called stalking horse candidate, someone with no hope of winning who does not mind being vilified for being the first to wield the knife. After that, the serious contenders – the cabinet ministers Rishi Sunak, Liz Truss and Sajid Javid, or an outsider such as Tom Tugendhat – could potentially swing into action. Tellingly, all Johnson’s top team have been keen to distance themselves from the No 10 parties stories in recent days. On Friday morning, Truss, the foreign secretary, told the BBC: “Last Christmas, I was spending my time getting trade deals … We were busy working on trade deals.” Supporters of Johnson believe he can turn things around if he can make it through to Christmas with no further major revelations about lockdown-busting antics in Downing Street – but with rumours of other parties abounding, that may be a big if. One former Tory No 10 adviser was pessimistic: “He’s an agent of chaos, and he’s no fucking good at running anything. People are saying he needs to get a grip but that’s not going to happen.” On whether Conservative MPs would make a move against the prime minister, he said: “He got them their seats but he may cost them their seats. If we’re still in this situation in six months’ time I can see him going.” One former minister said they had dismissed stories about letters being submitted but had now begun to take the threat to Johnson seriously. “I’ve had about six emails from constituents. That’s not a flood, but MPs do start to listen when they come in from people who aren’t the usual troublemakers who hate you. Especially if they are personal.” Another MP said their colleagues would probably take some time to think during the Christmas break. “People will start to think: it’s only potentially a year till the next election. I need to think about my leaflets, my fundraising. And does Boris help or hinder? If people decide the latter, then we don’t hang about like Labour do.” Gavin Barwell, a former chief of staff to Theresa May who is now a Tory peer, has also highlighted a trio of issues that he believes have the potential to bring the prime minister down: the Downing Street parties, the flat refurbishment and the anger of backbenchers over a return to Covid restrictions. However, others believe the discontent among Johnson’s ranks is not as severe as it was for May, who was toppled by her own party. “The party is pretty ruthless,” one cabinet minister said. “But I am not getting the sense this is anything like the days before the no confidence vote in Theresa May. Cabinet has some disagreements but compare it to what came before. It’s chalk and cheese.” Even so, there was a consensus that Tory MPs would make a move if they felt the polls had turned convincingly in Labour’s favour or their own local areas appeared to be lost causes. A senior MP told the Guardian they believed the party had “already lost my seat” so felt “ungovernable”. Another said there had been an “erosion of authority”. “Boris has become politically toxic to the electorate,” the MP said. “They think the PM’s incompetent and a liar, and the parliamentary party isn’t far behind. He is incompetence personified.” Others in this camp said they were not going to put a letter in to call for Johnson’s resignation at this stage – but were gradually being convinced it might be necessary, if things deteriorated further. “The key is in the ignition,” said one of Johnson’s own ministers.Independent restaurants are being forced to offer hefty sign-on bonuses of £1,000 or more for chefs and other kitchen staff as the shortage of skilled workers tightens in the busy festive season. Small businesses such as Angie’s and D Grande, both restaurants in Chiswick, west London, the Coniston Hotel in Skipton, and Galeta, a bakery in Hackney, east London, are offering sign-on fees of between £500 and £1,000. Larger rivals are offering even more: recruits at Harry’s Bar, the Mayfair private members club owned by the hospitality entrepreneur Richard Caring, will get £2,500, while the Côte bistro chain is dangling dangling £2,000. The job search site Indeed said that less than 1% of hospitality job ads currently mentioned a signing-on fee but the number of posts in the industry offering such a bonus had soared fivefold (443%) since the end of May. “This is a new phenomenon for the hospitality industry that doesn’t show signs of abating, despite Omicron, as we head into the Christmas season,” a spokesman for Indeed said. Steven Whibley, the operations director of Galeta, said he was offering a sign-on bonus of £1,000 after three months in the job on top of a salary of up to £40,000 in order to secure a head of bakery. The business is also offering £500 bonuses for less senior roles such as chefs de partie and drivers, posts which are also proving difficult to fill. Whibley said: “We currently have 20 vacancies and our fully staffed team would be 60 people, so that is about a third missing. We are filling that with overtime and agency staff where we can. The problem has been there since the summer but it’s got tougher as the business has expanded with the opening up of the economy. We’ve got busier and busier, and the staffing needs more acute, and we have lost staff as other people are offering more.” Whibley said the business had already upped basic pay by 10% as well as offering the bonus but will still be struggling to recruit staff. “It doesn’t seem they are there.” Angie Steele, the owner of Angie’s in Chiswick, said she was offering a £1,000 bonus for chef roles as she faced the prospect of shutting two days a week, ending dinner service and laying off serving staff as she was struggling to replace three of her six chefs who are about to leave the business. She said that even with the bonus, the restaurant had attracted only two applications, neither of whom showed up for their interview. “Two years ago if a chef left I would put an ad out and get four or five CVs and we would have gone to [kitchen] trials next day and I would have a choice. Now there are no CVs and no one is walking through the door. It is pretty extraordinary.” She said that Brexit and the coronavirus pandemic had had a “huge impact” on the UK hospitality industry, with staff going home to mainland Europe when restaurants were forced to close and not returning to the UK. Steele said she had been forced to offer a sign-on bonus because so many other restaurants were doing so in the battle for staff. “It is not a very nice atmosphere,” she said, with rumours that some restaurants are offering customers free food in return for recommending staff from elsewhere.Claims companies and law firms looking for the next bonanza in payouts are targeting people who have been the victim of a data breach, with some telling those affected they could be entitled to thousands of pounds in compensation. A Google search for the term “data breach claim” results in a long list of firms – the vast majority of them no-win, no-fee solicitors – and there are more moving into this space all the time. Meanwhile, adverts for firms are increasingly appearing in Instagram feeds. The proliferation of companies operating in this area has prompted speculation that this could be the industry’s next “golden goose” after the payment protection insurance scandal, and could lead to a new deluge of spam text messages and unwanted cold calls. What is fuelling this growing market is the fact that the UK’s data watchdog, the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO), can’t award compensation to people if they have been affected by a data breach, even when the law has been broken. As an individual, your options include pursuing the company yourself – either by appealing to it for compensation or taking it to the small claims court – or turning to one of these firms, which could launch a group action if there are enough people with a claim against the same company. One advantage of using one of these firms is that, assuming they take you on, they will typically do a lot of the legwork for you. Also, because most are no-win, no-fee, you often won’t have to pay anything upfront or if the claim fails. The big downside is that, generally speaking, you can expect to hand over a quarter of your compensation to the firm as its fee if your claim is successful. An industry insider told Guardian Money that “25% is the standard”. The ICO defines a personal data breach as an incident that leads to “the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, personal data”. It could be something that affects only one person or many. Over the last few years there have been a string of high-profile data breaches, many involving big companies such as British Airways, the hotels company Marriott, Ticketmaster and TalkTalk. Some have been linked to cyber-attacks, and others related to information being lost or shared with the wrong people. There have also been a number of incidents involving government departments or similar. Only days ago an NHS trust apologised after sharing the email addresses of people taking part in a Covid vaccine trial. Last month it emerged that Labour had been hit by a “cyber incident” affecting members’ data. Meanwhile, some people find out they have been the victim of a data breach after submitting a subject access request to a company they are in dispute with. Guardian Money has been told that some utility companies and other firms are still being lax when it comes to customers’ information, and are emailing Excel spreadsheets full of personal data to perhaps dozens of people. The most basic type of personal data is your name and email address. The next level might be your home address and phone number. Most people would probably consider that breaches involving financial data such as credit card and banking information (card numbers, expiry dates and so on), and passwords, fall into the most serious category. There is also what the law describes as “sensitive” information – things such as religious beliefs, health, sexuality, ethnic background and trade union membership. However, the impact of a breach will vary from person to person. For some individuals – a survivor of abuse or domestic violence, a member of the UK Special Forces or an asylum seeker, for example – even only the unauthorised disclosure of their name or email address could have serious repercussions but for others the impact will be minimal. The UK’s Data Protection Act 2018 gives you the right to claim compensation from a company or organisation if you have suffered “damage” as a result of it breaking data protection law, the ICO says. This includes both “material damage” (for example, you have lost money) or “non-material damage” (for example, you have suffered distress). If you have been the victim of financial crime after an incident, such as suffering fraudulent transactions, that may tick one or both boxes. However, you could also argue you have suffered damage if, say, you have had to change your banking details or have seen your credit score take a tumble. “This is a very contentious area right now – it’s definitely an area of claims growth, without a doubt,” says Richard Jones, a director of DSAR.Ai, a software company specialising in subject access requests. There are various claims as to how much people could be in line to receive. One firm says compensation could be in the region of £1,000 for less serious breaches and “up to £10,000 for very serious breaches”. Graham Coffey &amp; Co Solicitors, based in Manchester, is one of the firms advertising a service. Its managing partner Stuart Snape is keen to dispel the idea that a breach of the rules automatically entitles someone to compensation: “There has to be a real anxiety and a real material effect of that breach.” It might be that the effect is minor – for example, if your name and email address is disclosed, perhaps the only consequence is that you receive more spam in your inbox. “But there are varying degrees of that,” Snape says. He adds that if more sensitive data such as credit card or bank details is involved, “that is when the compensation starts to go beyond the £1,000 mark. [That is potentially] more than just a minor nuisance. Your name and email address, while understandably concerning, is more of a minor nuisance.” It is not clear how many people in the UK have received compensation relating to a data breach – there are no published figures, some individuals will have secured ex gratia payments, and settlements will often be confidential. In July it emerged that British Airways had settled a legal claim by some of those affected by its 2018 data breach. Of the 430,000 customers and staff affected, about 244,000 had their names, addresses and payment card details, including the security number on the back, exposed. The settlement related to a group action reportedly involving more than 16,000 people. However, the payout was kept under wraps There have been a few court cases where details of payouts have been made public. In 2016 the high court awarded damages ranging from £2,500 to £12,500 to six asylum seekers for privacy and data protection law breaches after their personal data was accidentally published on the Home Office website. In the case of the two who were each awarded £12,500, “the effects have been serious”, leaving them fearing for their safety, the judge said. There are thought to be several group actions brewing against Ticketmaster, which was fined £1.25m by the ICO in November 2020 after a breach that included names, payment card numbers, expiry dates and security codes. It potentially affected 1.5 million people in the UK, and investigators found that 60,000 payment cards belonging to Barclays customers had been subjected to known fraud. Another 6,000 cards were replaced by Monzo after it suspected their fraudulent use. Probably your best chance of receiving compensation is if you are a customer of a company that is publicly punished by the ICO and so can’t argue that it did not do anything wrong. Handily for consumers and claims firms, companies can’t hide their failings: under the law, all organisations are required to report personal data breaches to the relevant authority within a certain period. If you are thinking about using a claims firm go for one that is regulated by the Solicitors Regulation Authority (look out for the SRA clickable logo being displayed on a firm’s website). Also, check online reviews for the firm and whether it is acting for other people affected by the same incident.It once hoped to make banks a thing of the past by cutting them out of the equation, but now Zopa is shutting down its “peer-to-peer” (P2P) lending arm after 16 years – so it can concentrate on being a bank. The company has contacted its 60,000 existing P2P investors to let them know that it will be handing them back their money – leaving them to find a new home for their cash at a time of ultra-low savings rates. P2P platforms bypass the banks by linking savers looking for a better return with individuals or small businesses looking for loans. Until recently, billions of pounds were tied up with Zopa and its competitors. However, the coronavirus crisis and increased scrutiny from regulators such as the Financial Conduct Authority – which has dubbed P2P a “high-risk investment” – have caused huge turmoil for the industry and led to some players quitting the market. When it launched in 2005, Zopa (it stands for “zone of possible agreement”) was hailed as a radical online financial “exchange” allowing millions of ordinary people to borrow from and lend money to each other. Its aim was to leave “faceless corporations” out in the cold, claiming it could offer consumers better rates of interest than they could get from banks. But in recent years, with some of the shine coming off the P2P sector after the collapse of some smaller players, Zopa has adapted its business model to embrace what it initially stood against. It was granted a full UK banking licence in June 2020 and now offers products such as credit cards, personal loans, fixed-rate savings accounts and car finance. Zopa is closing the P2P side of the business with immediate effect and will be buying its investors’ loans at their current face value, without any of the fees that they would normally incur for a loan sale. This means they will receive back the money they have invested with the site, plus any interest that borrowers have paid up to the date of sale. Everyone should get their money back by 31 January 2022. All of the loans are being bought at face value, including those currently in arrears. There will be no impact on borrowers as Zopa’s banking arm already services them. The company told customers: “Sadly, over the last few years, customer trust in P2P investing has been damaged by a small number of businesses whose approach led to material losses for customers investing in those platforms. Linked to this, the changing regulation in the sector has made it challenging to grow and remain commercially viable.” For some investors, Zopa has been a key part of their portfolio. The company says that since launch, the average return has been 5%, and that even during the pandemic it was able to deliver an average of 3.9%. That compares with the 1.37% to 1.75% it was this week offering those who put their cash into its fixed-rate savings accounts, which involve tying up your money for between one and five years. Those who want to stick with peer-to-peer will find that there are limited options. RateSetter, formerly the UK’s biggest P2P site, shut down the investment side of its business in April, while the other former big player, Funding Circle, now concentrates on small business loans. However, there are still a number of platforms open for business. One of the better-known players is Lending Works, which was this week saying people could earn projected returns of up to 4.5%. Some P2P sites – in many cases ones that most people will not have heard of – are offering up to 12%. These include the P2P property loans platform Blend.Constitutional scholars in the US said a litany of rights, from same-sex marriage and sex to birth control and in vitro fertilization, could come into question if the country’s highest court moves to overrule or weaken Roe v Wade. The supreme court last week heard arguments in the case Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which centers on whether the state of Mississippi can ban abortion at 15 weeks gestation, roughly nine weeks before bans are permitted under current law. The Mississippi case is widely regarded as the most important abortion rights case since Roe v Wade, when the supreme court effectively legalized abortion nationally in 1973. A decision in the Dobbs case is expected June 2022. Although supreme court opinions are notoriously difficult to predict, a majority of justices on the conservative-leaning court appeared inclined to severely curtail or overturn Roe v Wade, which protects abortion rights in states hostile to the procedure. Legal scholars warned that the impacts of such a move would likely be widespread, because abortion rights are rooted in the same implied constitutional right to privacy that is the foundation for other intimate personal decisions Americans now take for granted. Gay rights, contraceptives, certain fertility treatments and even interracial marriage, “are imperiled because they’re all rooted in that right to privacy”, Melissa Murray, a law professor at New York University law school and an expert in constitutional, family and reproductive rights law, told the Guardian. “All of this has been implied because they’re understood to be core, basic human rights,” said Murray. “You don’t need the state to recognize them because they are vested in you by virtue of being a human.” Currently, states are prevented from banning abortions before a fetus can survive outside the womb, a concept known as “viability”. But at the hearing on 1 December, a majority of justices appeared ready to uphold Mississippi’s law, which would require either invalidating the “viability” standard or overturn Roe v Wade entirely. In arguments, justices pointed to several ways they may reinterpret the Roe v Wade decision. Some, such as Justice Clarence Thomas, were skeptical there is a right to privacy and were swayed by the lack of an explicit reference to the right in the constitution, a concept known as “textualism”. “If we were talking about the second amendment, I know exactly what we’re talking about,” said Thomas. “If we’re talking about the fourth amendment, I know what we’re talking about because it’s written. It’s there.” That argument could be paired with one pushed forward by conservatives, such as Mississippi solicitor general Scott Stewart, who argued a right to abortion is not grounded in the “history or tradition” of the country. “A right to abortion [is] not grounded in the text,” said Stewart. “It’s grounded on abstract concepts that this court has rejected in other contexts as supplying a substantive right”. The theory underlying that right to privacy is called “substantive due process”, or the doctrine that the constitution protects both the procedures of due process, such as how criminal law is applied, and “substantive” guarantees of life, liberty and property. “If you ask where rights come from in the US constitution there’s basically two general answers,” said Mary Ziegler, a law professor at Florida State University and a historian who has studied abortion rights since Roe v Wade. “There’s the rights spelled out in the text of the constitution,” such as rights to bear arms or against unreasonable search and seizure, “and there’s other rights, like the right to marry and the right to parent that are not in the text of the constitution”. Those are rights established by substantive due process. For example, in 1965 the court struck down birth control bans for married couples in Griswold v Connecticut. In 1967 with Loving v Virginia, the court invalidated anti-miscegenation laws that barred interracial marriage. In 1972 in Eisenstadt v Baird, the court found people who were not married also had a right to birth control. In 1973, the court recognized a right to terminate a pregnancy. “These rights of parental autonomy are underpinnings of the right to privacy; marriage is included in this,” said Murray. “In a later case, the state says marriage [and] procreation are basic civil rights of man.” Cases based in substantive due process continued into the modern era, when in 2003 the court invalidated anti-sodomy statutes in Lawrence v Texas and established a right to same-sex conduct. In 2016, the court found same-sex couples also had a right to marry in Obergefell v Hodges. Attorneys for Jackson Women’s Health Organization responded on the principle of substantive due process when quizzed on this principle by Thomas. “If I were to ask you what constitutional right protects the right to abortion, is it privacy? Is it autonomy? What would it be?” asked Thomas. “It’s liberty, Your Honor,” said Julie Rikelman, litigation director for the Center for Reproductive Rights, which represented the abortion clinic. Briefs to the court in Dobbs directly challenge that principle, such as the brief from the conservative, anti-abortion group Texas Right to Life. Attorneys for the group, the conservative legal activists Adam Mortara and Jonathan Mitchell, argued the court does not necessarily need to overturn decisions protecting gay rights. “But neither should the court hesitate to write an opinion that leaves those decisions hanging by a thread,” wrote Mortara and Mitchell. “Lawrence and Obergefell, while far less hazardous to human life, are as lawless as Roe.” The same brief argued women could control their reproduction by refraining from sex. Neither Mitchell nor Mortara responded to an interview request. Until the supreme court issues a decision, it is unclear exactly how rights protected by substantive due process might be affected. However, scholars consider same-sex and reproductive rights to be the most vulnerable because there is an active political campaign to circumscribe them. By contrast, there is little contemporary criticism of interracial marriage. If Roe v Wade is overruled, “it will be on the ground it was a right that was untethered from constitutional text,” said Murray. If that view prevails on the court, rights to contraception, gay rights and in vitro fertilization could also be quickly implicated, since “all of these things are untethered from constitutional text and historically were not available in the US”. What’s more, the history of abortion rights may provide a roadmap for other rights to be hobbled, even if substantive due process prevails. Murray offered the example of a 2017 case, in which three conservative justices, led by justice Neil Gorsuch, argued states could restrict birth certificates of same-sex parents. Gorsuch argued there appeared to be nothing unconstitutional about a “biology-based birth registration regime” where only one same-sex parent would be listed on the certificate. “It is a really good example of how they have dismantled Roe piecemeal and incrementally could be applied to these other rights,” said Murray.The £800 Townhouse dining table is an “elegant, sturdy classic” built for gathering round. Marsha Moore’s £20 melamine camping table, with a surface area of less than a square metre, is not, and certainly not where she imagined eating Christmas dinner. But Moore, a writer who recently moved into an unfurnished flat in London with her husband and son, is one of many Britons trapped in a furniture nightmare before Christmas after deliveries of key pieces such as sofas, tables and beds were delayed by supply chain disruption. “We have been eating at camping tables since we moved in in early November,” says Moore, who selected products, including a sofa, with the shortest wait time after being advised that orders could take up to 25 weeks. After her dining table’s arrival was bumped to 2022 she headed to Decathlon for a second substitute surface. “Now we’ve got two of them pushed together and some folding chairs we got from Argos … we will be eating Christmas dinner on our camping tables.” Her family is not alone. Social media is full of tales of furniture woe and pictures of empty rooms as, even after long waits, new purchases fail to materialise, with one longsuffering shopper even giving it a name: the “Great Furniture Delay” of 2021. This week, the online furniture retailer Made.com warned that up to £45m-worth of orders were delayed, with the newly listed company blaming its profit warning on factory shutdowns in Vietnam, clogged ports and extended shipping times. It follows last month’s gloomy update from Ikea. The furniture giant says it is struggling to keep shelves in its stores and warehouses stocked with more supply chain disruption and higher prices on the cards for 2022. Shoppers looking to make rare big ticket purchases are surprised by how long they now have to wait for furniture pieces tailored to their taste. In John Lewis the average wait is 16 weeks for a sofa while some upholstered beds take 20 weeks. The pandemic has turned the once steady furniture market into a rollercoaster ride. Britons typically spend around £14bn a year kitting out their homes but last year’s lockdowns wiped £1.3bn off UK furniture sales, according to Retail Economics. Demand has see-sawed back with sales on track to hit £14bn again this year. In Ian and Eilidh’s Glasgow flat a pair of lonely-looking camping chairs are stationed in front of the television rather than the muddy Glastonbury field they were bought for. The festival, like their sofa, fell foul of the pandemic. Ian thinks his L-shaped sofa is on a “container ship somewhere”. As first-time buyers on a budget, it is with some irony that Ian reports they “chose something that would fill the room”. “The sofa had an estimated delivery time of eight to 10 weeks so we optimistically thought it might arrive shortly after we moved into the flat in late August. “It’s now December and we are still sofa-less.” The PhD student is “not a camper by nature” and with no end in sight to their sofa odyssey bemoans not being able to have anyone over at Christmas “because there is nowhere to sit”. Richard Wilding, the professor of supply chain strategy at Cranfield School of Management, says that before the pandemic, global supply chains were like a “well-choreographed ballet”. Then in 2020 demand fell sharply in the initial phase of the pandemic only for it to roar back in 2021. “We talk about black swan events,” he adds. “These were rare events but at the moment we have flocks of black swan events coming at us: in recent months we’ve had ports in China being shut down again; Vietnam has gone into a really big lockdown. “When things look as though they’re getting back to normal in the UK, what you’re suddenly finding is rolling lockdowns are occurring in other regions. As soon as that starts to happen that means that the ballet is once again disrupted, so we’re getting disruption after disruption.” Production and transport delays are putting a strain on customer service, with DFS, the UK’s biggest sofa chain, coming under fire from disappointed customers. One customer suggests its initials stand for Disappointment, Frustration and Sitting on the floor. A Facebook group devoted to “angry customers” of its Sofology brand has 3,400 members. One horror story comes from Janet Bell who, when she ordered her £2,900 Tallulah sofa and matching footstool from Sofology in May was looking forward to sinking into its “perfectly plump” cushions. But her September delivery bled into November and then calamity struck: her old sofa was collected only for the following day’s delivery of her new couch to then be cancelled, “leaving me and my children with nothing to sit on”. DFS says supply chain disruption has increased the average wait for its sofas from eight to 15 weeks but the “vast majority of customer orders are delivered on time”. “The short-term operational environment continues to be difficult for the furniture industry … Against this backdrop, lead times are being extended and in some instances we are not able to deliver orders within the timeframes we originally scheduled.” In Worcester, Caitlin Wakefield, a charity worker who bought her sofa from a local shop back in August, has her fingers crossed it will finally arrive on her new delivery date, which is just four days before Christmas. “We were happy to wait because we wanted to support a local business coming out of the pandemic,” she says. “I didn’t want to go to a big corporate, like Ikea, where we could probably get the sofa at the weekend. “When we ordered in August they had a massive backlog of orders from people who had changed their homes around in lockdown or moved house. [But] when I called in mid-November to ask ‘is it coming’ they said they were struggling with staff at the factory where it is being made in south Wales.” Although China and Vietnam are important manufacturing hubs a lot of sofas are actually made in the UK. However, British companies are said to be struggling to recruit upholsterers, for example, because of worker shortages linked to Brexit. Thanks to a new wave of retailer all is not lost for households desperate for a sofa to sit on. Companies such as Snug and Swyft sell modular sofas with rapid turnaround times that can be clicked together in different configurations. After three weeks without a sofa Janet Bell, a single mum with two teenage children, banked a refund through PayPal, and took a risk, ordering a sofa online she had not physically tested out. Five days later she was sitting on a cloud. A Snug Cloud Sundae corner sofa to be precise. “It arrived on time and it is fab,” she reports. “I love it, the kids love it, my cats love it.”“Hang Mike Pence!” was the chilling chant of the mob at the US Capitol on 6 January 2021. Can the same constituency be persuaded to vote Mike Pence on 5 November 2024? He, for one, appears to think so. The former vice-president this week travelled across New Hampshire, host of the first-in-the-nation presidential primary elections, to meet local activists, raise money and deliver a speech attacking potential opponent Joe Biden. Pence, who has nursed White House ambitions since his teens, has also paid recent visits to the early-voting states Iowa, South Carolina and Nevada, implying that a run is more likely than not. But there is one problem. Donald Trump. The ex-president, whom Pence served faithfully – or obsequiously, in the eyes of critics – has not forgiven him for ignoring his plea to overturn the result of the 2020 election. That Pence, presiding over the Senate at it certified Biden’s victory, had no such power has become irrelevant at this stage. Pence’s continued insistence that he did his constitutional duty on 6 January has done little to assuage the sense of betrayal among livid Trump supporters. In June he was heckled as a “traitor” during a speech to a gathering of religious conservatives in Orlando, Florida – hardly a positive omen. “His biggest challenge is the people that he’s going to need to vote for him – the Republican primary base – are also the people who wanted to hang him on January 6,” said Kurt Bardella, an adviser to the Democratic National Committee. “I don’t see how you overcome that.” Yet the former Indiana governor appears to be playing a long game, perhaps betting that Trump’s influence over the party will wane over the next three years. He may also be calculating that the stand he made for democracy on 6 January – a day on which he refused to flee the Capitol, taking cover in an underground car park – will resonate with moderate Republicans and independents. Mike Murphy, a Republican strategist in Indiana, said: “He’s doing everything he needs to set himself up to run and, if Trump is not the nominee or is not running, I think he’s clearly the frontrunner.” “I think people are realising that he was an unlikely hero on January 6. In the end, even for people who disagree with him for many other policy positions he’s taken, whether it was as a governor or as a vice-president, he did the right thing when the pressure was on on January 6.” Pence’s visit to New Hampshire was his second to the state, which has a huge say in choosing the party nominee, since leaving office. He attended holiday parties, raised money for state Republicans and posed for photos at at the Simply Delicious bakery in Bedford. In a speech hosted by Heritage Action, a conservative policy advocacy organisation, the 62-year-old accused Biden of fuelling inflation and lambasted the president’s social and environmental spending plan, warning: “Keep your hands off the American people’s pay cheques.” As is customary at this stage of an election cycle, Pence did not confirm or deny whether he was running for president, insisting that his priority was next year’s midterm elections for Congress. He told the Associated Press: “To be honest with you, all of my focus is on 2022 because I think we’ve got a historic opportunity for not just a winning election, but a realignment election. So I’m dedicating all of my energy to the process of really winning back the Congress and winning statehouses in 2022. And then in 2023, we’ll look around and we’ll go where we’re called.” The campaign-style tour did not go unnoticed by Trump, who released a statement that said: “Good man, but big mistake on not recognizing the massive voter fraud and irregularities” in the 2020 election. There is no evidence of any such fraud or irregularities. Pence, however, may choose to borrow from the playbook of Glenn Youngkin, who recently won election as governor of Virginia by keeping Trump at arm’s length without overtly denouncing him, thereby reaping the best of both worlds: the party establishment and “Make America Great Again” (Maga) base. There are already signs of Pence having his cake and eating it too. In a radio interview on Wednesday he repeated a now familiar line that he and Trump may “never see eye to eye” on the events of 6 January, but he also told several news outlets “there were irregularities that happened at the state level” in the election. He also insisted that he parted with his boss on good terms. This Trump-lite approach might do just enough to satisfy the former president’s followers while promising other Republicans a lower political temperature. Michael D’Antonio, a Pence biographer, said: “What’s weird is he earned his bona fides with Trump by being so craven in his loyalty and then he expressed his independence in that one moment when it really mattered. So he could make a play in both directions and say, ‘Look, I’m Donald Trump but without the violence.’” There are signs of the Maga core “cooling off” or losing interest in politics, D’Antonio added. “I also knew a number of Trump voters who chose him in 2016 because of Pence. So Pence may have built up a lot of credibility with people. And I guess the last point is, you don’t need to win 50% to get the nomination.” Some Republicans, including former UN ambassador Nikki Haley, have said they will not contest the primaries if Trump throws his hat in the ring. Others, such as ex-New Jersey governor Chris Christie, have rejected the idea that a Trump candidacy should prevent others running. Florida governor Ron DeSantis, South Carolina senator Tim Scott and former secretary of state Mike Pompeo are seen as potential contenders to be party standard bearer. Pence, however, might hope that his status as a former vice-president would count in his favor, just as it did for Biden last year. Clues to his intentions include the fact he is writing a book and recording a regular podcast: in the latest episode of American Freedom, the devout Christian says “we hope and pray” the supreme court will overturn Roe v Wade, its 1973 decision upholding a woman’s constitutional right to abortion. Should he secure the nomination, however, Pence would be hard pushed to win over millions of Trump critics who have not forgotten how he failed to speak out or take a principled stand during four years of chaos. There are countless hours of footage of him giving speeches in which he mentions “President Trump” over and over again, praising his “leadership” and calling him “my friend”. Bardella, a former Republican congressional aide, said: “Mike Pence will be regarded for what he is, which is a coward void of any real moral conviction or principles. “The fact that he is turning around now, still trying to court the hearts and minds and votes of the very people who perpetrated the domestic terrorist attack on our country illustrates that he is the worst kind of political figure because, even though he may not believe these things, he’s still pandering and catering to those elements. I don’t believe that history will look back on him kindly at all.”It’s been more than two weeks since Kevin Strickland was released from the Western Missouri correctional center and now he often wakes at 3.30am, long before the dawn, with an urge to get outside. For 43 years of a sentence under a former Missouri law known as the “Hard 50” – which required Strickland to serve at least 50 years before he would be eligible for parole – that was an impossibility. But on 23 November, Strickland, 62, was discharged from the state’s custody, ending his incarceration for a 1978 triple murder he always maintained – and local prosecutors and Kansas City officials now agree – he did not commit. Now he’s waking at his brother’s place. “I’m waking up anxious to get outside,” Strickland told the Guardian at his lawyer’s 38th floor office in Kansas City, the Great Plains out spread out across the arc of the windows. “I want to know and feel light. Three o’clock in the morning, I’m ready. Time to go. I don’t know where I’m going but I know it’s time to go.” In the moment that Strickland walked free, he was Missouri’s longest serving inmate. His conviction for the murders of Sherrie Black, 22, Larry Ingram, 21, and John Walker, 20, during a home invasion largely rested on the eyewitness testimony of the sole survivor of the crime, Cynthia Douglas. Douglas recanted her testimony in 2009, saying she had been pressured by prosecutors to identify Strickland, a Black man who was then 18 years old. But until his case was taken up by the Midwest Innocence Project, which was joined in an effort to overturn his conviction by Jackson county prosecutor Jean Peters Baker, there was little Strickland could do. “You can’t even imagine – and you don’t want to,” Strickland says of his incarceration. “It’s tough to be told when to do things every day. When to lay down. Eat. Sleep. Play. And to know those things are going to repeat day after day after day so long as you keep living – and that it’s not going to change.” “You’ve just got to go through it. It’s dark. I didn’t check out. You have to face it. Deal with it. I’ve seen several suicides, so that would be an indication their will and strength had been compromised.” Strickland, who is confined to a wheelchair until his spinal stenosis is treated, has become in many ways an example of criminal justice inequities, and not just in the circumstances of his conviction – no physical evidence tied him to the crime scene; an all-white jury came back after two hours, though he recalls 15 or 30 minutes. “They sure didn’t waste any time,” he says. His case has also drawn attention to a Missouri law that denies restitution unless an exoneration results solely from DNA profiling analysis. Last week, state representative Mark Sharp filed a bill to change the state’s restitution law to include people found innocent as the result of an evidentiary method. The proposal would allow eligible people to receive as much as $100 aday for every day they spent incarcerated after conviction, or $36,500 a year. In Strickland’s case that would be about $1,569,500 – just short of the $1,734,370 raised by the Innocence Project’s GoFundMe page. In Kansas City last week, many said they had repeatedly donated small amounts to the fund, a gesture that could be interpreted as a show of sympathy and popular resistance to injustice. But not all are on board with Strickland’s release, which followed a law passed in April that gave Baker, the county prosecutor, the right to ask the court to vacate Strickland’s guilty verdict. Missouri’s fiercely conservative attorney general, Eric Schmitt, battled to uphold Strickland’s conviction, delayed his hearing and attempted to block his release with a series of motions, each rejected by retired Missouri appeals court judge James Walsh. “I’d always felt the attorney general’s office was going to oppose everything,” Strickland says. “They’d oppose the change of the day from Monday to Tuesday. It’s what they do.” Missouri governor Mike Parson also rebuffed appeals to pardon him, arguing that it was not a “priority”, even as he pardoned Mark and Patricia McCloskey, the Missouri couple who confronted racial justice protesters with guns last year. But Strickland is now a hero to many. Kansas City mayor Quinton Lucas invited him to switch on the Christmas lights on a 100-foot-tall fir tree; Kansas City Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes said he hoped Strickland’s release “can be a thing that doesn’t let people get in that same situation that he was in and lose a big part of their life”. Strickland says he’s not angered by four decades of incarceration. Anger is a luxury for others, he says, but one that he does not have an inclination to indulge. “I can’t waste energy in anger, so I don’t get angry, because anger sometimes make you get physical. Anger is a strong word and it brings on negativity. I’m just disgusted and disappointed about what has happened to me.” *** As in other recent wrongful conviction releases, including Anthony Broadwater, who served 16 years after being misidentified by author Alice Sebold as the perpetrator of her rape, the question of restitution is a question that keeps surfacing. Having been imprisoned for his entire adult life, Strickland has no savings or ability to show work history for social security entitlements. He plans to use the funds that have been raised “wisely, not wastefully. No partying. There won’t be none of that.” “I’m truly grateful, and I’m not just saying that because it’s the politically correct thing to say. I need it, and I didn’t know there was so many caring people out there.” But the attention he’s getting is unfamiliar. “I can’t say I enjoy it. Big groups are too much, and I don’t like people constantly rolling up me. But you got to take the bitter with the sweet.” His plan is to find a quiet, safe place to live, away from most people, and to try to appreciate the days he has “moving forward”. “I’m going to eat what I want to eat, do a little swimming, and just try to enjoy the remainder of my life.” He might like to live in the country. “I’m a country boy at heart,” he says. “Some people have a problem with squirrel and rabbit. But I’m good with them. I’ll eat some raccoon, deer, wild turkey, snake. And I want to try ‘gator.” But his real ambition is to go fishing. “I’d fish anywhere you told me I could fish. When I fish, I’m not fishing for sport, I fish to eat. That guy Jeremy [Wade, host of TV show River Monsters] – I’d like to go out fishing with him. He knows what he’s doing.” During his incarceration, Strickland was once in contact with Cynthia Douglas, the woman who identified him as being one of the murderers, when he heard that she was trying to clear up her mistake. “I called her to thank her for what she was trying to do. It was just one time. But I knew what had happened – that she had been pressured into saying it was me. I felt pity for her that she’d had to accuse me. But she was trying to do the right thing, so those feelings went out the window.” Strickland is heartened by the increasing number of exonerees from the criminal justice system. What would make a difference to preventing future wrongful convictions, he believes, is to have a public defender in every precinct before suspects are pulled into a lineup. “The justice system doesn’t have to change,” Strickland says. “It has to be re-booted from the ground up. The police are relying on civilians to call in tips. They need to find detectives who want to do their jobs, and not rely on civilians to tell them which way to go.” Being released from long-term incarceration is not simple – mastering a cellphone, for instance, or getting ID can be tricky. The sight of a clock reminds him of head-count time – 5.30am, 7.30, 11, 4, and 10pm. When he was released, he was met by his friend Ricky Kidd, who was exonerated after 23 years and released from Western Missouri correctional. Kidd’s counsel was to take it slow, take time to acclimate, don’t do anything on anybody’s time but your own. “You can’t catch those 43 years,” Strickland says. “Can’t get them back. They’re gone. Never can. So I need to fix that in my mind and slow down.”The questions 1 Earth and which other planet have polar ice caps? 2 Which London parade has a proverbially disappointing aftermath? 3 Which pop star’s real middle names include Pirate? 4 Streymoy is the largest island in which archipelago? 5 What defines a “unicorn” business startup? 6 Which engineer was nicknamed the Colossus of Roads? 7 Native to Asia, what is the longest venomous snake? 8 The Inseparables is a rediscovered novel by which thinker? What links: 9 Geddington; Hardingstone; Waltham; Eleanor of Castile? 10 Arabian Nights translation and Mrs Palfrey at the Claremont? 11 Nastase; Connors (x2); Tanner; McEnroe? 12 Laughing; with two circles; with beret; at the age of 63? 13 Mank; The Girl; My Week with Marilyn; Saving Mr Banks? 14 Merovech; Charlemagne; Hugh Capet? 15 Thiamin; riboflavin; niacin; biotin; folic acid? The answers 1 Mars (carbon dioxide and water ice). 2 Lord Mayor’s Show. 3 Billie Eilish. 4 Faroe Islands. 5 Valuation of over $1bn. 6 Thomas Telford. 7 King cobra. 8 Simone de Beauvoir. 9 Edward I’s queen and her surviving memorial crosses (Waltham was original name). 10 Film couple’s literary namesakes: books written by Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor. 11 Beaten by Björn Borg in Wimbledon men’s singles finals. 12 Rembrandt self-portraits. 13 Films about making (real) films: Citizen Kane; The Birds; The Prince and the Showgirl; Mary Poppins. 14 Gave names to French royal dynasties: Merovingian; Carolingian; Capetian. 15 Vitamin Bs: B1; B2; B3; B7; B9.• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereThat’s it for the live blog today. But before we go, let’s recap the biggest stories from Saturday 11 December 2021. New South Wales recorded 560 new cases, and three Covid-related deaths. It is the highest daily case tally recorded in NSW since 9 October, and the second day in a row with more than 500 infections. The state also recorded three more cases of the Omicron variant, bringing the total to 45. Victoria recorded 1,193 new Covid cases and 13 deaths. The ACT recorded 11 new coronavirus infections. There are five people in hospital, two of whom are in intensive care; none are ventilated. The latest figures show that 98.2% of the territory’s population aged 12 and older are fully vaccinated. Queensland recorded one new community case of Covid. The state health minister, Yvette D’Ath, also announced new changes to quarantine rules. From 1 January, Queenslanders who are fully vaccinated and deemed close contacts will only have to quarantine for seven days, rather than 14. South Australia recorded seven new Covid cases. The Northern Territory recorded one new Covid-19 case. As a result, the remote Northern Territory community of Beswick entered a three-day lockout from 2pm this afternoon. A food and beverage staff member who worked at the Sydney Opera House from 8 to 9 December, the same time that the Aacta awards were taking place, has tested positive for Covid-19. NSW Health said those who were at the Opera House at the same time have not been deemed close or casual contacts, but should monitor for symptoms. Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, is attending a G7 meeting this weekend, despite the fact that Australia is not a member state. The meeting is billed as a show of unity against China and Russia amid growing international tensions. Cricket Australia officially confirmed that the fifth Ashes Test will be played in Hobart. At the Gabba today, Australia won the first Ashes Test and Nathan Lyon took his 400th Test wicket, becoming the third Australian bowler to achieve the feat. Western Australian police suspect that the bushfire in the Margaret River region, first reported on Wednesday, was deliberately lit. In a statement, police said that the fire had burnt about 5,500 hectares of land as of Saturday. Based on an initial assessment of the fire scene by Strike Force Vulcan detectives, it is believed the fire was deliberately lit, and may have been ignited near Mammoth Cave. The statement went on to say: “Detectives would like to hear from anyone who saw any suspicious activity in the vicinity of Mammoth Cave on Wednesday (8 December) or who has dash-cam or mobile phone vision of people or vehicles in the area at the time.” NSW Health has sent through a statement in response to questions about a Covid-19 case at the Aacta awards at the Sydney Opera House on Wednesday night. A spokesperson for the South Eastern Sydney Local Health District said NSW Health had been notified of one case of Covid-19 in an employee who worked at the Sydney Opera House while infectious. “NSW Health has identified the venue as low risk and the SESLHD Public Health Unit is currently investigating this matter,” the spokesperson said. “People who attended the venue during the times that the employee was there are not considered close or casual contacts but must monitor for systems.” The spokesperson added that the staff member who tested positive is in isolation, and the variant has not been determined to be Omicron. Nathan Lyon has finally taken his 400th Test wicket, becoming the third Australian bowler to achieve the feat. Read the Guardian’s story about Lyon’s journey to pass 400 here: From vaccine scepticism to calls to “drain the billabong”, a growing number of Liberal and National figures are playing directly to the political fringes. Read Guardian reporter Paul Karp’s analysis as to why fringe elements within the government are appealing to the radical right: And with that, I am going to hand you over to my colleague Justine Landis-Hanley who will take you through the last bit of today. As always, it’s been a complete pleasure. Health authorities in Victoria are investigating seven suspected Omicron cases. One is a household contact of a person who has tested positive for the variant. More to come. Queensland police have commented after people wanting to cross from New South Wales into Queensland have been warned to expect delays ahead of the much-anticipated border reopening at 1am on Monday. In a media conference on Friday acting chief superintendent Rhys Wildman said there were “no plans” for special lanes at border checkpoints. We’ve looked at this a number of different ways to try and provide the best efficiency. The issue with providing a special lane for border zone residents is the vast majority of traffic is border zone residents. So we’d wind up with a lane that stretches for many kilometres and the other checkpoints would be just about empty. On Saturday, a Queensland police spokesperson said heavy vehicles are “waved through” to an inspection station on the M1 at Coomera. That’s been active since last Thursday night after we closed the heavy vehicle checkpoint on the Gold Coast Highway at Bilinga. The remote Northern Territory community of Beswick will enter a three-day lockout at 2pm today after the territory recorded one new case. The new case is a man in his 20s who tested positive to the virus after a testing blitz in Katherine. The health minister, Natasha Fyles, said authorities were “concerned” by Covid-positive wastewater detected in Beswick and Barunga. Seven new Covid cases have been recorded in SA. A spokesperson for the Opera House said that “a thorough cleaning of affected areas has been carried out and we are taking all necessary steps as required by NSW Health”. The Opera House currently has a number of measures in place in line with our Covid safety plan and our commitment to the health and safety of everyone on our site. Opera House patrons who attended the site on those dates are not required to take any action unless advised by NSW Health via the Service NSW check-in notifications. A Sydney Opera House spokesperson has confirmed that a food and beverage staff member who worked during the Aacta awards has tested positive for Covid-19. The person worked at the Opera House from 8 to 9 December. From AAP: The federal government has been accused of sitting on its hands while Australian “hero” and WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange faces extradition to the US on espionage charges. Assange, 50, is wanted in the US over an alleged conspiracy to obtain and disclose classified information following WikiLeaks’ publication of hundreds of thousands of leaked documents relating to the Afghanistan and Iraq wars. In January a UK court ruled Assange should not be sent to the US, citing a real and “oppressive” risk of suicide, but after a two-day appeal hearing, the high court on Friday sided with the US. The senior judges concluded the risk of suicide was mitigated by assurances from American authorities that Assange would not being held in highly restrictive prison conditions if extradited. Assange’s lawyers have said they intend to challenge the ruling with another appeal, this time in the UK’s supreme court. The federal independent MP Andrew Wilkie is calling on the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, to “end this lunacy” and demand the US and UK allow Assange to be released. Mr Assange should be looking forward to spending Christmas with his two young boys and his fiancee, but instead he’s facing a 175-year jail sentence and the very real possibility of living out his final days behind bars. He is a hero, not a villain, and journalism is not a crime. Again the United Kingdom proves it’s a lackey of the United States and that Australia is delighted to go along for the ride. People wanting to cross from New South Wales into Queensland have been warned to expect delays ahead of the much anticipated border reopening at 1am on Monday. But those who have been navigating the checkpoints for months say poor traffic management is to blame for the current wait times. Queensland truck driver Michael told Guardian Australia he does three return trips to Sydney every week. So every second day I’m coming back across that border. I’ve watched it all. Michael said the checkpoint on the M1 pulls together cars and trucks into a single lane, creating a “huge bottleneck”. This was a problem when border checkpoints first began, he said, but was solved in recent months with a system where cars were sent to the left lane to be checked and trucks to the right lane where they were permitted to roll through and provide their papers at a later point. In recent weeks the checkpoint moved and it’s back to the single lane, Michael said. They’ve created the big bottleneck again and all the headaches. It’s not that there’s too many people passing through, it’s just ineffective traffic management. Queensland police did not immediately respond to questions on Saturday. Large number of travellers have begun arriving at the border ahead of the scheduled reopening on Monday morning. Stranded Queenslanders unable to enter their home state since July have been forced to live in caravans and at showgrounds in the NSW northern rivers region while waiting for the border to reopen. But authorities have warned of hours-long delays and asked people to consider travelling at a later date and to “pack their patience”. The online system where people can apply for new border passes to enter Queensland will go live at midnight on Sunday, just one hour before the border opens on Monday at 1am. The Aactas red carpet at the Sydney Opera House on Wednesday has reportedly been listed as a Covid exposure site – we are working on confirmation and will have more details for you soon. The event was attended by some of Australia’s biggest celebrities – Rebel Wilson, Taika Waititi, Sarah Snook, Rachel Griffiths, Deborah Mailman and Baz Luhrmann to name a few. The Western Australian government has created an awareness program to help deal with sexual assault and harassment in the mining industry. From AAP: A new $1.9m awareness program will address the “completely unacceptable” level of under-reporting of sexual assault and harassment in WA’s mining and resources sector. The Mental Awareness, Respect and Safety program is the WA government’s latest move to address the crisis, exposed in a recent parliamentary inquiry. The initiative aims to address mental health, workplace culture, drug and alcohol use, and mine safety issues. The culture of WA’s mining and resources workplaces have been under the spotlight this year after several women came forward to police detailing claims of assaults on major mining sites. A parliamentary inquiry prompted by the revelations heard evidence of widespread sexual misconduct within the industry. “The level of under-reporting of sexual assault and harassment in the mining and resources sector is completely unacceptable,” said WA women’s interests minister, Simone McGurk, in a statement on Saturday. “The McGowan government is acting to ensure workers – especially those working on mine sites – are safe and protected at work.” And I’ve got a better breakdown of Victoria’s Covid numbers. Yesterday, 4,056 vaccine doses were administered by Victoria’s state-commissioned services. The total number of doses administered through state-run services is 4,887,560. Some 94.2% of Victorians aged 12 and over have now had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and 92.0% have had two doses. This excludes the most recent commonwealth data. There are 323 Covid-19 cases in hospital in Victoria – 68 active cases in ICU, with 29 of those on a ventilator. There are an additional 44 cleared cases in ICU. Of those in hospital, 61.8% were not fully vaccinated, and of those in ICU, 81.8% were not fully vaccinated. Victoria was notified of 1,193 new cases of Covid-19 yesterday. All cases were locally acquired except for two that were acquired overseas. The 11 local government areas with the highest number of new cases are Hume, Casey, Brimbank, Whittlesea, Moreland, Greater Dandenong, Melton, Kingston, Monash, Glen Eira and Port Phillip. All locations containing new cases will be published today at Victorian Covid-19 data. There are 11,457 active cases in Victoria. The total number of confirmed cases in Victoria since the beginning of the pandemic is 134,911. There are no new confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in Victoria. To mark a century since the birth of the late Adelaide-born artist Jeffrey Smart, the National Gallery of Australia is showing 125 of his works. One reason his paintings have gone up in price is because that’s what happens when there’s a big show, such as the one at the National Gallery of Australia celebrating 100 years since his birth. Another reason is love. Specifically, how the love for Smart’s paintings stays unrequited because it’s never wholly fulfilled. Read the full story here: The Queensland government has unveiled plans to set up an independent Environmental Protection Agency in the state. From AAP: Queensland has started the process of setting up an independent environmental regulator. The state is the only jurisdiction remaining in Australia that doesn’t have an Environmental Protection Agency dedicated to protecting the environment. In other states, EPAs work with businesses, government, community and environmental groups to reduce pollution, waste and any adverse impacts on the environment and human health. The state environment minister, Meaghan Scanlon, has launched a public consultation to set up an EPA. “We made an election commitment to investigate and consult on the establishment of an independent Environmental Protection Agency to protect our environment, provide greater investment certainty, and support economic recovery,” she said in a statement on Saturday. “Queensland is the only state in Australia without an external independent Environmental Protection Agency.” The government has called for members of the public to fill in an eight-question online survey, which will be used to plan the new agency. And lastly, Leigh is asked if states should reimpose restrictions if Omicron pops off. This is what he has to say: States will make their own decisions based on the health advice that comes in. There’s still a lot of uncertainty around the Omicron variant. There’s uncertainty over whether it is more contagious. Whether it is deadlier. And how it responds to the various vaccines that are on offer. As that information emerges, we’ll be in a better place to understand how to respond to the Omicron variant. So I don’t think that any responsible politician would be answering hypotheticals as to how we should react to Omicron. We need to do it based on all of the evidence and guided by the health experts. In response to Josh Frydenberg’s announcement this morning in The Australian that the government will increase permanent migration to around 160,000 a year, Leigh says this: We don’t have the detail that would allow Australians to judge what the migration settings will look like. That’s going to go to the migration mix. It’s got to talk about how our balance between temporary and permanent, between family and the unskilled and skilled migration. There’s a lot of good work that’s been done on this by the Grattan Institute, the Migration Council. It’s not like there’s a shortage of good ideas out there. But instead, now, I feel like we’re getting a rewind of the duplicity that we saw in 2019 when the Morrison government, within months, was trying to claim credit for both the decrease and an increase in the migration intake. Leigh says the government should listen to the states rather than pick fights with them: “I know that the Morrison government is desperate to try to deflect attention away from their economic failures, their failures on vaccines and quarantine, and the way in which that has damaged Australia. But I think that rather than trying to pick fights with premiers and chief ministers, they’d be better to work with the states and territories and to focus on sorting out the issues that are clearly the remit of the federal government. Providing a sense of certainty to Australians as to what the migration settings will look like. The federal government does have clear responsibility for our external border, but instead it wants to change the conversation and talk about the internal ones. Leigh says the government has no real policy on migration: We’ve also had some announcements today around migration. Well, more headlines than announcements to be honest. Australians are wise to this mob when it comes to migration. Australian people will remember in 2019 Scott Morrison going out there and claiming a congestion-busting cut to migration. And then, just months later, Josh Frydenberg bringing down a budget that had baked into it a significant increase in Australia’s migration. They want to have it both ways. We have in Australia now record numbers of migrants who don’t have a pathway to permanency. Leigh says the Australian economy will rebound, but it will be because of the Australian people – not the government. The Morrison government is a little bit like a guy who digs a really deep hole and then wants people to pat him on the back because he starts to make his way out of it. The fact is the Australian economy is struggling. Right now, we’ve got real wages going backwards. We’ve got housing affordability at historic lows. And we have many Australians feeling that their pay packet just isn’t keeping up with the cost of living. The shadow assistant minister for treasury, Andrew Leigh, is speaking in Canberra, in response to Josh Frydenberg’s presser earlier which made the argument for strong economic bounce back. Leigh says: While good governments take the blame on their own shoulders and pass the credit on to others, Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg are just the opposite. The moment the Australian economy is struggling, they’re nowhere to be seen, but they’re racing for a headline the moment there’s any chance for an uptick. At the start of this year, Australia had the slowest vaccine rollout in the advanced world. And in the September quarter, partly as a result of that, we recorded the worst quarterly growth performance in the advanced world. Look out Queensland – new contact tracing locations have just been added to the list: A Perth man who practised as a psychiatrist is facing nine child abuse charges. From AAP: WA police say their investigation into the 47-year-old began after they received information relating to his activities while he was practising as a psychiatrist, between 2012 and 2016. The probe found another nine victims, the police say. Police raided addresses associated with the man and seized various items. The man was then charged with seven counts of indecent dealings with a child under 13 and two charges of indecent dealings with a child under 16. The man, from Success, will face Perth magistrates court on Saturday. Police are calling for anyone with relevant information to come forward. Earlier we had some lines from Lane Sainty on the Western Australian bushfires. But you can read the full story here: The New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has talked up the trans-Tasman friendship in an interview with AAP: Jacinda Ardern insists the trans-Tasman friendship with Australia is in fine health, and she won’t join the international pile-on critiquing Scott Morrison’s foreign engagement. But nor is the New Zealand prime minister willing to support her Australian counterpart for recent dealings that have left France fuming, the US cold and have further provoked China. In a rare sit-down interview with Australian media, Ardern said she hadn’t drawn any conclusions about Morrison’s trustworthiness from the Aukus episode, which upset a trio of world powers. “I don’t have to base the relationship on what I observe of others because I’ve got my own experience to base the relationship on,” she said from her Wellington office. The two leaders’ most recent dealing came last week, when New Zealand joined Australian forces in the Solomon Islands to diffuse tensions there. “We do stay in regular contact ... and we don’t schedule it, we just pick up the phone,” Ardern said. The trans-Tasman relationship is pivotal to New Zealand, which has one-fifth of Australia’s population and a GDP seven times smaller. Australia’s centrality was demonstrated this week by new opposition leader Christopher Luxon, who was quizzed by TVNZ’s QandA program after taking the top job. “Our most important relationship is that of Australia ... our economy is very tied to the success of Australia,” he said. Ardern is an avid follower of Australian goings-on, referencing the vaccine rollout in Queensland and Covid-19 restrictions in the ACT during the interview. She is acutely aware of the upcoming federal election, which could unite the Australian Labor and NZ Labour parties in office – which has happened for just one year of the past three decades. She has an association with the Australian opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, having invited him to Wellington previously, and the pair maintain irregular contact but she insists she will “not jump into the politics” of Australia. “Our relationship with Australia is so important to us that I will place a priority on making sure that there is a solid one with the prime minister of Australia, and we do have a solid relationship,” Ardern said. Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, is attending a G7 meeting this weekend, despite the fact that Australia is not a member state. The G7 meeting, held against the backdrop of a potential invasion of Ukraine, tensions in the South China Sea and the potential collapse of the Iran nuclear deal, is being billed by the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, as a “chance to show a united front against malign behaviour – including Russian posturing towards Ukraine”. It will also be interesting to see what happens when Payne comes face to face with her French counterpart, JLe Drian, for the first time since Australia announced the Aukus pact, effectively ending its contract to buy French submarines. Read more here: New Zealand has reported 63 new Covid cases, its lowest daily total in 52 days, which it attributes to soaring vaccination rates. AAP reports: New Zealand’s grip on its Delta outbreak continues to tighten, ahead of a major shake-up of domestic settings. On Saturday, health officials announced 63 new community Covid-19 cases, the lowest daily total in 52 days. Public health experts attribute the drop in daily cases – down from highs more than 200 in mid-November – to soaring vaccination rates. Vaccination rates are slightly above Australia’s, with 94% of Kiwis aged 12 and above partially vaccinated, and 89% fully vaccinated with two doses of Pfizer. Of Saturday’s 63 cases, 53 are in Auckland, with the rest spread across Northland, the Waikato, Taranaki and Canterbury, and a historical case in Southland. One of the Auckland cases is a border worker. An investigation will probe whether they were infected in the community or through a quarantine leak. From Wednesday, and for the first time since mid-August, the government will allow travel in and out of Auckland for all Kiwis. While travellers must show proof of vaccination or a negative test, health officials warn the spread to different corners of the country is inevitable and have urged vaccine hold-outs to inoculate themselves. New Zealand’s death toll stands at 46, after two deaths on Friday. There are 60 Kiwis in hospital, with three in intensive care. Earlier the Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, also announced new changes to quarantine rules. From 1 January, Queenslanders who are fully vaccinated and deemed close contacts will only have to quarantine for seven days. On day five they will have to return a negative test to be released on day seven. After they leave quarantine they will need to continue to wear a mask outdoors and avoid high-risk settings from day eight to 14. “We don’t want you going into hospitals, aged care facilities, correctional facilities, youth detention centres and the like,” D’Ath said. “We know there is still a risk from day eight to 14, but we know that risk is reduced when you are fully vaccinated.” What better way to symbolise your favourable turn in fortune than with adorable bunnies, the sign of good luck? Comedian Hannah Gadsby has marked her return to the Sydney Opera House with four rabbits across the stage, though you will probably first notice the one in the Joan Sutherland theatre that functions as a lantern, a beacon of hope. Read our five-star review here: Firefighters are hopeful milder weather conditions on Saturday will help contain an out-of-control bushfire at Margaret River. The fire in Leeuwin-Naturaliste national park has burned through 5,200 hectares since it started on Wednesday morning in Boranup, Western Australia. The blaze was “reasonably steady overnight” but remains uncontained and uncontrolled, a Department of Fire and Emergency Services spokesperson said on Saturday morning. It is burning in an easterly direction, with more than 150 firefighters on the scene. An emergency warning remains in place for people in the national park bounded by Mammoth Cave Road to the north, Caves Road and the park boundary to the east, Grace Road and Bridle Trail to the south and the coast to the west. People in the area are urged to leave now. If they cannot, they should shelter at home in a room with two exits and water, such as a kitchen or laundry. An evacuation centre has been set up at the Margaret River Recreation Centre. Watch and act and advice warnings are in place for other parts of the Augusta-Margaret River shire. Bussell Highway has been closed between Forest Grove Road and the Brockman Highway due to heavy smoke in the area. Queensland has recorded one new community case of Covid, the state’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, has announced. The case was flagged as a potential positive on the Gold Coast yesterday and was confirmed today. The person had been potentially contagious in the community for five days on the Gold Coast between 6 and 10 December. And lastly, Frydenberg again makes his case for a strong economic comeback from the pandemic: Our strong economic support through programs like jobkeeper have put us in the position we are in today. There are some $370bn that has been accumulated on household and business balance sheets that was not there at the start of the pandemic. That is money that people have saved because they have not been able to go out and spend because of the health restrictions in place. But also the economic support that we as a government have been providing. Frydenberg is asked how the government plans to help alleviate the skills shortage. He says: Skilled workers are in high demand. We are seeing that in a range of sectors across the economy – construction, mining, agriculture, hospitality and professional services as well. We have announced that we were bringing in 200,000 people, whether they were skilled workers, whether they were people who were coming through the humanitarian intake. Obviously we made a decision to put a two-week pause on that reopening, based on medical advice at the time with respect to Omicron. We will make a decision in the coming days about the next steps with respect to that pause, but the early signs are indeed positive, as I say. We are certainly focused on opening those borders as soon as possible so that international students and skilled workers can come in and play their role across our economy. We are also investing heavily in new programs like the jobtrainer program, providing 450,000 places, of which 250,000 already have enrolments in. At the same time, we have supported apprentices. Frydenberg is talking about what advice the government has received on Omicron: The medical advice is still coming in, in terms of the Omicron variant, but we have heard from the medical professionals and the chief medical officer that it looks encouraging and that some of the early signs are more positive than initially thought. The virus is certainly highly transmissible but perhaps not as severe as other variants. We have not seen the mass hospitalisations in South Africa, for example, the vaccination rates are lower than a country like Australia, and there is no evidence, as yet, that the vaccine is not a defence against Omicron. Frydenberg is asked if all Australians could be together at Christmas – which leads, of course to discussing Western Australia: Obviously WA is taking its own decision and it needs to explain to its own public. But as the vaccination rates have lifted we have seen states be more confident that they can reopen in a Covid-safe way. I am looking forward to this Christmas. I am not getting ahead of ourselves. We have a lot of work still to do to maintain this momentum in the economic recovery, to ensure that Australians are kept safe from Covid, and next year there is an election to be won as well. Frydenberg says the pandemic is not over: The Omicron variant is a reminder of the challenges that we face. But states need to keep calm and carry on. And not overreact to the Omicron variant. Our economic recovery depends upon it. We have the vaccination rates now at record highs and that has proven to be a vital defence against Covid. So Australians can go into Christmas confident about the future, looking forward to being reunited with friends and with family, enjoying a well-deserved break after what has been a pretty trying two years. Frydenberg says with lockdowns lifting, the economy has grown strongly: Business investment is up 16% over this year and next, and that is the strongest business investment since the mining boom more than one decade ago. Non-mining investment will reach its highest level on record at $200bn. Non-mining investment, I say that again, non-mining investment will reach its record level at more than $200bn. This is a sign of growing confidence in our economy by businesses big and small and by households who are going out and spending. Frydenberg is speaking about the Australian economy, arguing government policies saved jobs and helped the economy rebound: Jobkeeper, which saved more than 700,000 jobs, the cashflow boost, $750 pensioners’ payments and others on income support. It was a team Australia moment. And what we saw was that Australia, ahead of any major advanced economy in the world, had employment levels and growth levels coming back to where they were pre-pandemic. This was a strong sign of the recovery in the Australian economy. And then we were hit by Delta. And 13 million of our fellow Australians went into an extended lockdown period. And that hurt the economy. And we saw that reflected in the September quarter of the national accounts. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg is speaking now in Melbourne. There were three new cases confirmed with the Omicron variant of concern overnight, and more are expected as the results of genomic testing is confirmed. It brings the total number of Omicron cases to 45 in NSW. To date, no Omicron cases have been admitted to hospital in NSW for treatment of Covid-19. NSW recorded 560 new cases of Covid-19 in the 24 hours to 8pm last night. Sadly, NSW Health is today reporting three deaths. A man in his 80s from south-western Sydney died at Liverpool Hospital. He was a resident of the Gillawarna Village Aged Care facility, where he acquired his infection. He had received three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine and had underlying health conditions. This is the second death linked to this facility. A man in his 80s from eastern Sydney died at St Vincents Hospital. He had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine and had underlying health conditions. A woman in her 70s from the Riverina region died at Albury Base Hospital. She had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine and had underlying health condition. There are currently 150 Covid-19 cases admitted to hospital, with 25 people in intensive care, eight of whom require ventilation. There were 82,517 Covid-19 tests reported to 8pm last night, compared with the previous day’s total of 90,223. And we’ve got a breakdown of Covid numbers from the ACT: In the last 24 hours to 8pm, the territory recorded 11 new cases, meaning there are 76 now active. There are five people in hospital, two are in intensive care but none are ventilated. A whopping 98.2% of the population aged 12 and over are now fully vaccinated. That’s actually incredible. Details of the shock decision to close Circus Oz are emerging as circus company members meet to try to save the revolutionary 44-year-old troupe, which started as an artist collective and put Australia’s larrikin spirit on the world stage. On Friday, the board of Circus Oz released a statement saying the members of the company had voted to reject reforms proposed by its funding partners – choosing instead to wind up its operations. Good news for parts of Vicotria as that weather moves offshore. Cricket Australia has officially confirmed that the fifth Ashes Test will be played in Hobart. AAP reports: CA has confirmed the series finale, beginning on 14 January, will be a day-night Test staged at Bellerive. The ground hasn’t hosted a Test since 2016, while it has never featured in any Ashes series. The match was slated to be held in Perth, but CA hit a brick wall in its talks with Western Australia officials while trying to negotiate border exemptions. Cricket Tasmania and the Tasmanian government put together a bid that trumped the case to schedule a second Test at either the MCG or SCG. “I would like to thank all the states and territories who took part in this process,” CA chief executive Nick Hockley said. “The submissions we received were outstanding and we had no doubt that each of the venues that took part would have hosted a wonderful event. “There were a range of considerations, including commercial, logistical and operational factors.” From AAP: The cost of the floods and storms that hit Victoria earlier this year is set to rise, with the Victorian government pledging a further $73m to fund the recovery. The June storms brought down trees, caused major flooding and destroyed powerlines across the east of the state. The event affected 2 million hectares of public land, including in the Dandenong Ranges and Gippsland, state environment minister Lily D’Ambrosio says. Under the funding package announced on Saturday, $27.6m will go towards repairing roads and access tracks needed for firefighting. A further $10.7m will fund safety works in forests and parks, with work on hazardous trees costing another $7.5 million. The Gippsland riverbank also needs work, to the tune of $5.2m. The number of Australians challenging National Disability Insurance Agency decisions has exploded since July, with new data revealing a 300% increase in legal appeals. As the Morrison government confronts Labor claims about “stealth cuts” to funding packages, figures obtained by Guardian Australia confirm a huge rise in applications to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal over NDIS decisions. From AAP: It is the highest daily tally recorded in NSW since October 9, two days before lockdown lifted, and the second day in a row with more than 500 cases. Health authorities are concerned festive season celebrations are driving the spike in cases, and are urging caution. “The transmission in these types of settings is contributing to the increase in cases in NSW,” Dr Jeremy McAnulty said on Friday. “We urge people not to attend any of these social functions or venues if you have any symptoms at all, even if mild.” NSW Health is already battling to contain several large transmission events. A trivia night at a Sydney pub sparked a new cluster of cases, with at least 46 patrons testing positive to the virus after attending the Oxford Tavern in Petersham on November 30. Authorities are also concerned about 140 passengers who embarked on a Sydney Harbour cruise on Friday night which has so far resulted in five cases of the Omicron variant. The number of people diagnosed with the Omicron variant of COVID-19 in NSW has reached 42. The high court on Friday refused the Friends of Leadbeater’s Possum special leave to appeal a federal court ruling that federal environment laws don’t apply to logging in Victoria’s Central Highlands. The Victorian Forest Products Association and Australian Forest Products Association said the high court decision vindicated Victoria’s sustainable and essential native hardwood forest industry and the regional forest agreement framework. “Finally some common sense has prevailed with today’s High Court decision the final nail in the coffin in this long running legal saga, VFPA ceo Deb Kerr said in a statement. Nationals senator Bridget McKenzie also welcomed the decision, saying the Friends of Leadbeater’s Possum’s “green warfare” against VicForests’ native forest operations has jeopardised the livelihoods of thousands of workers throughout the timber supply chain. “Supporting forestry is not anti-environment,” the Victorian senator said in a statement. Barns says he sees no difference between what journalists do and what Julian Assange did: “What he did was to obtain information that was clearly in the public interest. It was clearly in the public interest for them to see the collateral murder video, where you see the gunning down of innocent people in Iraq by US troops. “That’s clearly in the public interest. There is no difference. And I think that there has been in the past, as you know, a debate about ‘is Assange a journalist or not?’ It doesn’t matter. “The issue is that the material that he was able to publish, and was published by other organisations such as the New York Times, is clearly in the public interest.” Barns is asked about Assange’s health: “Look, he’s remarkably stoic given the blows that he’s endured. But you know, he’s in Belmarsh Prison, which is a hellish place, usually reserved for those who have been found convicted of terrorism offences. “And environment for him and the continual blows that he’s getting through this process mean that his health continues to deteriorate. And, in fact, that was one of the points that was raised and successfully argued in front of the judge in January this year.” Greg Barns, who is an adviser and barrister with the Julian Assange campaign is talking on the ABC now about the high court of the UK ruling Assange can be extradited to the US. “It’s a very disappointing ruling. It’s a disappointing ruling for all Australians and particularly the Australian media. “What it means is that any Australian journalist who finds themselves in the ire of the United States for publishing material that deems that it doesn’t want to be published could find themselves on the end of an extradition request. “Because, of course, Assange had no contact with the United States.” Farmland prices are soaring at quadruple the rates of median growth in Australia’s capital cities – as 30-year price highs across agricultural commodities combine with low interest rates and generally good seasonal conditions. Experts are beginning to warn that the “exorbitant” price of farmland is prohibitive for those starting out, echoing city housing concerns. Two of the government’s biggest departments were found to have broken freedom of information law within a month of each other, prompting the watchdog to demand urgent explanations and reforms from both, documents show. The Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) last month found the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade breached the law by dragging out and eventually refusing a request by lawyer and FoI specialist Peter Timmins, documents seen by Guardian Australia show. From AAP: Dozens of shoplifters have been arrested after a three-day blitz across Sydney stores, with stolen goods worth more than $11,000 recovered. Operation Lightfingers this week targeted thieves in a number of major retail outlets across the Sydney CBD, Ultimo and Bondi areas. Some 84 people were arrested and either charged, issued a Criminal Infringement Notice or a warning. Among those sprung by police were a pair of woman, aged 31 and 26, who were allegedly trying to steal a trolley full of cosmetics and clothing worth more than $3400 from a store in Bondi Junction. For AAP: Some have been known to use the back of a kitchen knife, others the edge of a bench top and some (although don’t try this at home kids) their teeth. But popping the top off a cold one is about to get classy, with beer brewer James Squire poised to unveil Australia’s most valuable bottle opener worth a cool $30,000. The one-off collector’s item was handcrafted from sterling silver, burl walnut, grade 5 titanium and rare Damascus steel of the type used to make ancient swords, and took three years to source. The opener is destined to go under the hammer, with all proceeds of the auction to be donated to Rural Aid to support farmers in need. It’s not just the gossip-hungry who have been devouring every bit of news about marriage bust-ups among Sydney’s fund manager set – or, at least, it shouldn’t be. For while many may be reading the details of the dissolution of the marital bonds between fund manager Charlie Aitken and his wife, Ellie, with an eye to the details (Charlie has hooked up with his business partner’s wife, Hollie Nasser, who was Ellie’s best friend) investors who have put their money with Aitken Investment Management have a financial interest, not just a prurient one, in the unfolding drama. From AAP: One in five Australians in the outer suburbs have been living in “financial survival mode” during the pandemic and are more likely to feel stressed, frustrated and anxious than the national average. City reaches are home to many of the essential workers who kept the Australian economy ticking over during rolling lockdowns yet their needs are being overlooked, the National Growth Areas Alliance (NGAA) says. Analysis of over 80,000 interviews commissioned by the group reveals 21 per cent of outer metropolitan residents are in survival mode. More than half of them are struggling to pay at last one major bill, whether it be to meet their energy needs, groceries, rent or personal loans. For those aged 40 and under, the figure jumps to 64 per cent. NGAA CEO Bronwen Clark says government is failing a segment of the population representing 5.2 million people in total and growing at twice the national average. “Our outer suburbs are home to the most essential workers and faced the strictest lockdowns,” she said. “These are the communities that saw us through the pandemic and to date governments have failed to understand their needs. “Now, governments must join the dots between high COVID rates, high outbreak risk factors and the lag in social infrastructure in fast-growing outer suburbs.” Assistant Commissioner Nicola Hogan from the New South Wales SES is currently on ABC. She said they received 450 requests for assistance over the last 24 hours, 31 of those being flood rescues. “Predominantly in the south-east of the state, although we do still have significant flooding in the north-west and west of New South Wales. “There were some storms experienced in the Sydney metropolitan area also yesterday, so it was quite a day of wild weather that we were experiencing over the last 24 hours.” For those ready and raring for some searing political analysis this morning, I’ve got this piece from Katherine Murphy for you ... An emergency warning remains in place for a fire burning near Margaret River in Western Australia’s south-west. Despite conditions easing yesterday, the blaze at the Leeuwin-Naturaliste national park is still out of control. It has burned through about 6,000 hectares, but so far no buildings have been destroyed. Good morning, this is Cait Kelly – we will be going through the day’s news together. The number of cases of the Omicron Covid variant from a Sydney Harbour cruise is expected to grow. Last night, NSW Health added two new Covid exposure sites visited by confirmed cases linked to the cruise that could be the Omicron strain – the Albion Hotel in Parramatta and the Cult nightclub in Potts Point. There are two suspected Omicron cases in South Australia while Victoria has had three instances of the variant, two of which were in hotel quarantine yesterday. New South Wales has 42 Omicron cases of the strain but none have yet been admitted to hospital. Overall infections are on the rise in NSW. The state reported 516 new cases on Friday, its highest daily caseload in two months. Victoria recorded 1,206 daily infections and two more deaths. The ACT detected six additional cases and the Northern Territory four, while there were six locally acquired cases in Queensland. National cabinet was focusing on Omicron yesterday, with the country’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, saying health experts were in the early stages of understanding the variant. We’re going to be bringing you updates from Margaret River, where a huge bushfire has been raging the past few days. The clean-up is continuing in the NSW south coast town of Mogo, where there was flooding yesterday, including up to 200mm in some parts. And with that, let’s get cracking on the news.There’s much to be said for idle thoughts in the right minds, and Jan Morris was particularly good at giving whimsy free rein. A writer of places and their people, she didn’t much care for the label “travel writer”, presumably because of its trivial and transactional connotations, and I doubt she would have been so grandiose as to style herself an “adventurer”. This book of brief essays, written in the last decade or so of her life and always designed to be published posthumously – “by the time you read it I shall be gone!” she writes cheerfully in her “pre-mortem” introduction – is filled with whimsy and, aside from decidedly light musings on matters such as sneezing, marmalade and hot-water bottles, she proves that being fanciful is not the enemy of seriousness. Take her jeu d’esprit in the matter of the late Diana, Princess of Wales, that “burr in the heart of the monarchy, lovely but sly”. In Morris’s view, her death was marked in precisely, diametrically, the wrong way: “The nation mourned a martyr when it should have been celebrating a miscreant.” It would have been far better, the writer suggests, had Britain embraced her true nature while she was alive, given her the royal yacht Britannia, repainted it in bright colours and instructed her to tour the world’s ports, spreading glamour and cheer on behalf of the nation. Imagine, Morris asks us, Diana and hunky entourage arriving at some dusty and remote Mediterranean island at dawn, blasting rock’n’roll by way of reveille, and leading its bemused and bewitched inhabitants in a merry dance around the harbour until wine flows from the fountains and flowers rain down on the streets. It is, if nothing else, a rather more enticing vision of noblesse oblige than those to which we have become wearily accustomed. But Morris’s penchant for allegories means that her essays are rarely “nothing else”. Threaded through these pieces is a “dedication to the proposition that nothing is only what it seems”, and a recurring fascination with applying that principle to weighty topics that range from the difference between nations and nation states, patriotism and nationalism, the contrasts between the conception and the execution of the feminist project, the subtle changes that mark the transition between countries and cultures, the past and the present. Prompted by a graffito in Trieste – a city of complex origins and identity about which Morris wrote a whole book – the writer ponders her response to its exhortation to “FUK NATIONS”, a sentiment that she grants the status of not only “considered historical opinion” but one with which she sympathises. “I dislike the word ‘nationalist’. I dislike the ungenerous, niggling, mean sound of it. In my mind it goes with wars and squabbles and prejudices and old historic quarrels best forgotten. But I am sick to death of nationality, too, and think it is a dying concept anyway. The earth is becoming just too small for political nationalities. To my mind they will one day seem as absurdly primitive as dynastic wars, or the divine right of kings.” What Morris does believe in is attachment; that a commitment to an idea, whether emotional or intellectual, is itself an inalienable form of belonging. Her elaboration of that argument in terms of patriotism – including her own proud Welshness – is both stirring and moving: “I like to imagine a world,” she writes, “in which the things that are rightly Caesar’s, like war and foreign policy and higher economics, are left to Caesar, at the centre of things; but the things that are rightly God’s, the way we think, and behave, and talk, and believe, and organise our private lives, are left to the nations.” And there is a rousing sting in the tail: “As for the Nation-States, which have done so much evil in their time, and bring out the worst in us still, fuck ’em all.” Among the several pleasures of Allegorizings are its shifts in tone and mood; alongside ideological and philosophical argument come Morris’s self-conscious indulgence of her own idiosyncrasies, and her airing of private passions (see the above marmalade, which sparks a revelation that Morris eats the stuff with apples when she is being austere, and sausages when seeking hedonism). She is, on occasion, like a faintly ironised Charles Pooter, wondering where England’s glories have been hidden as she takes a train through the industrial heartlands of the Midlands, reflecting that those glories “were almost beyond my imagination, indeed, as I masticated the Penn State Sour Cream and Chive-Flavoured Pretzels with which Virgin Rail sustains its first-class passengers”. Naturally, given that Morris wrote these pieces towards the end of her life – she died in November last year, at the age of 94 – there is a fair amount about the challenges of ageing; the time when you might begin to keep a note of the best cities, in terms of helpful bystanders, in which to fall over. Her account of a cruise holiday is wonderfully delicate, seeing her move from a mild and comical suspicion of her fellow travellers to a whole-hearted admiration for their determination to extract maximum pleasure from their surroundings, even in the face of limitations. She begins the voyage by christening the ship the Geriatrica, but ends by renaming it the SS Indomitable, bookending her story with a woman who quotes Groucho Marx to her at the beginning of the holiday but gets it wrong: “‘It goes like this,’ said she. ‘Next to a dog, a book is a man’s best friend, but inside it’s too dark to read anyway. Isn’t that hilarious? I just love it.’” Morris is non-plussed. On the final day aboard, she pops up again, having worked out her mistake: “‘I knew I’d got that Groucho story wrong. I’ve been thinking about it all this time, and this is how it should go: Outside of a dog, a book is a man’s best friend, but inside it’s too dark to read anyway.”’ “This time I really did laugh,” writes Morris. “I marvelled that throughout our voyage, in museum, taverna and Seafarers’ Lounge, she had been assiduously worrying out that joke; and even as she spoke my eyes strayed to the Sunshine Promenade above her head, where the passengers were seizing their last chance of seaboard exercise around the measured mile.” Really significant writers are made so by the quality of their noticing, their attention to what happens both when they are there and when they are not. Allegorizings might be an addendum to a life that brought us so much of this kind of significant work, but it’s a welcome and delightful one. • Allegorizings by Jan Morris is published by Faber (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Perched 550 metres above sea level in the Swiss resort village of Arosa is a three-bedroom ski chalet that proves that a small space can feel expansive – and that, sometimes, a dated interior doesn’t need ripping out. Built in the 1970s, the house was bought by its owner, Zurich-based interior designer Claudia Silberschmidt, in 2016. It hadn’t changed in that time, and was filled with 70s fittings and furniture, including wall-to-wall beige carpets, dark orange tiles in the living space, and a striking wood-panelled suspended ceiling. She and her husband spent their visits that winter soaking up the chalet’s dated ambience while deciding how they might transform it. “We wanted to adopt its 70s spirit and not force a wooden ‘mountain chic’ look on to it,” she says. “To freshen it up without erasing its identity, which had been what attracted us in the first place.” Silberschmidt has a long family connection to Arosa: her great-grandfather was the architect of a prominent local hotel; her grandfather was the hotelier there; and her father was born and brought up in the village. Silberschmidt visited the chalet as a child, and recalls feeling at home there, even then. “It’s not a real beauty, but it’s the perfect size and location,” she says. A tiny galley kitchen with black resin worktops was originally separated from the living and dining area by a wall; Silberschmidt removed it to create an open, communal kitchen, living and dining room. She designed a table made from natural spruce (inspired by a stack of freshly milled timber), which wraps around a supporting column and doubles as a kitchen worktop. Its far end resembles a stack of Jenga bricks. This, together with a built-in L-shaped bench upholstered in orange/pale pink fabric – a nod to 70s-style booth seating – divides the kitchen from the rest of the space. “I wanted a simple ‘no design’ table,” says Silberschmidt. She constructed it from pale, new wood, which contrasts with the dark grey walls and ceiling. She kept the decorative ceiling panel, painting it the same grey as the walls but adding blue highlights to create a retro-style feature. This is suspended over the dining and living area, marking it out from the kitchen space. Grey, blue and red tones fill the living area: the sofa is upholstered in the same grey fabric (from Andrew Martin) as the curtains. An open fire with a mantel above it and a wide shelf in front, along with an original decorative plaster surround, is painted the same colour as the walls; and the previously orange tiles are painted grey. A series of mismatched stools and chairs, including a fluffy blue love seat (for similar, try roselandfurniture.com) and stools surround a coffee table by British artist Paul Kelley: it’s made from copper cubes and resembles a Rubik’s Cube. The rug was designed by Silberschmidt (from frohsinn.ch), and pops of colour come from a vase and a 1960s ceramic lamp made in the former West Germany. A lot of people are afraid of using dark colours in a small space, says Silberschmidt, but if you combine it with “bright, happy details”, it can actually make the space feel larger. “When you paint the walls the same colour as the ceiling, the contours disappear,” she says. “The darker these colours, the stronger this effect will get, and the ceiling and walls will ‘fade away’. Painting all items (including fireplace and built-in cupboards) in the same colours and not having hard contrasts will make you feel the space is larger. Keeping the colour scheme neutral also means that, if I want a change, I can just switch the decorative elements, like the table lamp, carpet or cushions, and not have to repaint the whole house.” A floor-to-ceiling wall of black shelving spans the kitchen and living areas, displaying crockery, cooking pots and books. The highest shelves under the gabled eaves are accessed by a bespoke ladder. Copper features throughout, from a floor panel beneath the fire to stools in the living area, wall lights in the kitchen, utensils, and even an original milk churn on the landing. Another major job was changing the outdated 70s windows for higher-performance ones. Silberschmidt kept their arched shape, but opted for darker frames to better highlight the landscape outside. “It’s an inviting place,” says Silberschmidt. “I love the simple act of making a fire – the smell of it. It’s perfect for recharging the life batteries.” atelierzuerich.chWhere did Omicron come from? By all accounts it is a weird variant. Though highly mutated, it descended not from one of the other variants of concern, such as Alpha, Beta or Delta, but from coronavirus that was circulating maybe 18 months ago. So where has it been all this time? And why is it only wreaking havoc now? Researchers are exploring a number of hunches. One is that Omicron arose in a remote region of southern Africa but failed to spread until now. Another is that it evolved in infected animals, such as rats, and then crossed back into humans. But a third explanation is gaining ground as more data come to light, that Omicron arose in a person with a weakened immune system: someone having cancer treatment perhaps, an organ transplant patient or someone with uncontrolled HIV. The latter possibility has sparked global concern. Sub-Saharan Africa is home to two-thirds of the global population living with HIV. For a whole series of reasons, ranging from lack of access to clinics to fear of stigmatisation and disrupted healthcare, 8 million people in the region are not on effective HIV therapy. Beyond the direct problems this causes with disease progression and vulnerability to Covid – people with advanced or uncontrolled HIV are far more likely to die from coronavirus – is the risk that uncontrolled HIV is driving the emergence of Covid variants. “For me there are two key things,” says Dr Richard Lessells, an infectious diseases physician at the University of KwaZulu-Natal in Durban, who was part of the team that first reported Omicron. “First there is the science that needs to go on to get a better understanding of this. But more importantly, on a public health level, we don’t need to wait for the science. It is a reminder that while addressing the immediate challenge of Covid-19, we also need to intensify efforts to end HIV as a public health problem.” The suspicion that variants of concern can evolve in patients with weakened immune systems is not new. The Alpha and Beta variants, first spotted last year in the UK and South Africa respectively, are widely thought to have emerged after long-term infections in patients. The mechanism was laid out by Charles Darwin more than 150 years ago: evolution through natural selection. If a person is infected with Covid but mounts a weak immune response, the infection can persist for months. In that time, antibodies neutralise some of the virus, but not the versions they bind to less well. These surviving viruses proliferate, mutate and undergo further selection – potentially leading to variants that evade immune defences. A preliminary study posted online this week reveals the process in action. Scientists in South Africa, Lessells among them, traced a particular sample of coronavirus to a 36-year-old woman who was not receiving effective antiviral therapy. Tests revealed that she had harboured the Covid virus for 216 days, in which time it accumulated 32 mutations, making it similar to the vaccine-evading Beta variant. If weakening of the immune system by HIV drives Covid evolution, the researchers say, then antiretroviral therapy must be ramped up to prevent it. Writing in the journal Nature, Lessells and his colleagues make the case more strongly. They warn that the failure to tackle the Covid pandemic “with sufficient urgency” in countries with high rates of uncontrolled HIV “could lead to the emergence of variants of the coronavirus Sars-CoV-2 that spread more easily between people or render the vaccines less effective”. With Omicron, one possibility is that the virus lingered in an immunocompromised patient for months – explaining why it descends from such an old version – before it acquired the right mutations to break out and spread like wildfire. The effort needed, then, is huge. Covid has caused massive disruption to healthcare services, with HIV patients among those badly hit. More than 1,300 healthcare workers have died of Covid in South Africa alone. Thousands more may leave the profession because of the unsustainable strain. The UK’s hefty cuts to international aid, including slashing funds for the UN agency focused on fighting HIV/Aids from £15m to £2.5m, will hardly help the situation. Meanwhile, 70% of Britons are vaccinated against Covid, compared with 7.5% in Africa. What vaccine has arrived on the continent has been prioritised for the oldest, in line with strategies in many countries, but this means few of those with HIV are protected: about 80% of people with HIV in Africa are under 50 years old. Prof Penny Moore at the University of the Witwatersrand and the National Institute for Communicable Diseases in South Africa said there was “good data” to indicate that immunocompromised people who could not clear Covid infections as quickly as others were a risk for new variants. “That includes HIV-positive people with uncontrolled viral replication, as well other groups like people on immunosuppressants,” she said. “But this is probably still a rare event. “Increasing access to Covid-19 vaccines will reduce that risk, for sure, and there is a worrying overlap between areas where HIV prevalence is high and Covid-19 vaccine coverage is low,” she added. “I do think we need to translate our sense of urgency from Sars-CoV-2 to HIV prevention and treatment in parallel to tackling uneven vaccine coverage globally.” • A heading on this article was amended on 13 December 2021 to reflect more closely the stance of the South African scientists.I’m known as the feminist barrister. I represent women with no immigration status on the breadline and I represent politicians in positions of power. They all have one thing in common. They are survivors of male violence. Kate Griffiths MP is no exception. I had the great privilege of being her barrister. I remember meeting her in the Houses of Parliament for the first time. She had such stature. She was poised and had an air of confidence. We walked into a small room and it was there that I learned what her ex-husband Andrew Griffiths, a disgraced former MP, had done to his wife behind closed doors. When he was a minister under Theresa May MP, he was also raping his wife whilst she was asleep. Sex whilst asleep is rape. But the abuse didn’t stop there. He put his hands around her neck, hit her and was physically abusive to her when she was nine months pregnant. He even shouted “shut the fuck up” to their new born baby. He continued his insidious coercive control of her even after they separated. We already knew he had a reputation for sexual depravity towards women. In 2013, Andrew Griffiths was reported to the police for harassment by his former partner whom he cheated on. In 2018, just weeks after Kate had just given birth, he sent over 2,000 sexual and violent messages in just a matter of days to two female constituents. His darker texts included “She’s so cute. So sweet. I can’t wait to beat her”. Whilst he supported making upskirting a criminal offence in parliament, he was sexting women, “I want to be able to lift your skirts over dinner and show my friends”. The Tory government suspended him – only to bring him back for Theresa May MP’s “confidence vote”. Then he was cleared of any wrongdoing by the parliamentary standards watchdog. The big red neon warning signs were ablaze for everyone to see. But those in the most senior positions of power turned a blind eye. In 2019, Kate bravely stood to succeed Andrew Griffiths as an MP in Burton upon Trent and she won. Little did anyone know that Derby family court was making decisions about one of the biggest cases of our time. Kate wanted to protect her child from further harm at the hands of Andrew. She could only do this by proving that he abused her and the child. She went through a traumatising trial. Watching her being cross-examined was painful . “You’re lying”, “why didn’t you leave?”, “why didn’t you tell anyone?”, was the line of questioning. Because, Kate responded, he told me that no one would believe me because he’s an MP. He used his position of power as a minister and MP to rape and abuse his wife with absolute impunity. He tried to silence her. Thousands of victims of domestic abuse will know from first-hand experience that almost everything that happens in the family courts is secret. I have long campaigned that we need to expose the truth. We need transparency. In this case, two journalists, Louise Tickle and Brian Farmer, applied to publish the judgments. Unlike all the other women that I represent, Kate had a platform to expose the truth. But Andrew, who denied allegations made by Kate and “adamantly denied” rape, fought bitterly against publishing the judgments. He was trying to further control her. But it didn’t work. Mrs Justice Lieven said, “the court should be slow in all cases to be used as a means by which one parent seeks further control over the other. Particularly where there have already been findings of coercive control”. We were vindicated. This case is not over. Andrew Griffiths is still allowed to have supervised contact with their child. And if that isn’t awful enough, she has to pay half of the costs of supervised contact. This is financial control – both sickening and perverse. I appealed against the decision on behalf of Kate. We are waiting for the judgment. Imagine, you are teenager and you discover that your father raped your mother and then the family court required your mother to make you available for contact with him. Surely that is state-sanctioned abuse. The Ministry of Justice found last year that the family courts take a “pro-contact” at all costs approach even in cases of domestic abuse. This case shows that the government needs to urgently change the law. We need a presumption of no contact for abusive parents. But what this case shows most powerfully is how men in positions of power can still use their status to silence and control victims. Haven’t we learnt anything from the MeToo movement? It shows that even an MP, a public figure, a lawmaker, can be coercively controlling of their spouse and of other women. We have seen so many of these cases. It can happen to anyone. Powerful men who abuse need to be held accountable because victims will only have faith in the family justice system if they see that perpetrators are being held accountable and children are being protected. Victims in the family courts must not be silenced, for they have a right to self-identification and self-determination. If we want to change the system together, we must be able to speak the unspeakable. • This article was amended on 11 December 2021. Andrew Griffiths did not stand for election against Kate Griffiths in Burton in 2019, as an earlier version suggested.No one goes to a motor race hoping to see a crash, or so they used to say. It may be less true this weekend, when the promise of mayhem between Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen in the final round of the 2021 Formula One world championship promises to attract a vast worldwide television audience. As they prepare for Sunday’s showdown, Verstappen hoping to become champion for the first time and Hamilton in line to surpass Michael Schumacher with a record eighth title, not just individual career landmarks rest on the outcome. It feels as though much more – perhaps nothing less than the entire culture of the sport – is at stake here. This is not the first season in which the title has gone down to the final race. It is not even the first in which the two remaining contenders have gone to the starting grid at the last round with an equal number of points against their names. But no race in the long history of Formula One has been awaited with such a mixture of excitement and apprehension. The two contenders, level on points at the top of the drivers’ standings, have been crashing into each other since the middle of the season, when the reigning champion arrived at Silverstone having decided that he was not going to allow his young Dutch rival to get away with carving him up any longer. Hamilton may be a streetwise racer, but he has always been a clean competitor and to see him answer Verstappen’s intimidatory tactics with some of his own was an indication of how far the rivalry has gone. If the decision was intended to make his opponent reconsider his approach, it was never likely to work. At 24, Verstappen believes he has waited too long to become world champion. He is already a year older than the age at which, in 2008, Hamilton won the first of his seven titles. Through his style of racing, the Dutchman has made it plain that he follows Ayrton Senna and Schumacher in the belief that nothing and no one should be permitted to stand in the way of his success. Although they stand level on points after 21 rounds, Hamilton starts with the handicap of knowing that if neither of them finishes this one, Verstappen will be crowned champion by virtue of his nine race wins to eight, raising the possibility of the contest being ended by a collision of which only the Dutchman could be the beneficiary. This week the F1 race director, Michael Masi, stressed that such incidents could be punished by the kind of penalties that might affect championship standings. Temperatures are certainly running high. Racing drivers of the past have had their armies of supporters, but their allegiance was never expressed with the sustained mutual animosity shown by the fans of Hamilton and Verstappen on social media or the partisan fervour displayed at circuits around the world. A thick haze of orange smoke is now as common a sight at a grand prix as it has long been at football matches involving the Netherlands or at “Dutch corner” on the Alpe d’Huez. Both drivers are accustomed to hearing boos as they emerge from their cars to be interviewed before making their way to the podium. The duels between Senna and Alain Prost or Schumacher and Damon Hill produced wrecked cars and angry words, but they were conducted with nothing like the ferocity among F1 fans that is reaching its peak this weekend. That will come as a particular delight to the makers of Formula 1: Drive to Survive, the Netflix documentary series that has attracted a new audience to the sport – particularly in the US – through an emphasis on character-driven narratives, lurid crashes and heightened emotions. Its fourth season is likely to raise the pitch of melodrama to new levels. *** If Verstappen wins out, by whatever means, he may become the standard bearer for a new generation of drivers who, moulded by the video games and simulators in which aggressive tactics can be rehearsed and refined without the possibility of physical consequences, no longer play by the old rules. Drivers of Hamilton’s generation were still partially influenced by the memory of older codes of etiquette, when behaviour on the circuit was regulated not by lines painted on concrete or stewards imposing stop-and-go penalties but by trackside stone walls, trees and ditches. There was also a sense of comradeship among the drivers that crossed the borders of team loyalty and involved a willingness to risk their own lives but not, if they could avoid it, the lives of those with whom they might have shared a hotel breakfast table that morning. Thirty years ago, those protocols began to break down. The Prost-Senna rivalry saw cynical collisions determine the outcome of the championship in 1989 and 1990. Schumacher won his first title in 1994 after barging into Hill. Three years later he failed in an even more blatant attempt, doing more damage to his own car than to that of Jacques Villeneuve. These tactics were made possible by the knowledge that cars and circuits had been made much safer in response to the fatalities of the preceding decades. Young drivers trained in karts were introducing the previously unthinkable idea of Formula One as a semi-contact sport. And whereas significant change in motor racing had usually been confined to the technical side, now it was also behavioural. This season has presented the sport with perhaps its greatest challenge, placing a heavy burden on the shoulders of a rotating cast of stewards whose disciplinary decisions often seem inconsistent and even contradictory. For all the availability of onboard data, they have the task of reading the drivers’ minds and assessing their intentions, a task highlighted last Sunday when Verstappen slowed, ostensibly in response to a demand to let Hamilton overtake, but in such a way that it was impossible to come up with a definitive interpretation of both the initial action and Hamilton’s response. The questionable state of the disciplinary processes was also exposed in Jeddah when Masi was overheard seeking the approval of the Red Bull team for Verstappen’s grid position at the second restart, a hint of weakness that would never have occurred under his respected predecessor, the late Charlie Whiting. But as the world watched Hamilton and Verstappen haring away from the rest of the 20-car field last weekend, there was no doubt that here were the two finest drivers of their era. At Interlagos last month Hamilton demonstrated that time has not dimmed his gifts as he fought his way from 10th to first with a concentrated fury that reminded historians of Juan Manuel Fangio’s legendary fightback against the Ferraris at the Nürburgring in 1957. Verstappen’s brilliance was evident from the moment of his arrival in F1. In Jeddah last Sunday, as a chaotic race was restarted for the second time, he glimpsed an opening at the first corner and sliced past Esteban Ocon’s Alpine and Hamilton’s Mercedes like a shark gobbling shrimps. Also evident, however, were the less widely admired aspects of his deportment on and off the track. His air of arrogance and entitlement is inherited from his father, Jos, whose achievements as an F1 driver never remotely matched his own estimation of his abilities. An equally powerful role in Verstappen’s career has been played by Dr Helmut Marko, an Austrian whose own highly promising career was cut short when he lost an eye in a grand prix accident in 1972 and who has since fashioned the Red Bull driver training programme into the most unsparingly effective scheme of its kind since the Spartans left male babies out on a hillside to see which of them would survive to be trained as warriors. Christian Horner, the Red Bull team principal, has proved willing to defend Verstappen’s behaviour in all circumstances. This week’s claim that his driver is fighting an opponent in a superior machine looks disingenuous when considered alongside the revision of the current technical regulations which favoured the basic design concept of the Red Bull against that of the Mercedes. Few outside Abu Dhabi and F1’s finance department will rejoice that the final act of a sometimes horrifically mesmerising season is taking place on a track all too typical of the bland computer-designed facilities inflicted on F1 over the past 25 years rather than a traditional circuit based on a more varied set of natural topographic features. Although the elimination of some of the fiddlier corners this year represents an attempt to create more opportunities for overtaking, it’s still a bit like accepting $50m to hold the Olympic downhill ski race on an artificial slope in Milton Keynes. But as Hamilton and Verstappen pull down their visors and twilight creeps over the Persian Gulf, looking away is not an option. In an atmosphere so fraught with tension and expectation, the 13th Abu Dhabi Grand Prix is likely to be the hardest to forget.For almost a century, Kuttiyamma’s daily routine had been much the same. Rising early at home in the village of Thiruvanchoor in Kerala, the 104-year-old would begin her day’s work of cooking, cleaning and feeding the cows and chickens. But now, every morning, there’s something new to get up for. She eagerly awaits the paperboy to deliver Malayala Manorama, the local newspaper. For two hours, she buries herself reading the news and keeping herself informed about what’s going on in the world. But it is only in recent months that she has been able to fulfil this dream of hers – in April, Kuttiyamma finally began to learn to read. “I was always curious about what was happening around the world,” she said. “On many occasions I regretted my inability to read newspapers and I used to plead with the younger generations at home to read out newspapers to me. I always wanted to write my name and address.” After months of evening classes, she decided to take the Kerala state primary literacy exam last month, the oldest woman to do so. She achieved 89% in literacy and 100% in mathematics. It was a result that drew praise from the state education minister, who tweeted: “Age is no barrier for knowledge. With utmost respect and love, I wish Kuttiyamma and all other new learners the best.” For most of her 104 years, Kuttiyama had been curious about reading and would often try to make out the alphabet herself, but when she was born, in a village to a low-caste rural family, there was no education. “I hailed from Kerala’s backward Ezhava community and was born in the midst of poverty,” said Kuttiyamma, while pottering about in the kitchen. “Education for women family members was unthinkable at that time. Even boys discontinued their studies at nine. My parents were landless agricultural labourers and it was my duty to cook food, wash dresses and keep the hut for my 11 siblings.” And so she got on with her life. At 16, she married TK Konthi, who sold herbal medicines in a small shop, and they had five children. Decades passed, filled with cooking and housework, and Kuttiyama says she was content but always felt that something was missing. It was only with the encouragement a year ago of her neighbour Rehana John, a 34-year-old literacy trainer, that Kuttiyamma was persuaded to start to learn to read. John had noticed Kuttiyama’s curiosity about her grandchildren’s learning and offered to give her some books. Previously, John’s oldest student had been 85. After some gentle encouragement, they began meeting every evening, poring over literacy books together. “Except for very little vision and hearing problems, she was a perfect and sometimes naughty student who made my teaching feel meaningful,” said John. “She always has her textbook, notebooks and pens ready before I reach her home. In addition, she will keep extra of the delicacies she has cooked at home to give me.” John added: “She is my mother now. We are sharing a rare kind of camaraderie and relationship.” Kuttiyamma now has her sights set on aceing the fourth standard examination, which students normally pass at the age of nine. This time it involves papers in Malayalam, English, environment and mathematics. “I don’t think English is alien and a hard nut to crack,” said Kuttiyamma. “I will try to achieve 100% marks in the equivalency examination for all papers.’’ John said Kuttiyamma still requested lessons every day without fail, while refusing to let any other family members take over the household chores or the cooking. “Her passion and commitment are exceptional,” she said.“When you see them in the wild, there’s this tangible feeling of humility and respect,” says Tom Gibbs, one of the UK’s first two bison rangers. “The size of them instantly demands your respect, although they are quite docile. I wouldn’t say they are scary, but you’re aware of what they can do.” The rangers will manage the first wild bison to roam in the UK for thousands of years when four animals arrive in north Kent in the spring of 2022. The bison are Europe’s largest land animal – bulls can weigh a tonne – and were extinct in the wild a century ago, but are recovering through reintroduction projects across Europe. “They are magnificent animals, truly gentle giants,” says colleague Donovan Wright, who spent 20 years working with rhino, cape buffalo and other large animals in southern Africa. “The Kent project is very different, but it’s no less important.” Wright says: “How amazing will it be to track the largest land mammal in the UK on foot right here in [Kent]? To experience something like this only five miles from Canterbury would be just incredible, and help people reconnect with nature.” Gibbs and Wright have just returned from training with wild bison herds in the Netherlands, where they were reintroduced in 2007. The £1m Kent project is called Wilder Blean and is run by the Kent Wildlife Trust and the Wildwood Trust, and funded by the People’s Postcode Lottery. A principal aim is for the bison to rewild a dense, former commercial pine forest. “What makes bison a keystone species is that they strip bark off of trees by rubbing up against them, and by eating it,” says Wright. “Those trees die and that allows light to reach the forest floors. And, wow, that’s like jet fuel for biodiversity – all of a sudden, you’re creating habitats for other species to thrive. “Also, just by their sheer size, they carve amazing trails through the vegetation, and they love dust bathing, creating big open patches. That’s all fantastic for pioneer plants, insects and sand lizards.” The insects living on the dead wood left behind are amazing for woodpeckers and bats too, Wright says. The rangers visited the Kraansvlak project in the Netherlands, where people can walk freely through the area occupied by 14 bison and where there has never been a dangerous incident. But part of the training was learning the animals’ behaviour to ensure safety. “You read the animals, so if they’re giving you signs that they’re not really comfortable with your presence, you just back away,” says Gibbs. The signs include staring, alert ears, heads flicking up and down, pawing of the ground, or the herd fanning out. “In reality, the bison are the ones who maintain the [50 metre safety] distance, by moving away.” Like the bison in Kraansvlak, the animals in Kent will wear GPS collars, but these can get damaged and so tracking skills are needed to ensure the rangers can find the animals without startling them. Broken twigs and tufts of fur on branches are clues, as well as hoofprints in softer ground. The rangers also learned how to encourage the bison into a corral for quick health checks. “There are a few tricks of the trade, such as certain foodstuffs,” says Gibbs, but these are kept secret to avoid the public trying to attract the bison unnecessarily. It took five years before the Kraansvlak rangers were confident the public could enter the bison area alone, but Wright is not setting a timescale for the Kent project. “We are treading very carefully,” he says. The Kent herd will be founded by a young bull from Germany and an older female from the Highland wildlife park in Scotland, who will be the matriarch. “She looks beautiful and we’re really confident that she’s going to be a fantastic leader for the group,” says Gibbs. Two young females from Fota wildlife park in Cork, Ireland, will complete the group, which will roam and feed freely across 210 hectares (519 acres). The rangers expect the bison to breed – females produce one calf a year – and the site is licensed for up to 10 animals. In future, they hope to provide bison to found other sites in the UK, as well as exchanging animals across Europe. All 7,000 bison living in Europe are descended from just 12 zoo animals, and the species is still classed as vulnerable, so maximising genetic diversity is very important. Preparations are now under way at Wilder Blean for the arrival of the bison. “We’re putting up a 1.4-metre electric fence to contain the bison and then, on the perimeter, we’ve got a 6ft deer fence to keep the people out,” says Wright. Ponds are also being dug for the bison to drink from, as well as the longhorn cattle, Exmoor ponies and “iron age” pigs that will help restore the landscape. Wright says: “We had another interesting dilemma: how do you get a herd of bison safely over a public footpath [that crosses the site]? The answer was bison-sized tunnels, so we are working on that at the moment.” The UK is one of the most nature-depleted countries in the world and the rangers hope the bison project will be a beacon for a wider recovery. “By using nature-based solutions, we can really turn the tide and help mitigate the effects of the current climate and biodiversity crises that we face,” says Wright. “A lot of people feel frustrated about a lack of action but I think this project is a real beacon of what can be done,” says Gibbs. “We can’t wait for the bison to arrive and for them to start doing what they do best.”A south London man has described his incredulity after Merton council ordered him to remove his solar panels – flying in the face of attempts to tackle the climate crisis and in spite of the fact his neighbour has had some on their roof for more than 10 years. In 2019, Merton council declared a climate emergency and said the borough would become net zero by 2050. But that hasn’t stopped council officials ordering Syd Reid, who lives in Wimbledon, remove his panels because his property is in a conservation area. A year ago he put up photovoltaic panels on his south-facing roof at the front of his home in an effort to reduce the property’s carbon footprint without realising he needed planning permission to do so. He had been assured, wrongly, by the installer that he didn’t. “I did a cursory investigation but somehow missed the conservation area rules,” he said. “The main reason I thought I would be fine was that our immediate neighbour has had almost identical south-facing solar panels on their roof for more than 10 years. “What’s happened since has been something out of the dark ages. Someone has complained and the council has ordered them to be taken down. It’s as if the climate crisis isn’t happening.” In 2008, the government removed the need for most people to get planning permission to install photovoltaic solar energy systems but the requirement for permission was retained in conservation areas and for all listed buildings. After Reid received an order from Merton’s planning department instructing him to take the panels down, he submitted an application for retrospective planning, only for this to be rejected. He said he appealed against that decision but this, too, has been turned down. He said the decision is all the more baffling given that the road that he lives on features a mixture of house styles and roof types. Not even the road’s greatest fan would describe it in any way as architecturally extraordinary, or important. “While the panels have been up I have reduced my carbon emissions by over 400kg,” he said. “The whole thing is madness – a combination of nimbyism and inconsistent, out-of-date planning bureaucracy that is failing to recognise the state [in which] we are leaving the planet. This has to be changed. “Our neighbour’s panels have been producing electricity for 10 years without upsetting anyone but mine have to come down. If I wish to maintain my level of carbon emissions reduction I have been advised that the only course of action left is to take my case to the high court.” A spokesperson for Merton council told Guardian Money that while installing solar panels is “generally to be applauded”, the council also has a duty to protect the “character” of the local area. “The standards of design that have to be met will always be higher in conservation areas,” he said. He said two other houses in the road have approved solar panels but on north-facing roofs, rather missing the point that they will produce significantly less power than they would on a south-facing roof. “We don’t want to put residents off installing carbon saving measures,” the spokesperson said. “Our planning officers are here to work with them to achieve developments that are compliant with our planning policy. There are other options which might have less of a visual impact, such as low-profile PVs or the use of solar tiles.” Meanwhile, it now looks likely that Reid’s neighbour could be forced to remove their panels, too. “We have not looked into this yet as no formal complaint was raised. However, our officers will now look to inspect and regularise those solar panels,” the Merton spokesperson said.When Karen Elson was a young hopeful trying to make it in Paris, a model scout took her to a nightclub. After long days on the Métro trekking to castings that came to nothing, and evenings alone in a run-down apartment, she was excited to be out having fun. The music was good and the scout, to whom her agent had introduced her, kept the drinks coming. She started to feel tipsy. A friend of the scout’s arrived, and the pair started massaging her shoulders, making sexual suggestions. “I was 16 and I’d never kissed a boy,” she recalls. “It was my first experience of sexual – well, sexual anything, and this was sexual harassment. They both had their hands on me.” She told them she wanted to go home, and left to find a taxi, but they followed her into it, kissing her neck on the back seat. When they reached her street, she jumped out, slammed the taxi door and ran inside. The next day she told another model what had happened, and the scout found out. “His reaction was to corner me in the model agency and say: ‘I’ll fucking get you kicked out of Paris if you ever fucking say anything ever again.’” Twenty-six years later, Elson is telling me this story from her sixth-floor suite in the Ritz hotel in London. The scout did not get her kicked out of Paris. She got booked for a shoot in Tokyo by an up-and-coming young American designer called Marc Jacobs, then Donatella Versace hired her as a fitting model to help her fine-tune her clothing. On Elson’s 18th birthday, Steven Meisel photographed her for the cover of Italian Vogue, her strawberry blond hair chopped into a Louise Brooks bob and tinted crimson, her pale skin exaggerated to alabaster, and a career as a supermodel began. Karl Lagerfeld called her “the beauty of the new millennium” and she is still going strong. At Paris fashion week this autumn, she walked in the Balmain show between Milla Jovovich and Carla Bruni-Sarkozy; in Milan, she was on stage alongside Kate Moss and Gigi Hadid for a collaboration between Italian powerhouses Fendi and Versace. Today, the trappings of success are all around. A vast bouquet sits in its cellophane, a plate of fanned sliced fruit is untouched on the desk. But Elson takes a sip from a bone china teacup and tells me that the legacy of her 25 years at the top of the modelling game is “a shit ton of PTSD”. Her distinctive Elizabethan colouring is still radiant against black cashmere, her complexion still peachy and wrinkle-free (more of which later), but her verdict on fashion lands with a punch. “Modelling looks like it’s all glamour, and it really is not,” she says. “I survived sexual harassment, body shaming and bullying. And I am supposedly one of the lucky ones.” Not long after that night in Paris, Elson was living in Milan, signed to “an agency run by women who gave it to me straight: ‘Do not go to clubs, because the men who take models to clubs are sleazy and you will be in danger.’” Some of the girls in Elson’s apartment were not so lucky. “I remember one waking up with bruises on her neck. We were all horrified. They were young models, full of hopes and dreams, and the people who were supposed to be their guardians were preying on them. The agents had prestige names on their books, girls who were in Vogue and getting big campaigns, but they also had young models they went to nightclubs with.” Models who are earning little money are given free drinks in clubs, sometimes taken to fancy restaurants, in return for being arm candy. “Sometimes there is a fine line between modelling and escort work, and the girls don’t realise it. I’m not shaming them for that.” Last year, a Guardian investigation by Lucy Osborne revealed decades of alleged abuse by former Elite Models boss Gérald Marie. This summer, the model Carré Otis filed a suit against Marie – who denies all allegations against him – for rape and sex trafficking, abuse she claims began when she was 17. Elson, who has led calls to reform the model agency system, booking most of her own shoots for the past four years, immediately offered her support. “We need to figure out why the fashion industry enables so much toxicity and [we need to] finally make positive changes,” she wrote on Instagram. For a time, Elson was also represented by Marie. “My impression was he was a sleazy man,” she says, speaking publicly about him for the first time. “But I never had anything happen with him. To be blunt, I don’t think I was … well, that I was a bit odd-looking and ginger granted me some protection. Not always, but sometimes.” Elson has seen how a toxic blend of international travel, lack of transparency and an unequal power structure can shade modelling into trafficking. In March, she began running “model mentor” workshops online, giving advice to young people in the industry. A young eastern European woman at one session told Elson her passport had been confiscated when she tried to leave an agency. “I was like: withholding your passport, that’s human trafficking. And her agency was also telling her she’d get kicked out of the country if she left.” In 2001, the Victoria’s Secret televised lingerie show was in its pomp, with 12 million viewers tuning in. Rupert Everett was the host; Mary J Blige performed that year’s inescapable hit, Family Affair. It was a high-profile, lucrative job, but Elson recalls “walking out and seeing a bunch of lecherous men in the audience. I could smell the misogyny. I didn’t feel beautiful, I felt ridiculous. I felt like someone else’s fantasy of a redhead, in a red G-string and devil horns, or whatever the fuck I was wearing.” Later, I look up the pictures. Elson is in a red G-string and corset, though no devil horns. Most of the other models toss their ringlets and flash toothy grins; Elson, half hidden under long straight hair, looks stone-faced. “I felt sad the whole time I was doing it,” she says. Elson has never been a cookie-cutter beauty queen. Growing up in Oldham, “with frizzy red hair and ghost-white skin and no boobs” at a time when every teenage boy she knew had a poster of Cindy Crawford on his wall, she kept her early modelling ambitions quiet. After signing to Boss Models in Manchester, she left school early every Thursday to go there, claiming she was off to see the orthodontist. The day after she finished her GCSEs in June 1995, she caught the train to London, dragging her suitcase straight to the office of Models 1. Photographer Tim Walker’s Vogue portraits of Elson have featured her in bed with a giant crocodile, or in white tuxedo trousers with braces and no blouse. He met Elson and fellow model Erin O’Connor for the first time in 1997 and thought they didn’t look like models: “They looked like people I knew, art college friends.” With her marble skin, flaming hair and fine bone structure, Elson can look “androgynous and ethereal, so I wasn’t so much the sexualised object,” she says. But being pigeonholed as otherworldly came with its own issues. “I was put in this box where I was a freak, and as a result it was as if I wasn’t real. I wasn’t supposed to have feelings.” Having reached the supermodel ranks, she experienced a kind of impostor syndrome. “I just wanted so badly to fit in. I wanted to be Claudia Schiffer and instead I felt like the red-headed stepchild.” Despite Elson’s slender frame, through much of her career she has been bullied over her weight by people in the industry. A well-known Italian designer once described her, to her face, as “a beast” and “disgusting”. A US model agent offered to pay her money for every pound she could lose. Once, in desperation to get work, she booked into a “health spa” in California where she fasted for seven days. She flew straight to Milan for fashion week (“looking skeletal”) and the compliments – and bookings – flooded in. Just before our interview, Elson texts to say she is about to order room service, asking if I want anything. When her lunch arrives, she ignores the food, saying she feels too self-conscious to eat during the interview. (It is under a silver dome, but I think it’s a salad.) Clumsily, I comment on her “self-control”, to which she replies with a wry smile that “self-control is my achilles heel”. *** Eating disorders have plagued her since she was seven when, unsettled by her parents’ increasingly unhappy marriage, she stopped eating and was admitted to hospital. “Food has always been attached to trauma for me,” she says. “And then I went into an industry that played into my biggest insecurities.” With the help of “a great therapist, who used to be a ballerina and understands body dysmorphia”, Elson has reached a “safety zone”. “I sincerely do eat these days. I will never do another diet as long as I live because they make me feel like I’m losing my mind, but if I’m on set and a dress doesn’t fit, it’s really hard not to go to that place where you start thinking, if I was 12lb skinnier … I’m not going to do anything drastic any more, but the thoughts still appear. I run really fast four times a week and, yes, I love it mentally, but I also love how it makes me look, and it’s important to be candid about that. It’s a rollercoaster for me still.” Her therapist would like her to give up modelling, she says. Behind the lip service to diversity, fashion’s obsession with thinness persists. “I looked at photos from a catwalk show recently and the models were so, so thin. Not the kind of thin you get by going for a healthy jog in the morning – the kind you get when you stop eating. I find it heartbreaking to see that still.” Recently, someone in the industry greeted her with: “You’ve lost so much weight in your face, you look great!” she recalls. “I said to him, ‘You know, “Hello, how are you?” would be nicer.’” But there have been good times, too. She danced for Alexander McQueen’s landmark Deliverance show in 2004 and this year starred in a mini-musical for Moschino. When she feels a connection with a photographer on set, being a model is like being “lightning in a bottle”, she says. In her memoir The Red Flame: a Journey of a Woman, she writes about her breakthrough shoot with Meisel. “We shot for two glorious hours. I had never felt more excited. I left the studio to go back into the snow with only a single subway token, but I had never felt so joyful.” But while her unique looks caught the eye of the most creative photographers, being stereotyped as edgy often meant being expected to take her clothes off. “I would suddenly be given a see-through dress, or a pair of knickers and no top, and told: ‘That’s the image.’ My opinion didn’t come into it,” Elson says. Sometimes the results were poetic, beautiful images of which she is proud – her memoir includes nude portraits by Walker, Peter Lindbergh, Mert and Marcus – but there are other images she dislikes because she felt uncomfortable on set. These days, she has learned to set out boundaries. “If someone wants to take a nude, they have to explain the context, why it’s necessary and how they intend to ensure I feel safe and comfortable.” She laughs. “Funnily enough, no one ever asks me to be nude any more.” Because our society struggles to distinguish what a woman looks like from who a woman is, models have become ciphers for femininity. Debate about them is charged because it is never just about models, but about the institutionalised misogyny of a world where the female experience can feel like a never-ending beauty contest in which even the winners are shortchanged. “Power is so elusive as a model. Even as a supermodel, it doesn’t feel like you really own your power,” Elson says. Her words remind me of a point made by Emily Ratajkowski in her essay collection My Body – that exploitation is inevitable in “a value system that revolves around men and their desire”. Elson is encouraged “by Emily taking control of her own voice, the way other people have taken control of her image”. Yet when she describes Ratajkowski in person, Elson’s articulate, crisp sentences dissolve into breathlessness. She was “blown by how beautiful, how ridiculously beautiful, she is. It’s like … how is your stomach so flat? How is that even possible? Everything about her is just … And God Created Woman, you know?” Everyone, it seems, is conditioned to objectify Ratajkowski-level beauty, even supermodels campaigning against objectification. There is a fractiousness in the conversation around models that model and labour activist Sara Ziff, founder of the Model Alliance, has termed the “empathy gap”. Ziff argues that the job’s ultra-glamorous image does a disservice to most models by giving the impression that anyone with their picture in a magazine is flying first class with suitcases stuffed with cash. “The biggest misconception about modelling is the money,” Elson says. “Most working models are barely getting by.” Elson’s father was a joiner in construction; her mother stayed at home, occasionally taking odd jobs to make ends meet. Elson and her twin sister, Kate, shared a bed held up by tin cans. She has rarely known the luxury of not worrying about money. Because her off-kilter looks tended to appeal more to editorial clients than to commercial ones, her income has been erratic. “I’d get home from a shoot and once all the expenses were added up, I’d be in debt.” For a prestigious magazine, a 20-hour shoot might pay a flat fee of only £150, “and if you’re flying yourself somewhere, the debts can rack up”. A lack of financial transparency is symptomatic of the way models “are made into powerless, passive entities in their own industry, rather than treated as professionals”, she says. “The agents’ attitude was always – you’re just a pretty face, get out there and milk it until the wrinkles arrive, then you’ll be carted back to your home town.” Elson says she would ask an agent how much she’d be paid for a job and “practically hear the eye roll over the phone – here she goes again, being difficult”. Now she is represented by a talent agent and a publicist: “I’m never signing with another model agency as long as I live.” In 2005, Elson, ghostly in white tulle and teetering on her heels, starred in a music video for Blue Orchid by the White Stripes. Within a few weeks, she and frontman Jack White had eloped to the Amazon rainforest where they were married by a shaman. They divorced in 2013. Her memoir makes no mention of the restraining order she took out against him that year, saying only that “eventually the dust settled” and the two are now “loving co-parents” to their children Scarlett, 15, and Henry, 14. Having long harboured musical ambitions, Elson released her first album as a singer-songwriter, The Ghost Who Walks, in 2010, followed by Double Roses seven years later. Her music – a gothic kind of blues, part folksy Americana, part Left Bank chanteuse – has won over sceptics of the “model marries rock star, makes record” narrative. (“Ethereal pop majesty with a mesmerising talent,” wrote this paper in 2017.) An EP of covers recorded during lockdown, Radio Redhead, will be followed next year by a third album, Green. Yet music, Elson has discovered, can be as misogynistic as fashion. “In fashion, the misogyny is more superficial – the men don’t necessarily want to sleep with me, they want to objectify me in a picture. In music there are still powerful straight white men who operate under the myth of the tortured genius. There have been men who said they believed in my talent and then it turned out they wanted to sleep with me. It was humiliating.” We are living in the era of supermodel reparations. Paulina Porizkova and Carla Bruni-Sarkozy have joined Elson in offering support to Carré Otis. Linda Evangelista, who has posted about being “permanently deformed” by complications after a cosmetic procedure on her face, is “a good friend. It is so difficult to be a supermodel getting older and have what you looked like 20 years ago held up as a comparison the whole time. I’ve had two kids, and to walk on set and be given an outfit that would work on a 17-year-old is hard.” Evangelista speaking out “is really brave because it goes against decades of conditioning to be the beautiful face and stay silent”. At 42, Elson’s own face is wrinkle-free. “I have had Botox, and I like it,” she says. “I haven’t done filler yet, but I probably will.” She kneads her sculpted cheekbones with manicured nails, miming an imaginary lift. She’d love to champion natural beauty, she says, but she isn’t going to pretend she’s not “feeling the pressure. Let’s just talk about it, you know? The cloak-and-dagger around Botox isn’t helpful, because not admitting to it perpetuates images that aren’t realistic.” Elson’s next appointment has arrived – a film crew, pacing the corridor outside – and she still hasn’t had a chance to eat her salad. She promises she will call to say goodbye properly, and a few days later is on the phone from Nashville, Tennessee. The city is home, she says, because, years ago, “my husband Jack and I fell in love with Nashville and bought a house here, kind of impulsively. Two kids later, I looked around and I was like – huh, I guess I live in this town now,” she laughs. “Having kids taught me boundaries, and Nashville gave me an escape from fashion. The realness to life here is such a blessing.” To her kids and her neighbours, she isn’t a supermodel; she is “a dorky British woman, sitting here on my bed with a cup of tea, my big tom cat Fergus on my lap.” She has come a long way from Paris, in every sense. “You know what’s really messed up about fashion? The moments when I was totally exhausted and fragile were when people loved me most. It was like, she’s major! But at the expense of my health and my sanity. And I got to a point where I thought, I’m a grown fucking woman, you know? I’ve got two kids. I’m a good mother. I don’t want to be a broken doll any more.” • In March, Elson will appear in a Sky Documentaries series, telling the story of sexual exploitation in the modelling industry. Building on an investigation by journalist Lucy Osborne, first published in the Guardian’s Weekend magazine, it will be produced by Wonderhood Studios and the Guardian.I have determinedly avoided writing about neck creams for many years, but the huge fashion trend for “neck mess” (wearing lots of necklaces all together) has forced me to confront the issue. Neck mess is the new proclivity of social media users – and celebrities such as Michelle Obama and Gwyneth Paltrow – towards wearing multiple necklaces of varied thicknesses and lengths, suspending an eclectic collection of mismatching pendants, lockets and fobs, making the neck the focal point of a look (it’s no coincidence the trend was born at the height of Zoom-meeting dependency). Writer Nora Ephron’s decision to start hiding her neck with cowl necks and polos at just 43 (“Our faces are lies and our necks are the truth”) seems much less fun, but I know from your emails that there is anxiety around loosening and wrinkling neck skin. I have never recommended neck creams here because I think they’re nonsense. They’re expensive and cannot magically hoik up a sagging neck. Nothing but surgery can do that. In principle, the skin on your neck no more needs its own cream than molars need a different toothpaste from incisors. It’s easier to drape on another necklace to either camouflage or adorn. What works below the jaw is the same as what works above, via your regular facial skincare: antioxidants and sunscreen for protection, hyaluronic acid for hydration, oil for moisture and retinoids to at least partially reverse damage. Where this becomes tricky is that necks are prone to sensitivity, specifically with retinoids like retinol and tretinoin, which can leave them red and sore. The answer is to buffer the neck from too strong a product, effectively by reversing the application of layers, smoothing first a bland, gentle moisturiser (Avène Hydrance Rich Hydrating cream moisturiser, £15.50, La Roche Posay’s Toleriane Sensitive Fluide Moisturiser, £16.50 or Dr Jart Ceramidin cream, £30, perhaps) all over the neck, before applying retinol on top. Think of the cream as a mattress topper for your neck, to shield what lies beneath while letting enough through to do something. I do precisely this myself every night, as well as exercising my neck muscles regularly (they get much less of a workout than our expressive faces). By reappropriating the advice given by my midwife about my pelvic floor, I remember to make a point of tensing my neck muscles by flexing my jaw whenever I send a text message. It’s handy advice, if somewhat unbecoming on the bus.Gregg Wallace, Gregg Wallace, Gregg Wallace. I have to be up front and say: I love the man. There are lots of celebrities I enjoy playing a hypothetical game with where I explain who they are and why they are famous in Britain to someone from another country, and Gregg Wallace is one of my favourite plays. “Well he’s a greengrocer, basically,” I explain to someone from America or something, where they have dazzlingly glossy celebrities and where Gregg Wallace doesn’t even make an alien sort of sense. “Well, he was. Then he hosted a MasterChef reboot – nobody knows where he came from or why they chose him for that, because he often treats gourmet food as if it’s someone he’s shouting at through a car window – and now he’s sort of a national treasure, I guess. He lost a significant amount of weight and now he poses topless a lot on Instagram.” The American is looking baffled now. “You’re not getting it, he goes to factories! He met his wife on Twitter!” They are backing away now, saying something about having to get home to their hamburger, or a small child called Chad. “You don’t understand! Gregg Wallace has an irresistibly kissable head! He is one of Britain’s best celebrities!” It’s best not to focus on the Gregg Wallaceness of Gregg Wallace, is what I’m saying. Just turn your brain off and enjoy the ride, which is exactly what I did while watching Gregg Wallace’s Grand Christmas Adventure (Saturday, 8.25pm), where Channel 5 sent Gregg Wallace to Lapland for two days and said: “Have fun.” The wide-angle lens of this one is: Gregg Wallace will host a travelogue show in one of the most magical places on Earth, and he’ll turn the footage round in one weekend flat. But look closer and you’ll see it is one of the oddest TV shows of the year, and all the better for it. The first thing is: I don’t think anyone told Gregg Wallace who this was for, or what it’s about. On the surface he goes to Finland, attends a few touristy grotto-style events, eats some yuletide bakes, goes on a sledge, etc etc etc. But occasionally he goes quite odd and turns to the camera and tells me exactly how much the experience he is currently experiencing costs, and suddenly the merry Christmas show feels like when you can’t figure out how to stop the television in your hotel room from playing on a loop. It’s neat I mention hotels, actually, because Gregg gives us an exhaustive tour of the one he’s staying in, perching awkwardly on the edge of his bed with his shoes still on and explaining how, because of the size of the window, you wouldn’t want to sleep naked in here. All right, cheers then Gregg, I won’t. He pops round the corner into a cosy balcony room with a wood fire, sags on a chair, and says: “It’s not cheap.” OK? Next: I know at certain angles Gregg Wallace looks like a baby who somehow got a Millwall tattoo, but he is 57 years old, which makes it odd that he seems to be on a family holiday targeted quite directly at children, alone. Gregg goes around a toy factory (can’t help himself, can he?) after hours and laughs as he fills a toy horse with stuffing. He makes a traditional Christmas goat out of straw and gets pulled by a reindeer, alone, through some woods. The best moments are when Gregg does adult activities – he goes to an ice bar and does a shot of some herby liqueur, and enjoys a woodsy day of fishing and camping with a tour guide who later invites him for a beer in his sauna. But then he goes and meets Santa and hands him a little girl’s wishlist he found and was particularly moved by. Occasionally you’re like: this is classic background TV, I can leave it on while I do other stuff. And then, in a flash, perspective moves and you see Gregg Wallace is on a children’s holiday, alone – one of the most harrowing concepts for a television hour I’ve come across. Weirdly, I loved every second of it. There is no TV show that made me giggle out loud more this year, and the undercurrent of weirdness – though unintentional – is absolutely what makes it. There is a moment when Gregg Wallace fistbumps Santa Claus. They have cracked the code, TV producers, and figured out this one central truth: whenever Gregg Wallace is having fun on TV, viewers will have fun, too. Your “American celebrities” can’t get near him.Nearly half of all disadvantaged pupils in England could be prevented from going to university under government plans for a minimum GCSE entry level for higher education, university leaders are warning. Vice-chancellors believe that the government is poised to introduce a new entry threshold for a place on university courses as a means of reining in its rising student loan debt, with outstanding loans reaching £140bn last year. They are expecting the government to announce that students will not be eligible for a student loan unless they have at least a level 4 (the equivalent of an old grade C) in maths and English at GCSE. An analysis of Department for Education (DfE) GCSE results data conducted by the Million Plus group of modern universities and given to the Guardian shows that under the plan, 48% of all disadvantaged students in England would be ineligible for a student loan to pay the £9,250-a-year fees. Prof Rama Thirunamachandran, chair of Million Plus and vice-chancellor of Canterbury Christ Church University, said: “This policy entrenches inequality between rich and poor, north and south and black and white. It is introducing an 11-plus type system by the back door.” The government’s figures show that 52% of disadvantaged young people get grade 4 in English and maths GCSE compared with the national average of 71%. “So you are almost saying to a generation of disadvantaged kids: ‘You can’t get a student loan,’” said Thirunamachandran. “That is embedding inequality, not levelling up.” Million Plus analysed GCSE results in maths and English by parliamentary constituency and found the policy would hit young people in poorer areas of northern England far harder than in wealthier areas in the south. Under the proposed threshold, for instance, 54% of pupils in Great Grimsby would be ineligible for a student loan, as would 50% in Leeds Central, 49% in Bootle, Knowsley and Nottingham North, and 47% in Sheffield, Brightside and Hillsborough. In contrast, in the south only 12% of pupils would be excluded in Hitchin and Harpenden, 14% in St Albans, and 15% in London and Westminster, Chipping Barnet, and Richmond Park. Thirunamachandran, said: “The question is, if you are a parent in one of these less privileged regions in the north, will you simply accept that your child doesn’t have the same right to go to university as someone in a more privileged place in the south? That’s the political gamble the government is taking.” It is thought that the government believes many voters would consider it reasonable to expect students to have a good level of numeracy and literacy, making the idea a politically safe way to reduce student numbers. Claire Callender, professor of higher education at Birkbeck University and University College London’s Institute of Education, said: “This is a cap on student numbers through the back door – but not a cap on all potential students, just the most disadvantaged and those most affected by Covid.” She argued that a minimum entry level requirement signalled “an abandonment of any government concern about widening HE participation and nurturing social mobility” and said it would “cement existing social divides amongst young people at a time when they are widening rather than narrowing”. Sir David Bell, a former permanent secretary in the DfE and now vice-chancellor of Sunderland University, said the entry threshold would be seen as “a cap on aspiration”. “Politicians and policymakers always underestimate that really deeply felt aspiration to get to university,” he said. “They often falsely assume that people in a city like Sunderland just don’t want to go, but it’s simply not the case.” In its interim response to the Augar review of post-18 education in January the government said: “We are currently too skewed towards degrees above all else.” And last year the universities minister, Michelle Donelan, accused universities of “taking advantage” of disadvantaged students by mis-selling them dumbed-down courses that left them saddled with debt. Bell said the idea that universities are interested only in “piling students in” like “cash cows” was “offensive and unfair”. “We genuinely want them to succeed,” he added. “It is universities like ours that do the majority of the heavy lifting on social mobility.” He said universities such as his were very experienced in making nuanced decisions about applicants’ potential, and whether they would cope with a degree course. Sunderland takes a high proportion of mature students, many of whom do not have traditional qualifications and would be excluded under the proposed new system. Lee Elliot Major, professor of social mobility at the University of Exeter, who is leading a research project on how to help those who leave school without basic literacy or numeracy, said: “This is effectively closing off university prospects at age three for many poorer children. Our research shows the depressingly strong link between achieving poorly in early-age tests and failing to get passes in English and maths GCSEs at age 16.” Children from the lowest fifth of family income backgrounds are five times more likely to leave school without passes in English and maths GCSEs than those from the highest fifth of incomes, his research shows. “This move exposes the fundamental flaw at the heart of our education system: we already label a third of pupils taking English and maths GCSEs as failures – this will only condemn them further,” Elliot Major said. Academic staff at modern universities also say courses such as paramedicine, nursing and social care would all lose students under the proposed model, just as England is experiencing staff shortages in these professions. Dr Signy Henderson, dean for student success at Cumbria University, said its paramedic science degree would suffer. “We all know how desperately the country needs more well-qualified paramedics,” she said. “We often have learners who have real potential, but who went to schools where they say no one pushed them, or grew up in homes where no one understood the value of good GCSEs.” The DfE said it would not comment on speculation about discussions around minimum grade requirements and possible exemptions, which it said were ongoing. However, a spokesperson said: “This is a government that has boosted aspirations and grown opportunities for disadvantaged people across the country, and this year a record proportion of disadvantaged students has started university as a result. We are committed to continuing to level up opportunity.” He added: “But we also want to make getting on as important as getting in, which is why last month we asked universities to reboot their widening access plans with ambitious targets to support students both before and during their time at university, by reducing dropout rates and improving progression into high-paid, high-skilled jobs for disadvantaged students.”A year ago humanity embarked on a project to vaccinate every person against Covid-19. But in recent months a shadow vaccination campaign has also been taking place. From giraffes to snow leopards, gorillas to sea lions, zoos around the world have been inoculating their animals with an experimental Covid vaccine as an insurance policy against what they fear could be a similarly fatal illness for certain mammals. Meanwhile, veterinary scientists have been scrambling to understand the scale of Covid-19 infection in our furry household companions, and what the consequences could be for their health – and our own. Last week two hippos at Antwerp zoo in Belgium became the latest in a coterie of creatures to contract Covid from humans. Fortunately, Imani and Hermien had no symptoms apart from runny noses, but other animals haven’t been so fortunate. In November three snow leopards died from Covid-related complications at a children’s zoo in Nebraska. Other zoos have reported infections in gorillas, lions, tigers and cougars. Although Sars-CoV-2 is thought to have originated in an animal, most likely a bat, until recently most of the scientific focus has, understandably, been on human cases of disease. Yet ever since the early days of the pandemic, scientists have worried about the possibility of other animal infections. “We’ve always recognised that coronaviruses have this tremendous capacity to jump species. So it was always predicted that there would be a variety of domestic animals, livestock and potentially wildlife that could be infected,” said Margaret Hosie, a professor of comparative virology at the University of Glasgow’s Centre for Virus Research. If other animals can become infected and transmit the virus, this could put pressure on it to adapt and acquire new mutations, raising the prospect of new variants that could be transmitted back to people. “You could be concentrating on eradicating the virus in humans, but meanwhile the virus could be mutating away quietly in an animal species, and getting hotter and hotter,” Hosie said. The first report of an animal infection came in February 2020 when a dog in Hong Kong tested positive, probably having contracted it from its infected owner. Since then there have been numerous reports of dogs and cats with Covid. Other pets generally appear less susceptible – no one has yet identified a Covid-positive goldfish – although ferrets and golden hamsters can catch Covid-19, and dwarf Roborovski hamsters can die from it. Further research has suggested that cat and dog infections are relatively common. Scientists in the Netherlands found that in 20% of households they visited where pet owners had tested positive for Covid, the cats and dogs had antibodies for the virus. Some infected animals develop symptoms – generally a runny nose, coughing, sneezing or conjunctivitis – and most make uneventful recoveries. However, some may experience more severe illness. “The first cat that we identified as being infected from its owner was a young kitten that died of pneumonia,” said Hosie. “We didn’t test exhaustedly for other potential pathogens, so we couldn’t say for sure, but the pathology was very similar to the viral pneumonia seen in Covid-19 patients.” But are these infected pets contagious? Evidence from dogs suggests the risk of onward transmission is low because it is difficult to isolate replicating virus from them. On cats, the jury is still out. Experimental studies have suggested they can infect other cats, but the degree to which this happens in the real world is uncertain. Cats are relatively solitary creatures – they don’t spend much time in close contact with other cats or humans (besides their owners). So if they catch Covid-19, their owner is probably the source, and any onward transmission is likely to be extremely limited. Farmed mink, on the other hand, are forced to live in close proximity to one another, and are highly susceptible to infection with Sars-CoV-2. They can also develop pneumonia and die from it. In November 2020, news that the virus had crossed from humans into mink, mutated and then jumped back again sounded alarm bells around the world. “That was a real wake-up call, and I think is why there’s now more emphasis on studying viruses at the human animal interface,” said Hosie. Fortunately, although there have been other mink outbreaks, “so far [mink-related variant viruses] have not shown to be more transmissible or causing more severe impact compared to other circulating Sars-CoV-2,” a report by the European Food Safety Authority and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control concluded. Of course, infected farm animals can be quarantined or culled, as millions of mink were. Farm surveillance can also be stepped up and farmworkers kitted out with protective equipment. Vaccination is another option. In March, Russia’s state veterinary service announced that it had approved a Covid-19 vaccine called Karnivak-Kov for use on fur farms or for cats and dogs, after clinical trials on arctic foxes, cats, dogs and mink. The US Department of Agriculture has authorised a vaccine developed by the American animal health company Zoetis for experimental use on a case-by-case basis. Early this year Zoetis agreed to supply San Diego zoo with enough doses to inoculate its great apes after the zoo’s western lowland gorilla troop became ill with Covid. “Since then we’ve had multiple requests from different zoos and conservatories,” said Mahesh Kumar, a senior vice-president of biologics research and development at Zoetis. “I think 100 species of mammals have been vaccinated.” More concerning than farm outbreaks would be evidence of significant transmission among wild animals. Vaccinating them would be impractical, assuming a vaccine even worked in that species. In May the Journal of Virology reported that white-tailed deer, which are native to North, Central and South America, were capable of transmitting the virus to each other. And in August researchers at the US National Wildlife Center in Fort Collins reported that up to a third of white-tailed deer in the US north-east had antibodies to Sars-CoV-2. It is unclear how they became infected. If white-tailed deer really are transmitting the virus to each other in a continued and significant way, that could be problematic – although if a potentially dangerous new variant arose in them, it would still need to be transmitted back to us, and humans don’t tend to spend a lot of time breathing the same air as deer. “What we’re really concerned about is the passing back and forth between humans and animals, and to other animals, in a setting where the human population ultimately could be affected,” said Rebecca Fisher, an assistant professor of epidemiology at Texas A&amp;M University. Her greater fear is the virus adapting to wild animals that live in close proximity to humans, such as rodents. Fortunately, rats and mice don’t appear particularly susceptible to Sars-CoV-2 infection at the current time. However, because of the risks involved, it could pay to be vigilant. “The current pandemic is maintained by human [to] human transmission, but we need to keep a watching brief on animals,” said Alan Radford, a professor in veterinary health informatics at the University of Liverpool. For now, the most likely source of new variants is continued circulation of the virus in humans. With ongoing high infection rates, we still present a far greater risk to our pets than they do to us. This is unfortunate. “When we’re sick or convalescing, what is better than a snuggle with our pets?” said Fisher. “Tough as it is, if we are sick we must try to not interact with them, and not pass anything on to them. We need to try our hardest to protect them, just as we would our human children.”Newcastle’s 4-2 win at the King Power last season heralded the beginning of Leicester’s unravelling, and they are still suffering from the defensive mistakes that contributed to that defeat. The latest evidence came in Thursday’s disappointing elimination from the Europa League at Napoli. On top of that, Brendan Rodgers’ selection options are limited by Covid- and illness-related absences so Newcastle, fresh from their first league win of the season over Burnley last weekend and at full strength with the exception of the defender Paul Dummett, will travel with renewed confidence. Paul Doyle Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue King Power Stadium Last season Leicester 2 Newcastle 4 Referee Peter Bankes This season G6 Y29 R0 4.83 cards/game Odds H 13-17 A 15-4 D 16-5 LEICESTER Subs from Ward, Choudhury, Vestergaard, Amartey, Bertrand, Albrighton, Nelson, Soumaré, Daka, Lookman, Pérez, Iheanacho, Benkovic, Daley-Campbell Doubtful Lookman (illness), Pérez (illness), Vestergaard (illness), Iheanacho (illness), Amartey (illness), Benkovic (illness), Daley-Campbell (illness) Injured Fofana (broken leg, 1 month), Justin (knee, 1 week), Pereira (hamstring, 1 week) Suspended None Discipline Y21 R1 Form LDLWDL Leading scorer Vardy 9 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Fernández, Murphy, Krafth, Clark, Longstaff, Hendrick, Hayden, Ritchie, Fraser, Gayle Doubtful None Injured Dummett (calf, 1 month) Suspended None Discipline Y37 R2 Form LDDLDW Leading scorer Wilson 6The early impetus under Patrick Vieira has stalled after three successive defeats and Crystal Palace could do with ending that sequence against opponents they haven’t beaten since September 2014. Everton’s tails should be up after victory in their last match – courtesy of a late winner against Arsenal – eased some of the pressure on Rafa Benítez but they haven’t won on the road since the end of August. Palace are still without James McArthur, whose absence has coincided with their downturn in form, while the equally influential Dominic Calvert-Lewin is still out for Everton. Ed Aarons Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Selhurst Park Last season Crystal Palace 1 Everton 2 Referee Andy Madley This season G7 Y12 R2 2 cards/game Odds H 6-4 A 28-11 D 13-10 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Butland, Clyne, Milivojevic, Schlupp, Hughes, Riedewald, Eze, Ayew, Édouard Doubtful Andersen (thigh), Ferguson (knee) Injured McArthur (hamstring, 1 week) Suspended None Discipline Y30 R0 Form WWDLLL Leading scorers Benteke, Gallagher, Zaha 4 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Kenny, Branthwaite, Digne, Delph, Gomes, Gbamin, Iwobi, Simms, Dobbin, Tosun, Whitaker, Onyango, Welch, Rondón Doubtful Allan (muscle) Injured Calvert-Lewin (thigh, 19 Dec), Davies (knee, 19 Dec), Mina (calf, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y30 R1 Form LDLLLW Leading scorer Gray 5West Ham continue to be the Premier League’s surprise package but if they are to remain genuine challengers for a top-four spot then David Moyes will consider three points against a struggling Burnley side as an absolute must. Moyes enjoyed the luxury of resting all his first-choice players against Dynamo Zagreb on Thursday, with Europa League qualification already secured, but will be missing Kurt Zouma and Ben Johnson after they picked up injuries in last weekend’s thrilling win over Chelsea. Burnley have failed to score in their last two games so will be hoping Maxwel Cornet overcomes a thigh injury to feature. Stephen Hollis Sunday 2pm Venue Turf Moor Last season Burnley 1 West Ham 2 Referee Graham Scott This season G5 Y19 R0 3.8 cards/game Odds H 27-10 A 11-10 D 27-10 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Pieters, Bardsley, Thomas, Lennon, Long, Rodriguez, Cork, Collins, Cornet Doubtful Cornet (thigh), Mee (shoulder), Roberts (illness) Injured Barnes (thigh, 1-2 weeks), Stephens (Covid, 1 week) Suspended None Discipline Y32 R0 Form DWDDDL Leading scorer Cornet 5 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Baptiste, Alese, Cresswell, Ashby, Longelo, Kral, Noble, Vlasic, Chesters, Yarmolenko, Perkins Doubtful Cresswell (back), Fredericks (groin) Injured Ogbonna (knee, unknown), Zouma (hamstring, unknown), Johnson (hamstring, 1 week) Suspended None Discipline Y17 R1 Form WWLLDW Leading scorer Antonio 6A storm was raging when South Western Railway ordered all passengers to alight. The delayed 18.27 London to Exeter service was an hour from its destination, and torrential rain had prompted the company to abandon the journey. An announcement promised that coaches would relay travellers onwards but, when the train terminated at Yeovil Junction, no coaches could be found. Travellers would need to find taxis but none were available either. The conductor reboarded the train and it drove off into the night leaving a couple of dozen people, including an unaccompanied minor, stranded on the platform of a locked, unstaffed station in the middle of the countryside. South Western’s treatment of its customers exposes discrepancies in consumer protections when it comes to air and rail travel. If a flight is cancelled, or delayed, airlines are obliged to reroute passengers as swiftly as possible, and to feed and accommodate them until this can be done. Passengers are entitled to two free phone calls and emails while they are stranded, and to compensation of up to £520 a head unless the delay was down to an extraordinary circumstance. Statutory protection for rail passengers was only applied to domestic journeys in the UK in 2019. Article 18 of the Passengers’ Rights and Obligations Regulations EC 1371/2007 obliges train operators to offer meals and accommodation “where physically possible”. There is no requirement for them to try to ensure that this is the case when deciding where to terminate a train. Compensation is limited to a proportion of the fare for the affected part of the journey, and there are no free phone calls. They may, ultimately, have to cover any costs that passengers incur as a result of the delay or cancellation but in the short term, travellers will need to fend for themselves. Among the passengers stranded that night was my 16-year-old son, Greg, who was on his way to visit his sister in Exeter. His mobile phone was low on charge after fruitless calls to taxi firms, the electronic help point at the station was not functioning, and South Western’s customer care line had shut at 10pm. From 180 miles away, I rang every local taxi company listed on Google. Only one had a cab available and quoted £250 for the 50-mile-trip because of the dangerous driving conditions. A hotel room was the only safe option but most do not accept unaccompanied minors. By 11pm, Greg was facing a night on the station platform in lashing rain. Eventually, a receptionist at a Premier Inn two miles away took pity – as a rule, it does not allow unaccompanied guests aged under 18 – and in a rare example of a big chain putting humanity ahead of terms and conditions, it agreed to check him in. The manager of a fully booked taxi firm, on hearing his age, diverted a taxi to get him there. Four other stranded passengers crowded in with him as it was the only cab that had made it to the station. They reached the hotel shortly before midnight. South Western’s staff did not check whether any passengers were vulnerable before abandoning them. Getting to the station exit involved negotiating steep steps on a footbridge over the line, making it inaccessible for those with reduced mobility. Those without smartphones had to rely on strangers to find accommodation or transport. The response from South Western’s customer service should give any parent or traveller with additional needs pause for thought. “The decision should be made before a journey, by considering whether your child could cope alone, bearing in mind the possibility there may be delays during times of disruption,” wrote a customer service agent. “We don’t offer specific assistance to children travelling alone, although our staff will always help if approached.” Customer services has since told affected passengers that their hotel and taxi expenses will be reimbursed, and they can apply for a refund of their fare via Delay Repay. South Western eventually refunded the £200 cost of the hotel and taxi, and I received £10.98 via Delay Repay for the affected leg of the journey. South Western admits it fell short. “This was a difficult night for staff working on our railway but it is clear that we should have communicated more effectively and made sure that alternative transport and accommodation was made available,” it says. “We are sorry that we fell short on this occasion. We are investigating this incident to learn lessons from what went wrong and improve our processes.” According to the rail regulator, the Office of Rail and Road, passengers should be assisted if a service has to be abandoned. It adds: “The Consumer Rights Act gives rail passengers the ability to seek statutory redress if a train operator fails to provide a passenger service with reasonable care and skill.” Passengers with an unresolved complaint can appeal to the Rail Ombudsman, whose decision is binding on participating companies. The service will shortly be announcing details of a campaign aimed at making rail travel safer for young people. A spokesperson for the Rail Ombudsman said it expected train companies “to assist wherever possible to ensure that no passengers are ever stranded without reasonable options”. The spokesperson added: “The ombudsman is striving to empower young people when it comes to remaining safe on the rail network and will be launching the Young Person’s Train Guide, a campaign which will engage with rail operators and other stakeholders in the industry around the laws and bylaws that govern it.”Back in spring 2020, when it became clear that coronavirus wasn’t going away, book lovers spied an opportunity for a rare, government-mandated reading holiday. Here, at last, was a chance to have a go at Tolstoy’s War and Peace and Proust’s In Search of Lost Time. Robert Macfarlane reported that he was working his way through the great Babylonian Epic of Gilgamesh. Ali Smith urged readers towards Boccaccio’s Decameron. Diana Evans’s thoughts turned “heavenwards” by way of Homer’s Odyssey. I downloaded 27 hours of The Brothers Karamazov audiobook in anticipation. All lovely ideas. With 20 months of hindsight, however, which books did we actually end up turning to? The bestseller lists from the three different lockdowns may not tell you the contents of Britain’s soul, but then again, the numbers do not lie. We read: The Thursday Murder Club by Richard Osman. Sophie Hinchliffe’s Mrs Hinch: The Little Book of Lists. Lots of David Walliams, who topped the Lockdown 1 and Lockdown 2 charts with Slime and Code Name Bananas respectively. JK Rowling: the first three Harry Potter books steadily rose up the charts through the pandemic. Joe Wicks. The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse. A Pinch of Nom, plus spin-offs. Sally Rooney’s Normal People. Reni Eddo-Lodge’s Why I’m No Longer Talking to White People About Race. So: cosy crime, uncosy crime, tidying up books, weight loss books, self-improvement books, children’s books, books offering cutesy wisdom, romance and escapism all did well during the pandemic. But then again, so did the books industry as a whole. Despite the chaos of lockdown – bookshop closures, supply chain issues, disruption to release schedules, cancelled literary festivals, live talks and book clubs – by the end of 2020, overall sales of print books were up 5% year-on-year, according to industry watchers Nielsen BookScan, with the upwards trend continuing this year. Fiction did particularly well – adult fiction increased 8% in volume terms, with 147m books sold. So too did children’s books, up 7%, to 109m books. Overall, the British public spent £1.8 bn on 202m print books. Digital sales soared, ebooks growing 16% and audiobook sales 21% year on year. “Books had a real moment,” says Hannah Bourton, publishing director at Viking, which scored the big hit of the pandemic with Osman’s The Thursday Murder Club. “They were immediate, they were accessible. We all wanted to escape into different stories.” “It sounds bad, but the pandemic has been quite good for us,” agrees Phoebe Morgan, editorial director of HarperCollins. “Particularly in the commercial area of the market. Obviously there have been times where things have been difficult – and especially for the authors. But it has also shown that there’s a bigger appetite for reading than ever.” Even so, many people – myself included – found that they couldn’t necessarily follow through on their grand ambitions. “I heard a lot of people say that now was the time to read all of the books that they’d always meant to read, or finally sit down and write their novel,” says Damian Barr, the author of Maggie and Me and presenter of the Big Scottish Book Club. “But what I found was that the constant state of emergency really fractured my ability to concentrate.” He turned to poetry instead: Mary Oliver, Mark Doty, Richard Scott. “I found poetry meaningful and sustaining but short enough that I could manage it.” Personally, I abandoned Dostoevsky pretty swiftly, and soon found my level was the odd audiobook and as many Inspector Maigret mysteries as I could lay my hands on. Still, the uptick in book sales shouldn’t come as a huge surprise. When museums, galleries, theatres, cinemas and concert venues closed in March 2020, books (along with TV) were an obvious source of refuge: cheap, immersive, low-tech and solitary. A survey by Nielsen in May 2020 found that 41% of British people were reading more; the UK as a whole doubled the amount of time it spent reading books, from 3.5 hours to six hours per week. Philip Stone of Nielsen even noticed a “brief spike” in physical book sales just prior to the first lockdown, which he puts down to panic buying. “People really did rush out to buy books to keep them company as they bedded in.” Once the shops were closed, publishing was unusually well positioned to capitalise, argues Stone. “Even before the pandemic, online retail accounted for about 50% of the books market, so book consumers were pretty used to buying online.” So which books did we turn to in that first lockdown, when the world around us seemed so uncertain and alarming? Alongside pre-pandemic bestsellers by Lee Child and Hilary Mantel were school textbooks by homeschooling parents and the aptly timed thriller Lockdown by Peter May. Baking books did well, says Stone, adult colouring books had a second wave, and anything on personal development and mindfulness also sold strongly. Meanwhile, the Black Lives Matter protests helped to focus attention on writers of colour through the summer: Bernardine Evaristo and Reni Eddo-Lodge both sold well. But overall it’s what’s not on the charts that tells the bigger story. With the usual channels of recommendation disrupted, Amazon’s sales algorithms and supermarket buyers played an outsized role in shaping taste. “Tesco really stole a lot of market share and that had a huge influence on what people were reading,” says Bourton. “A book like Where the Crawdads Sing by Delia Owens, which was already selling well in spring, became a big ongoing phenomenon. The high street plays a huge role in breaking new authors, whereas what the supermarkets excel at is the familiar. Sainsbury’s didn’t actually take any new titles last April – they just sold more of what they already had.” Morgan says that the closure of bookshops actually helped sales for the commercial thrillers and crime fiction in which she specialises. “A lot of the stuff I was publishing was really overperforming in the supermarkets.” She noticed that “locked-room” mysteries performed particularly well: “An ensemble cast, assembled in a remote location, perhaps somewhere exotic.” Among big sellers were The Guest List by Lucy Foley, which is about a murder at a wedding on a remote Irish island, and The Chalet by Catherine Cooper, set in a snowed-in ski resort. “There’s an obvious reason for that when everyone is locked in their house and can’t actually travel anywhere,” she says. However, the runaway hit was The Thursday Murder Club, an Agatha Christie-esque murder mystery set in a retirement complex, published in September 2020. It has now sold well over 1 million copies, spawned a sequel (The Man Who Died Twice), and had its movie rights snapped up by Steven Spielberg. Osman is a well-known TV personality and Viking won the rights to the novel after a 14-way auction in 2019, so its success wasn’t totally out of the blue. Still, Bourton feels in retrospect it was perfectly placed to capitalise on the pandemic. “It is a comforting story about a small community – and it also has such respect and reverence for characters who are older,” she says. “The main characters are all 70-plus and experiencing end-of-life care. That was reflecting something we were going through as a society with a sudden extreme loss of elderly people due to Covid.” We can expect more “cosy crime” in the future: the Reverend Richard Coles’s crime debut, Murder Before Evensong, is due in June next year. However, as Bea Carvalho, head fiction buyer at Waterstones, notes, all kinds of crime fiction did well. “There’s something comforting about the structure of crime novels, a puzzle that needs to fit together,” she says. “When the world is so uncertain and hard to understand, those traditional narratives, where by the end the author will have done the work for you – that’s pretty appealing.” The fact that Osman and Coles are celebrities tells its own story about the winners and losers in this period. The Bookseller found that, notwithstanding the industry’s success, 63% of authors had lost income in 2020 – with debut authors bearing the brunt. For those without name recognition or a pre-existing platform, the pandemic took its toll. “There were lots of authors who were published for the first time in lockdown who really missed out,” says Barr, who was forced to cancel all the events surrounding the paperback release of his own debut novel, You Will Be Safe Here. “We’re in danger of losing two or three years of amazing writers who just haven’t had the attention they deserve.” For all the challenges of lockdown, there were stirring successes when stores finally reopened. “We’ve really felt the power of recommendation since we’ve welcomed customers back in again,” says Carvalho. “You can’t really get that from algorithms.” One of her most successful books has been The Appeal, by former screenwriter Janice Hallett, which tells the story of a murder at an amateur dramatic society via a series of letters and emails, but asks the reader to solve the mystery. Bookshops were closed when it was released in hardback in early 2021, and, as a debut author, Hallett was not afforded any supermarket listings and had little publicity. Waterstones sold only a thousand copies online in its first month. However, those who did read it urged their friends to buy it and when shops opened again, it began to sell in ever-larger numbers, becoming their bestselling book in July. Another hit was Exciting Times, a love triangle set among bratty young expats in Hong Kong by the young Irish writer Naoise Dolan. Released during the first lockdown, the combination of exotic locale, escapist love story and Rooney comparisons (just as the Normal People adaptation was on TV screens) hit a sweet spot. There were also mini-trends. One was mythology. From children’s books about myths to contemporary retellings such as The Women of Troy by Pat Barker, Circe by Madeline Miller, or Ariadne by debut author Jennifer Saint, it seems we couldn’t get enough of those archetypes. Another was “armchair travel”. Actual travel books suffered badly – travel guides lost around 90% of sales in the first lockdown (though have mostly recovered) – but books that conjured specific locales fared well. And Carvalho has noted a huge increase in teenagers buying Japanese manga and graphic novels – often filming themselves doing so. This is a TikTok trend that has migrated over into real sales; she is now increasing the space devoted to manga across the chain. Tom Robinson actually managed to open a new independent bookshop mid-lockdown: Gloucester Road Books in Bristol. He has been pleasantly surprised by how ambitious his new customers have been, reporting a roaring trade in Ann Quin’s highly experimental novel Berg, sold simply by recommending it to customers. Another success has been The Weak Spot by Lucy Elven, published by the tiny Prototype press. “Bookshops develop and sustain relationships with their customers and their communities,” he says. “There was a growing consciousness about what Amazon and other low-cost retailers had done to books. I’m finding that people will take the hit of a couple of quid to order it from me instead. And there are lots of people who come in soliciting opinions, bringing in their recommendations, and telling me how they got on with them, too. I’ve realised this is such a significant part of what bookshops do.” So did any of us fulfil those ambitions we set out with at the beginning of the pandemic? Old favourites have sold well over the last 18 months, says Jessica Harrison at Penguin Classics. “We noticed that people really were turning to those great doorstopper novels: Middlemarch, Anna Karenina, Don Quixote, David Copperfield,” she says. “All of their sales increased by significant amounts in 2020, and sales are usually steady so it has been quite noticeable.” Nor has the trend stalled in 2021, she says, suggesting that these books are classics for a reason. The big mover has been The Plague by Albert Camus, which increased by more than 1,000% and is still selling strongly, as is Journal of a Plague Year by Daniel Defoe. She also sold lots of books by writers of colour: Women, Race and Class by Angela Davis, The Autobiography of Malcolm X and James Baldwin’s oeuvre all had an uplift. The major trend, however, was the Stoics. “Meditations by Marcus Aurelius was huge for us,” she says. “As was Letters from a Stoic by Seneca – that sold absolutely loads in lockdown – and so did Epictetus.” Seneca and Marcus Aurelius were also the two biggest classics audiobooks during lockdown. “I guess lots of people were looking for ancient wisdom during lockdown.” Coming soon to a supermarket near you, hopefully. * * * The bestselling books Lockdown 1 March to June 2020 Slime David Walliams HarperCollins The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse Charlie Mackesy Ebury Mrs Hinch: The Little Book of Lists Sophie Hinchliffe Michael Joseph Normal People Sally Rooney Faber Jack Reacher: Blue Moon Lee Child Bantam Where the Crawdads Sing Delia Owens Corsair Girl, Woman, Other Bernardine Evaristo Penguin Why I’m No Longer Talking to White People About Race Reni Eddo-Lodge Bloomsbury Wean in 15 Joe Wicks Bluebird The Family Upstair Lisa Jewell Arrow * * * Lockdown 2 November to December 2020 Code Name Bananas David Walliams HarperCollins A Promised Land Barack Obama Viking The Thursday Murder Club Richard Osman Viking The Ickabog JK Rowling Little, Brown Guinness World Records 2021 Guinness World Records Guinness World Records The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse Charlie Mackesy Ebury Diary of a Wimpy Kid: The Deep End Jeff Kinney Puffin Shuggie Bain Douglas Stuart Picador A Del of a Life David Jason Century Jack Reacher: The Sentinel Lee Child &amp; Andrew Child Bantam * * * Lockdown 3 January 2021 to April 2021 Pinch of Nom: Quick &amp; Easy Kay Featherstone &amp; Kate Allinson Bluebird The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse Charlie Mackesy Ebury The Thursday Murder Club Richard Osman Viking The Midnight Library Matt Haig Canongate Tap to Tidy Stacey Solomon Ebury Grown Ups Marian Keyes Penguin Where the Crawdads Sing Delia Owens Corsair Pinch of Nom: Everyday Light Kay Featherstone &amp; Kate Allinson Bluebird Pinch of Nom: 100 Slimming, Home‑style Recipes Kay Featherstone &amp; Kate Allinson Bluebird The Fast 800 Easy Dr Clare Bailey &amp; Justine Pattison ShortYewande Omotoso is known for her second novel, The Woman Next Door, longlisted for the Women’s prize in 2017. As a reading experience, the follow-up An Unusual Grief is like a river. The story gathers turbulence and pace as it passes through its reader, twisting and turning back on itself until at last its emotional torsion seems to open out, as the grief fuelling this narrative achieves acceptance, or perhaps surrender, and the novel subsides into contemplative emotion. As a mapping of the progress of grief it skirts cliche, but only because grief does follow certain patterns. As the shape to a story it’s deeply satisfying. Mojisola’s daughter Yinka has taken her own life, and in a traumatised fugue state, Mojisola travels to Yinka’s flat in Johannesburg from her home in Cape Town, leaving her serially unfaithful husband, Titus, behind her. She moves into the ruins of her daughter’s life, befriending her daughter’s former landlord and occasional drug dealer Zelda as she rents the flat for herself, and seeks to excavate who Yinka was and what happened to her. This search takes her deep into a life that is entirely unlike the one she herself has lived. Of course, it doesn’t work: the threads left behind do not amount to the person, as Mojisola eventually accepts. In the end, the closest thing to an insight into the day her daughter died turns out to be something Mojisola left behind in Cape Town. What she finds in Johannesburg is the unknowability of any other life – even her own child’s. Omotoso is good on grief, trauma, families, loss – but when it comes to the way people in extremes of emotion still have to do the washing up, or the way people go back to difficult marriages, and lives take on patterns that become their defining themes, she’s outstanding. The only real false note is the decision to place the point of catharsis at the moment where Mojisola cries for her daughter for the first time; the novel is more than good enough not to have needed that Hollywood moment. This caveat aside, An Unusual Grief reveals itself as a beautiful book that offers emotional truth to its readers, and a feeling of consolation for the imperfections we are all making our peace with, all the time. • An Unusual Grief is published by Cassava (£11.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.BT’s status as a potential takeover target is back in focus after UK rules preventing its new largest shareholder from making its next move expired on Saturday. Here we look at the key points. What is happening? Altice, the telecoms group controlled by the billionaire Patrick Drahi, made an unexpected £2.2bn share swoop in June to take a 12.1% stake in BT. After the move Drahi, who has said he is supportive of management and their strategy and is not seeking to take control of BT, has been subject to a six-month no-bid clause. However, all bets are off from 11 December. The key players Patrick Drahi The 58-year-old French-Israeli telecoms billionaire has amassed a $12bn (£9bn) fortune making shrewd bets, often involving aggressive cost-cutting programmes at businesses he controls. Drahi has made his money in the telecoms market, but he is best known in the wider media for his $3.7bn swoop on struggling auction house Sotheby’s in 2019. Philip Jansen The 54-year-old chief executive of BT, who has made an estimated $100m fortune from the flotation and subsequent buyout of his former employer WorldPay, has led the telecoms company for the past three years. Adam Crozier Drafted in as chairman designate on 1 March after a boardroom bust up between Jansen and chairman Jan du Plessis, the 57-year-old Scot officially took the helm on 1 December – just in time to join the frontline resistance to Drahi. Crozier’s CV spans chief executive stints at ITV, Royal Mail, the Football Association and the advertising group Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, as well as chairman at online retailer Asos and the Premier Inn owner Whitbread. Tim Höttges The chief executive of Deutsche Telekom, BT’s second-largest shareholder with a 12.06% stake, has held its shareholding in a passive capacity as a legacy of the telecom’s company’s takeover of EE in 2015. KKR The US private equity firm has proposed a “friendly” buyout of Telecom Italia which, like BT, is a former state monopoly of significant strategic importance. A sign of private equity interest in European telecom stocks, and something of a template for how any deal for BT would need to be approached. Why is BT a target? The timing of Drahi’s stake-building was no accident. It followed BT’s £15bn commitment to roll out full-fibre broadband to 25m homes by 2026, having gained valuable regulatory and financial incentives guaranteeing a return on the huge investment over the long term. Telecoms have long argued that they are undervalued by the market; BT’s share price remains stubbornly about 65% down on 2015 levels, while the pandemic has shown the essential role internet and mobile companies play in society and strategic importance to the nation. What are the options? Drahi could look to increase his stake in BT by snapping up more shares with one option to quickly double his holding by buying out Deutsche Telekom. Höttges said recently the company is “entertaining all options” regarding BT. Drahi could also demand a seat on the board, as Deutsche Telekom has, to increase his direct influence over future strategy. A full-blown takeover could also be on the cards, although it would come with significant ramifications, both in terms of competition and politics. Britain has become more wary of threats to the economy and national security posed by the sale of certain UK companies to foreign rivals and private equity firms. From January, the government will gain tougher powers to block the takeover of key national assets, which BT would certainly be designated, under the National Security and Investment Act 2021.When The Matrix asks us all to take the red pill again on 22 December, Carrie-Anne Moss, 54, will return to the role that made her famous. Moss first played Trinity, a motorbike-riding, badass, PVC-clad hacker, in 1999, and despite the character not surviving the original trilogy, she is back, along with her co-star Keanu Reeves, for the fourth instalment, The Matrix Resurrections, directed by Lana Wachowski, this time without her sister Lilly. Moss, who was born in Canada, started her career as a model and had several small parts on television and in films before The Matrix struck gold. She played Marvel’s first on-screen lesbian character, Jeri Hogarth, in the Netflix series Jessica Jones, and away from the acting world, she runs a “labour of love” lifestyle site called Annapurna Living. She lives with her husband and three children in the countryside in California, which means she does not see the current trend for Matrix-inspired fashion such as big stompy boots and tiny sunglasses out on the streets. Was returning to the world of The Matrix a tough decision? Oh, no. I was absolutely over-the-moon excited about the prospect. It was something that I never imagined happening. People had mentioned it to me in passing, and I was always thinking: ‘No way. Never gonna happen.’ There are obvious reasons for that, the main one being that Trinity dies in the third film. When myself, Lana, Keanu and a few others sat together to read it for the first time, I was thinking: ‘What is this going to be like? How is she going to do this?’ It’s something that I never imagined, and I was really blown away. The Matrix came out in 1999, but it has been a near-constant part of the cultural conversation ever since. How does it feel to have been such a big part of that? It’s interesting. I’m definitely honoured to be in a film that made such an impact, and I’m deeply respectful of the part that I play in that story. I also have my own personal life that doesn’t include any of that, and so I don’t really feel the cultural impact. At the same time, when I do feel the weight of it, I’m moved that I got chosen to be that part of this film, and what it means to people, and I don’t take that lightly. It’s not just some job I did. When I did the first Matrix, it seemed to really impact women a lot. Women would come up to me, women directors, and stuntwomen, and they would thank me for opening this door or that. So I hold it with a lot of reverence, and a lot of deep respect. I respect this character more than any character that I’ve ever played. I chose not to play similar characters. I didn’t want to give Lana and Lilly’s hard work and beautiful artistry to any other film-maker. Were you offered roles like Trinity a lot? It did happen, and then it was just really clear. I think it didn’t even get past anybody to get to me because I was just like: I’m not going to do that. I think a lot of people interpreted it as that I didn’t want to stereotype myself, and it had nothing to do with stereotypes. It only had to do with my respect for the film-makers, and the film, and I didn’t want to sell that out. It was a no-brainer. I’m grateful now, coming around full circle to it, and getting to be in it again. There’s a real purity about it for me. What do you think those women were thanking you for? I don’t know. When I did the first film, I was super-young; I didn’t really understand all the different things that were happening, it was just such a whirlwind. When I saw the movie I was overwhelmed by it. I’d never seen myself in that way on a big screen. One of the things that I love about Trinity has to do with the gaze of thefilm-makers. It’s Lana, and how she shoots. She loves Trinity so much. I can really appreciate it, in hindsight. I didn’t feel that she was overly sexualised, and I don’t think they would have picked me anyway if they were looking for that. I am grateful, in Hollywood terms, that it wasn’t taken in that direction. I watched an interview you did around the release of the first Matrix, and you talked about trying to shoot a scene in heels, which was a problem for you. I checked the trailer for Resurrections, and Trinity appears to be wearing flat-soled boots. Is that progress? In the first one, there was one scene where they had me in a kind of a stiletto, and I couldn’t do the scene. I had auditioned with that scene, and then suddenly there we are on the day shooting it, and I was unsteady. It was the whole thing in the nightclub, where I’m whispering in the guy’s ear, and I’m supposed to be really grounded and strong, and yet I could barely stand straight. And so they took those off and gave me a boot with a nice solid heel. Well, footwear matters. Yeah. I’m a clog girl, personally. What did you have to do to get back into Trinity mode? A lot of the preparation was physical training. I had weight to lose, I had strength to gain, I had fights to learn, I had big scenes to mentally prepare for. For months leading up to it, it was a lot of physical work, to get into Trinity in a way that wasn’t me trying to be someone I used to be, and not trying to be 30, or trying to have the body I had when I was 30, and at the same time, being gentle with myself about that, too. When I had babies, I gained weight, and it took me years to come back into my body that I felt strong and comfortable in. I wonder if it’s less of a big deal than it was to have female action heroes in their 40s, 50s and 60s? It’s been normal for male actors for a long time, but I think fewer people would bat an eyelid about women doing those sorts of parts now. I haven’t really thought too deeply about it. Except that for my own personal journey, I didn’t want to add any desperation on to myself, because in a way, I would feel like I was doing all the women my age, who were 30 [once], a disservice. This feeling that I have about Trinity is that it’s not just about me, and I take that to heart. If suddenly I show up and I’m like … I don’t even know what that would look like, but let’s be real, seeing yourself on screen is not easy. It wasn’t easy when I was 30, either. But what I do feel happy about in seeing the movie is that I didn’t really even think about it. How much truth is there to the rumour that Keanu Reeves is the nicest man in the movie business? Ha ha! He’s a very kind person, and he’s so good at what he does. He is very committed and disciplined. And he works harder than anyone I’ve ever met. It was a pure pleasure to get to partner with him again, in this way. It was as if no time had passed. We all have those friends where you can just pick up right where you left off. He’s a great listener. It’s really lovely to be around a man who listens in the way that he does. He’s very thoughtful in his listening. He deserves all of that good press about his compassion and kindness. You said you made a decision not to play characters like Trinity, but there has been a thread of authority running through your characters recently. You were a doctor in Humans, a lawyer in Jessica Jones … Well, I think the common denominator is who’s playing them. They do all look like you. It was interesting to me that [Jeri Hogarth in Jessica Jones] was originally a guy. The character was written as a man, and when I talked to them about it, I didn’t want them to change it too much. I liked this idea that she had this stereotypical male kind of energy. That was quite fun to play. Actually, I really enjoyed doing that. It was my first [big] job after I had children. When I got that job, and I went to New York, it was as if I had walked into an entirely new world, with technology, and all of this stuff. I couldn’t even order a coffee! It was really a culture shock. Krysten Ritter, my co-star, I was always asking her things, she was helping me put Uber on my phone, little things, but New York was a real learning curve for me. It was quite jarring. I was quite comfortable at home, so I was stepping out of my comfort zone. You don’t seem like a very Hollywood person to me. I’ve never really been interested in any of that. I never went to any Hollywood stuff, premieres or events or whatever, unless it was something that I was part of, or I was supporting a friend. Sometimes in the beginning, my team would say: ‘Maybe she’d go to that thing.’ And I’d be like: ‘I don’t want to have to get dressed and figure out what to wear, and I don’t know how to do my makeup, and I don’t know how to do my hair.’ And I’m OK that I don’t know how to do that stuff. I would rather be at home with my family any day. I’ve worked really hard to have this connected family life, and that means a lot to me. It’s not because it’s perfect or easy, but it’s where I belong, in my heart. When I leave to go to work, I ultimately always love it, because you’re forced to get out of your comfort zone. It’s so healthy. But when I come home, I love my simple life. The Matrix: Resurrections is in UK cinemas from 22 December.Three generations of Arah Parker’s family have lived in her pleasant, yellow-hued home, where there used to be a clear view of the San Gabriel mountains from the kitchen window. There used to be – until the country’s hunger for online shopping swallowed the neighborhood. Four massive Amazon warehouses – ranging from 500,000 to nearly 900,000 sq ft – now surround this historically Black community, as do distribution centers for Target, Under Armour, Monster Energy and Keeco textiles. Her home is now boxed in on three sides by concrete block buildings and the quiet road out front has been paved into a four-lane expressway rumbling with delivery trucks. The ancient mountains are obscured by a “big, block wall” and more often than not, they are further shrouded by a noxious layer of haze belched up by the trucks. “To watch the transformation, it really has been disheartening,” said Parker, 39. The Inland Empire region, where Parker lives, is now one of the biggest national hubs for the e-commerce industry. The changes it has undergone are being replicated in cities and towns across the country. To feed the one-click, one-day delivery demands of the nation, new warehouses are opening quickly, often in Black and brown neighborhoods. They sometimes chew up entire suburban blocks and communities in the process, crowding roadways with delivery trucks and vans and air space with cargo planes, clouding the air with more pollution. Located about 60 miles east of Los Angeles, the Inland Empire has the third-largest concentration of Amazon warehouses in the US, according to a database of Amazon facilities Consumer Reports (CR) purchased from MWPVL, a logistics consulting firm. The people living within a mile of most Amazon warehouses are more likely to be poor and people of color than those living in the typical neighborhood in the surrounding urban area, a new analysis by CR, published this week in collaboration with the Guardian, found. About 67% of residents in the Inland Empire are people of color. Within a mile of the average Amazon warehouses in the area, 81% of residents are people of color, according to the CR analysis. Amazon, which is the largest private employer in the region, has continued to rapidly expand its facilities and warehouses here. The company opened eight new facilities in the Inland Empire in 2020 and at least five this year – altogether operating 34 facilities in the area. In an area that already faces some of the worst traffic and air pollution in the US, the explosive growth of the warehouse industry threatens to exacerbate already high rates of asthma and other respiratory issues. Placed close to the LA and Long Beach ports – the two busiest in the US – and encompassing four major freeway routes, the region is strategically situated, not just for Amazon, but about every major e-commerce and logistics company. Overall, there are hundreds of warehouses in the Inland Empire. “Our communities of color have become the sacrifice for one of the biggest, wealthiest companies in the world,” said Anthony Victoria, an environmental justice organizer based in the region. “This is the cost of online shopping.” ‘Billionaires’ dumping ground’ Parker’s neighborhood in Rialto, where her grandfather and great uncle settled during the 1940s, is now reduced to just her family, and one other one down the street. All the other neighbors sold their plots to warehouse developers. “You should see how they try to race the semis down the street,” said Marcus Gutierrez, who lives near Parker with his sister Maria. “They’ve taken out our mailbox twice,” Maria chuckled. “We have to be careful when we go get the mail because the trucks will take the mail right out of your hands.” The trucks are everywhere – idling outside sports arenas and high schools. Six out of eight schools in the Inland town of Bloomington are located or will be located right next to a warehouse. Eighteen-wheelers are parked along small residential streets. Semis rattle through the streets, the vibrations over time causing cracks into the homes they drive by. At the mall in Moreno Valley, shoppers sometimes see a fleet of Amazon delivery vans parked in the lot by the JCPenny. “It’s everywhere – warehouses everywhere and pollution everywhere,” said Mitzi Archer, the board president of the non-profit Center for Community Action and Environmental Justice (CCAEJ). “You don’t see that in Beverly Hills. You don’t see that in the wealthy parts of Los Angeles. They’re coming into communities populated with Hispanic and Black people.” Archer and her family have been living in Moreno Valley, about 500 feet from the 60 highway and a continuous procession of semis, for nearly three decades. Her son Thomas Winbush Jr, 27, struggled with asthma growing up. And her late husband, Winbush’s namesake, died at age 57, of multiple myeloma – a blood cancer in the bone marrow. In Archer’s husband’s last days, the doctor told her something that still makes her angry. “She said the type of cancer could be caused by a lot of things, but based on where we lived, it was likely from the environment.” Her family had been exposed for decades, even before Amazon had arrived. CCAEJ, which Archer joined shortly after her husband’s death, was started in the 1970s to fight for those living near the Stringfellow Acid Pits, a notorious toxic waste site. Elsewhere in the Inland Empire, pollution from the BNSF rail yard in San Bernardino emits a stream of pollution linked with elevated cancer risk. Billionaires have long treated the region as a dumping ground, said Tom Dolan, the executive director of the faith-based advocacy organization, Inland Congregations United for Change. In fighting against rail yard pollution, local activists had to take on BNSF, a company owned by Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway. “Now it’s no longer just Warren Buffett, it’s Jeff Bezos and Amazon,” said Dolan. “And we’re paying their cost of doing business.” Dolan himself developed chronic bronchitis – a condition that is common among smokers – but in his case was likely triggered by pollution. When tailpipe emissions cook under the sunlight and heat to create a thick layer of smog over the region, Dolan has been in and out of the hospital. His wife Cecilia Miranda Dolan, who used to work as a physical education teacher at the Norton Science Academy, an elementary school located near the Amazon Air Regional Air Hub in San Bernardino, said a third of her students had some respiratory issue. “They could run for just 100 meters before it was too much.” ‘Local leaders sold off people’s lungs’ A recent report from the local air quality monitoring management office found that people living within half a mile of warehouses have higher rates of asthma and heart attacks than residents in the area overall. Across Riverside and San Bernardino counties, which encompass the Inland Empire, 71% of children 10 and under have asthma, according to public health data compiled by the University of California, LA. “It feels like we’re disposable humans,” said Amparo Miramontes, who moved from LA to the Inland city of Fontana about a decade ago, in search of an affordable home to raise her family during the Great Recession. Around the same time, warehousing began to take hold in the region. And Miramontes and her whole family believe they have felt the effects. It started when she and her husband began getting frequent nosebleeds. Her then-infant daughter kept falling ill with respiratory infections. Soon, Miramontes developed asthma so severe that when she became pregnant with her son, she couldn’t breathe in enough oxygen for the both of them. “At one point, my oxygenation wouldn’t go over 60%, no matter how hard I tried,” she said. Her baby was born with respiratory issues. At four months, he needed a nebulizer four times a day. At 10 months, his lungs remained weak. “He had these big, huge black rings under his eyes all the time,” she said, a sign that his oxygenation levels were low and he was anemic. Her son, now eight, still uses a nebulizer often and an inhaler regularly – but he’s been doing much better since she invested in air purifiers at home and enrolled him in a magnet school about 15 miles away, where the air quality is better. She doesn’t let either of her kids play outdoor sports and constantly worries about the long-term effects on their health. With each new proposed warehouse development in her neighborhood, she grows angrier. Local leaders, she said, “have basically sold off people’s lungs”. She thinks often about whether she should move, but for now, she wants to stay and fight – in part because she feels it’s the right thing to do. She’s seen the warehousing industry spread, across southern California and the US. “It’s a hard decision,” she said. “Sometimes I’m like, ‘Damn, I’m a horrible mom. I need to leave.’” To track precisely how much the warehouse boom has impacted air pollution, non-profit organizations in the area as well as researchers from UC Riverside, have been fitting residents with wearable air quality trackers. Facing pressure from local activists, Riverside, Colton and Jurupa Valley have issued moratoriums on opening new warehouses, while officials assess their environmental impact. In May this year, the local air quality regulator adopted a rule that will require operators of warehouses 100,000 sq ft or larger to cut or offset emissions or pay a mitigation fee to fund air quality improvements nearby. Over the next few years, to avoid paying fees, warehouse operators will have to show that they have taken steps such as transitioning to electric or natural gas-fueled trucks, installing rooftop solar panels or providing air filters to neighboring schools and child-care centers – changes that regulators say could result in up to 300 fewer deaths and 5,800 fewer asthma attacks from 2022 through 2031. Amid mounting criticisms over pollution, Amazon has said it is planning to transition to electric transport and delivery vehicles. “We’re deploying 100,000 electric delivery vehicles by 2030 that will save millions of metric tons of carbon and reduce local air pollution, installing solar rooftops at our facilities, including 11 solar rooftop systems in the Inland Empire,” said Amazon spokesperson Maria Boschetti, in an emailed statement. However, Ivette Torres, a researcher with the local non-profit environmental justice group People’s Collective for Environmental Justice (PC4EJ), said even if Amazon transitions to electric vehicles, they worry that the onus of acquiring new, electric trucks will likely still fall on local drivers and fleets, they said. And even if environmental protections are put in place, Amazon and other e-commerce companies have created a community that has become so deeply dependent on the industry, that extricating the Inland Empire from its grasp will be complicated, Torres noted. At San Bernardino’s Cajon High School, the company has funded an Amazon Logistics &amp; Business Management Pathway Program of Study, which helps to train students to work in the logistics industry. Another high school in town, Pacific High, prepares students to work on commercial diesel trucks. Young people are receiving the message “that if they want to work another type of job, they have to leave the area”, Torres said. ‘Worn down by labor, torn down by pollution’ The promise of jobs and tax revenue is what local leaders and elected officials have used to justify the approval of more warehouse constructions. The region had been hit hard by the Great Recession and in 2012, when Amazon opened its first warehouse in the region, the unemployment rate for the Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario area was 11.7%, the highest among US metro areas with populations greater than 1m. In July, the California attorney general filed a lawsuit against Fontana, challenging its approval of a 205,000 sq ft project that would border a public high school. But Acquanetta Warren, the Fontana mayor who has helped usher in about 60 warehouses and logistics facilities over the past five years – and who critics have dubbed “Warehouse Warren” – has remained steadfast. “We have the cheaper land,” Warren said, and the region is surrounded by freeways – the 10, the 15, the 210, 215 and 60. The warehouses’ presence in Fontana and surrounding towns made strategic sense. And “they’re the key to our economic vitality”, she said. Warehouse workers told the Guardian that jobs can be grueling. “It’s a lot of wear and tear on the body,” said one former Amazon worker, who badly injured her arm during a shift at a fulfillment facility, quitting shortly afterward. But she returned to Amazon, because it was the only place she knew she could quickly and easily find work during the Covid-19 lockdowns. “It pretty much was the only option,” she said. Other current and former Amazon workers said they had been discouraged from taking restroom breaks and were pushed by management to lift and load heavy boxes at near-impossible speeds. Some current and former employees surveyed by researchers at UC Riverside said they permanently lost hearing because they weren’t offered proper ear protection while working in loud sorting and loading centers. “This is the slow violence of the supply chain,” said Victoria, the environmental activist. “You get worn down by the hard labor. Or you get torn down by the pollution.” Local residents said they are often left feeling like they are no match against the powerful e-commerce industry and local governments eager to build more warehouses. In a region where Latino residents make up the majority and where many residents are monolingual Spanish speakers, council meetings to discuss new warehouse constructions often lacked Spanish translation. Ma Carmen González, a community organizer with PC4EJ, said city officials have repeatedly told her she needs to bring her own translators. Earlier this year, even after local activists pushed the San Bernardino city council to assess the costs of providing Spanish-language interpretation at meetings, one local councilman, Fred Shorett, scoffed, “this is an English-speaking country”. González said she’s grown increasingly angry and disheartened with each new warehouse that’s constructed in San Bernardino. As the industry takes over, “we are the forgotten ones”, she said. This story is co-produced with Consumer Reports Consumer Reports has no relationship with any of the advertisers on this site.Labour has called on the government to give a “Christmas vaccine guarantee” to the hundreds of thousands of eligible children in England who have been unable to receive a Covid vaccination. With recent figures showing that just 44% of children in the 12-15 age group had been vaccinated on 8 December, Bridget Phillipson, the shadow education secretary, said the government needed to make a bigger push to vaccinate the remainder before they returned to school in the new year. “As Omicron cases in the UK are rising, it’s essential that ministers use the Christmas holidays to get the vaccine out to children, preventing continued chaos next term,” Phillipson said. “Labour has been calling on ministers to use pop-up and walk-in clinics, and bring back volunteers and retired clinicians to increase vaccine rollout, but 13 weeks after the jab was approved [by the chief medical officers] the Conservatives have failed to deliver. “With hundreds of thousands of children out of school each week this term, the government must urgently get a grip and stop neglecting children’s education.” The government had initially aimed to offer vaccinations to all 12- to 15-year-olds by the October half-term break. But the most recent figures suggest it will struggle to vaccinate half by the end of term next week. The Department of Health and Social Care has described the vaccination programme in England as “a phenomenal success”, with children able to be vaccinated at school or using the national booking system. Phillipson’s call came as two primary schools in England reported cases of the Omicron variant, including among staff and pupils at Solent infant school in Portsmouth. An entire year group at Manor community primary school near Dartford in Kent was sent home after a case emerged there. Phillipson has written to Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, asking him to urge the Department for Health to drive up vaccination rates among children, including a campaign to promote vaccinations and access to walk-in clinics. Earlier this week, Susan Acland-Hood, the permanent secretary at the Department for Education (DfE), suggested to MPs that most schools would have to pay for any new air conditioning or ventilation from their existing budgets. “In Germany and New York, ventilation systems have been in place in schools for months. Once again, England is lagging behind our international counterparts and children are being let down as a result,” Phillipson wrote. But even before the Omicron variant began spreading in England, attendance data from the DfE showed that more than 200,000 pupils were absent for Covid-related reasons at the end of November, a rise of 60% in two weeks. Results collated by Education Datalab suggest that the absence rate in state secondary schools is close to 10%, compared with nearly 6% before the pandemic. The biggest contributor to the rise has been in number of pupils off school because of illness. The DfE counts pupils absent for “Covid-related” reasons if they have suspected symptoms or a positive lateral flow test result. But if they return a positive PCR test they are counted as absent because of illness. As a result, the figures understate the full impact of Covid on school attendance.“I’m still pinching myself that my dad, my own flesh and blood, had Ernie on one hand and Bert on the other,” Eli Attie says. “It is like he got to sit at Abbey Road studios and watch the Beatles record I Want to Hold Your Hand.” Attie’s father was the photographer David Attie who, in 1970, visited the set of Sesame Street in New York City during its first season. His images lay forgotten in a wardrobe for the next 50 years, until Eli recently discovered them, leading to them being gathered together for a new book. They are a glimpse behind the curtain of a cultural phenomenon waiting to happen. Here are not only Bert and Ernie but Kermit, Big Bird, Oscar the Grouch with his original orange fur (he was green by season two). And here are the people who brought these characters to life, chiefly Jim Henson and Frank Oz, the Lennon and McCartney of Muppetdom. What also stands out in Attie’s images are the children visiting the set. As in the show itself, they are clearly so beguiled by the puppets, they completely ignore the humans controlling them. Eli himself was one of those visitors, although he has no memory of it. “I was in diapers, and as the story goes, I was loud and not to be quieted down, and was yanked off the set,” he says. His parents and older brother Oliver at least made it into the photos. Oliver was even in an episode of the show, in the background in Hooper’s Store, Eli explains, with just a hint of jealousy. Above: Bert and Ernie with puppeteers Daniel Seagren, Jim Henson and Frank Oz Left: Cast member Bob McGrath, an actor and musician, in a segment called The People in Your Neighborhood. Right: Henson (left) and Oz – the Lennon and McCartney of Muppetdom – operate puppets for a sketch titled Hunt for Happiness Fifty-two years and more than 4,500 episodes later, Sesame Street remains the premier address in children’s entertainment. It is still watched by hundreds of millions around the world, and broadcast in more than 140 countries. One attempt to statistically measure the show’s impact on American society failed because nobody could find a large enough sample group who hadn’t watched it. Sesame Street’s place in US culture was bizarrely underlined last month when Big Bird announced on Twitter: “I got the Covid-19 vaccine today! My wing is feeling a little sore, but it’ll give my body an extra protective boost that keeps me and others healthy.” He was promoting the rollout of vaccinations to five- to 11-year-olds, but Big Bird’s tweet, combined with Sesame Street’s recent introduction of a new Korean American muppet, has prompted a conservative backlash. Texas senator Ted Cruz responded: “Government propaganda … for your 5 year old!” Cruz later doubled down, tweeting a cartoon of the Sesame Street characters sitting around the Thanksgiving dinner table, with a dead, cooked Big Bird in place of a turkey. Others piled in. The influential Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) expressly banned Big Bird and other Sesame Street characters from its next conference, and CPAC organiser Matt Schlapp called for PBS, which broadcasts the show (although new episodes now air on HBO Max), to be defunded. “They just won’t stop in their push for woke politics,” he complained. Arizona state senator Wendy Rogers went even further, declaring: “Big Bird is a communist.” * * * Beyond the optics of beating up on universally beloved children’s characters, in the context of David Attie’s images, these takes could hardly be more wrong. Attie had been commissioned to photograph Sesame Street by Amerika, a Russian-language magazine funded by the US state department and distributed in the Soviet Union. Essentially, it was a cold war propaganda project. Soviet officials would regularly return copies of Amerika to the US embassy unsold, saying their citizens were not interested. In truth, the magazine was so sought after, it became a black-market commodity, explains Eli Attie. “One embassy official said to me they had traded two copies of Amerika for these impossible-to-find ballet tickets in Moscow at the time,” he says. So Sesame Street was used as government propaganda, just not in the way Cruz and Rogers might imagine. The choice of a New York street scene was a radical move in children’s TV in the 60s. You could say that Sesame Street had a political mission from the outset, as the new documentary, Street Gang: How We Got to Sesame Street (to which Attie’s book is a companion piece), lays out. One of the show’s co-founders, the broadcaster Joan Ganz Cooney, was involved “intellectually and spiritually” with the civil rights movement. The other, psychologist Lloyd Morrisett, was concerned about a widening education gap in the 1960s US, which was leaving behind socioeconomically deprived children, particularly African Americans. These children were often spending long hours at home watching television while their parents were busy working. Instead of jingles for beer commercials, Cooney and Morrisett reasoned, why not use television to teach them literacy and numeracy? Above: Big Bird with actors Loretta Long and Matt Robinson, AKA husband and wife duo Susan and Gordon. Below: According to Big Bird’s operator Caroll Spinney, his ‘sometimes sad, very complex character’ gave the show its depth. * * * With an $8m federal grant, the newly formed Children’s Television Workshop spent two years researching how to make content that would not only be educational but entertaining. That’s where The Muppet Workshop came in (even if the hippy-ish Henson was initially distrusted by his more academic colleagues). Not to mention the songs, the anarchic comedy sketches, the surreal animations, and the improvised child-with-muppet segments. The whole thing was an experiment. Nothing like it had been done before and there was no guarantee it would be a success, but everyone seemed to be on the same page. As Cooney puts it in the documentary: “We weren’t so worried about reaching middle-class children but we really, really wanted to reach inner-city kids badly. It was hardly worth doing if it didn’t reach them.” This explains why the show was set on an ordinary New York street – a radical move for children’s TV, a familiar place for the target audience. Equally radically, the show was multicultural and inclusive from the start, with white, Black and Latino actors alongside non-human characters of all colours. Even the title sequence and the guests reflected the US’s diversity (the first season featured James Earl Jones, BB King, Mahalia Jackson and Jackie Robinson). As the long-running writer and director Jon Stone said of the show’s inclusive approach: “We’ve never beaten that horse to death by talking about it; we simply show it.” Muppet designer and performer Caroly Wilcox goes to work with Henson. Sesame Street has taught kids about all manner of life topics. Not only racism (most recently with the introduction of two new African American characters, post-Black Lives Matter) but also poverty, addiction, autism, HIV and Aids, public health (Covid was not Big Bird’s first jab, he also got a measles vaccination in 1972), and gentrification (in 1994, the street was under threat of demolition from a loud-mouthed property tycoon named “Ronald Grump”, played by Joe Pesci). Sesame Street has even tackled the concept of death: when Will Lee, who played storekeeper Mr Hooper, died in 1982, the show featured a wrenching segment in which neighbours, clearly tearfully, explain to Big Bird that Mr Hooper is dead and is never coming back. Spinney, who played Big Bird for almost 50 years until his death in 2019, jokes with children on set. It wasn’t just “inner-city kids” Sesame Street was popular with. While his father was working, Eli Attie’s artist mother would also put him and his brother in front of the TV to watch it so she could paint. “There was a block of hours that it was on public broadcasting stations in the New York region. So she just thought: ‘Hallelujah. I can place them here, they’re entertained,’” he says. “We were learning to count, we were learning to spell and we were learning a kind of comedy: we both became fans of Monty Python and standup comedy and I’m sure this was the gateway.” Attie went on to become a TV writer and producer, working on shows such as The West Wing, House and Billions. Above: Filming on set of Sesame Street. Below: Henson with the Dentist and the Bus Driver from the song The People in Your Neighborhood, which was about different occupations. Sesame Street’s inclusive, humane, progressive agenda has always had its enemies. Mississippi broadcasters refused to air the first season back in 1969 on account of the show’s desegregated setting (they backed down after a few weeks). In the past decade, the conservative chorus of disapproval has been getting louder. Before Cruz and co, the show and PBS have been targeted by the likes of Mitt Romney, Fox News, and, inevitably, Donald Trump. “Sesame has never been a political show; it has been a very socially relevant show,” says Trevor Crafts, producer of the Street Gang documentary. Although the political climate today has echoes of the 1960s, when Sesame Street was created, he feels. “It was a very similar time. There was a lot of social unrest, and here we are again. It just shows that you need something like Sesame Street to sort of increase the volume of good in the world. And also to know that through creativity, you can make change. Positive change can occur if you’re willing to see a problem and try to fix it and do it creatively.” Spinney with Oscar the Grouch. Henson had wanted Oscar to be magenta, but television cameras couldn’t process the shade. In season two, Oscar became green. Long gets a peek into Oscar’s trashcan. Now in her 80s, she went on to be one of the longest-serving members of the original cast. Where some might see a political agenda, many more would simply see a model for the kind of society the US would like to be. “I think it showed everybody: ‘This is who we should be in our hearts,’” Eli Attie says. “It was utopian. It was optimistic, it was challenging and smart. And it didn’t talk down to children.” As well as a family album, his father’s photos capture that spirit of playful idealism. “I see now that’s part of who I am,” he says. “And it’s part of who we all are.” • The Unseen Photos of Street Gang: How We Got to Sesame Street by Trevor Crafts, with photographs by David Attie, is published by Abrams on 23 December at £28.99. To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy for £25.22 at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. The documentary Street Gang is on HBO in the US on 13 December and in the UK next year.Amanda Gorman, who became the youngest inauguration poet in US history when Joe Biden was sworn in as president, says she is attempting to “preserve the public memory of a pandemic” in a new collection published this week. Gorman shot into the public eye when she recited her poem The Hill We Climb at the inauguration in January, speaking of how “there is always light, if only we’re brave enough to see it, / If only we’re brave enough to be it.” A selection of her early work was published by a small press in 2015, but this first major collection, Call Us What We Carry, which was published on Tuesday by Chatto &amp; Windus in the UK, includes both Gorman’s inaugural poem and her response to Covid-19. In Fugue, she writes: “Every cough seemed catastrophe, / Every proximate person a potential peril”, capturing how “we fell heart-first into the news, / Head-first, dread-first …” Monomyth takes the form of a film script, laying out events in scenes, from December 2019, when “a new pneumonia-like illness is identified in Wuhan”, through the 20 January inauguration of Biden, when “Amanda Gorman, a skinny Black girl descended from slaves, becomes the youngest inaugural poet in US history”, to its ending. The 23-year-old told the Guardian that the collection was “my attempt to preserve the public memory of a pandemic”, because “nothing is as harrowing as the thought that the losses and lessons of this moment might be lost to collective amnesia”. She said: “I approach poetry as a method of social inquiry as well as a finding in itself, wherein we can both interrogate and rediscover our common humanity.” Many of the poems in the collection are written from a collective viewpoint. In At First, Gorman writes of how “When asking how others were faring, / We did not expect an honest or full response. / What words can answer how we’re remaining alive?” The poet said she had made a conscious decision use a collective voice. “When I began writing the collection, I would often start a sentence with ‘I’ and the thought would suddenly transition to ‘we’ and I realised that the ‘I’ from which I was writing from is actually a contingent of the ‘we’,” she said. “‘I’ is part of the ‘we’, not mitigated by it, which is why the book speaks with such a pluralistic voice. “I was discovering as I wrote that every pain and onus that I was writing about was owned, in part, by someone else as well. It wasn’t my own singularly, but it was a collective type of experience.” Fugue by Amanda Gorman Don’t get us wrong. We do pound for what has passed, But more so all that we passed by— Unthanking, unknowing, When what we had was ours. There was another gap that choked us: The simple gift of farewell. Goodbye, by which we say to another— Thanks for offering your life into mine. By Goodbye, we truly mean: Let us be able to say hello again. This is edgeless doubt: Every cough seemed catastrophe, Every proximate person a potential peril. We mapped each sneeze &amp; sniffle, Certain the virus we had run away from Was now running through us. We slept the days down. We wept the year away, Frayed &amp; afraid. Perhaps that is what it means To breathe &amp; die in this flesh. Forgive us, For we have walked This before. History flickered in &amp; out of our vision, A movie our eyelids Staggered through. We added a thousand false steps To our walk tracker today Because every step we’ve taken Has required more than we had to give. In such eternal nature, We spent days as the walking dead, Dreading disease &amp; disaster. We cowered, bone-shriveled As a laurel in drought, our throats Made of frantic workings, Feet falling over themselves Like famished fawns. We awaited horrors, Building up leviathans before they arose. We could not pull our heads From the raucous deep. Anxiety is a living body, Poised beside us like a shadow. It is the last creature standing, The only beast who loves us Enough to stay. We were already thousands Of deaths into the year. Every time we fell heart-first into the news, Head-first, dread-first, Our bodies tight &amp; tensed with what now? Yet who has the courage to inquire what if? What hope shall we shelter Within us like a secret, Second smile, Private &amp; pure. Sorry if we’re way less friendly —* We had COVID tryna end things. Even now handshakes &amp; hugs are like gifts, Something we are shocked to grant, be granted. &amp; so, we forage for anything That feels like this: The click in our lung that ties us to strangers, How when among those we care for most We shift with instinct, Like the flash of a school of fish. Our regard for one another Not tumored, Just transformed. By Hello, we mean: Let us not say goodbye again. There is someone we would die for. Feel that fierce, unshifting truth, That braced &amp; ready sacrifice. That’s what love does: It makes a fact faced beyond fear. We have lost too much to lose. We lean against each other again, The way water bleeds into itself. This glassed hour, paused, Bursts like a loaded star, Belonging always to us. What more must we believe in. • Call Us What We Carry by Amanda Gorman is published by Chatto &amp; Windus (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.For 10 months in Kuwait, everything was upside down. Daytime was full of darkness from the thick smoke, and nights were bright from the distant glow of burning oilwells. When Iraq’s leader, Saddam Hussein, ordered the occupation of Kuwait in August 1990 in an attempt to gain control of the lucrative oil supply of the Middle East and pay off a huge debt accrued from Kuwait, he was fairly quickly forced into retreat by a US coalition which began an intensive bombing campaign. But as Iraqi forces pulled out, in a final vengeful act they deliberately set more than 700 oilwells ablaze. Three decades later, despite promise after promise, Kuwait is still scarred by catastrophic damage from what is regarded by some as one of the world’s worst environmental catastrophes – and the billions set aside for remediation are still waiting to be spent. “The sound of gushing oil and roaring fires is still in my memory,” remembers Dr Samira Omar Asem, the principal research scientist at the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research (KISR). “I remember seeing a dead goat sinking in an oil lake.” The oilwells burned uncontrollably. The smoke plume above them initially stretched for 800 miles. A staggering 11m barrels of crude oil poured into the Persian Gulf, creating a slick nine miles long. Nearly 300 oil lakes formed on the surface of the desert, polluting the soils. An international coalition of firefighters battled the fires for months until the last well was finally capped on 6 November 1991 and Kuwait celebrated under clear skies. But today more than 90% of the unprotected contaminated soil remains exposed in the environment. Access to the contaminated sites is restricted, partly due to safety concerns arising from the littering of explosives left behind by Iraqi troops during their retreat. Photos from field research conducted between 2012 and 2019 show that the pollution takes all sorts of forms. Contamination in some wellheads currently runs as deep as four metres. Most of the damage was sustained within the Burgan oilfields in the southern deserts of Kuwait, an arid land 500 sq km wide housing more than 100 contaminated oil lakes. In one particularly badly affected oil lake known as Lake 105, images show meters-wide circles of black sludge. According to Meshari Almutairi, an environmental consultant with the Kuwait Oil Company, when he first visited the lake in 2015, he was able to shovel out the soil to expose a gradient of brown, as an indicator of pollution levels. Darker, more heavily contaminated soil at the top, fading into a healthy beige of undamaged soil near the bottom. He also saw huge pools of black oil deep enough to have drowned migratory birds falling into the oily grounds. Now, with increasing temperatures and weathering of the soil, the sludge has hardened and had become impenetrable. “When I tried to collect some samples recently, I needed to go to the edge and take out the surface, and I could not put my shovel in as I used to do before,” he said. “I tried two, three times, and couldn’t pick it up. It was like black ice.” Elsewhere in the northern oilfields of Raudhatain and Umm al-Aish, the source of Kuwait’s only two freshwater aquifers, visible crusts of dry oil lakes cover the tainted soil. Although Almutairi says that wind-blown sand has covered parts of the oil lakes in the north and south-east, multiplying its number over the years, harmful chemicals still remain in the soil today. “Had Kuwait decided to treat this contamination in 1993 or 1994, it would have been so easy. But after 30 years, you are not dealing with the crude oil that existed at that time,” he said. “It’s a very big challenge.” According to the KISR, just 2.3m cubic meters of the polluted sands – close to 10% – had been successfully removed as of June 2021 in a process known as remediation: roughly 1.7m cubic meters in the north, and 580,000 cubic meters in the south-east, where the Burgan oilfields lie. They estimate that another 19m cubic meters needing to be cleared. Researchers and conservationists are deeply concerned about the hazards it poses to the ecosystem and human health. “Any pollution in land or water should be treated as soon as possible,” said Asem. “The desert of Kuwait has valuable resources that need to be protected and preserved.” It’s the exposure to petroleum hydrocarbons, a mixture of chemicals found in crude oil, that is causing the biggest concern. Known as the most frequent type of environmental contaminant, any introduction of petroleum hydrocarbons to a pristine environment immediately results in reduced ecosystem functionality. They are already altering soil properties and causing extensive plant and animal mortality, and they’ve also seeped into fresh groundwater aquifers in northern Kuwait, used for irrigation, in small industries and within distilled water. Plant life has yet to recover around the contaminated sites, says Mohammed Mahmoud, director of the climate and water programme and a senior fellow at the Middle East Institute. Their exposure to petroleum hydrocarbons damaged plant growth and seed germination. Their soil was also clogged by oil and prevented from accessing light, water and nutrients. “It’s a sort of byproduct of slanted priorities. People didn’t really buzz about this until they started to see plant life being impacted and physically seeing decay of the natural landscape,” he said. According to Green Line, an environmental NGO in Kuwait, the surrounding wildlife that lives and relies on the desert vegetation has been noticeably scarce over the years. “We know this is definitely one of the causes of the depletion of the wildlife stock here in Kuwait,” the group said. Although the ecosystem will eventually recover, says Sara Akbar, a chemical petroleum engineer and co-founder of Kuwait Energy, many species and areas are still fighting for their health 30 years later. And Kuwait’s people have suffered effects to their health, too. Akbar and Jeffery Hall, a US veteran who was enlisted during the Gulf war, are among many who experienced severe lung damage after breathing in the toxins from the smoke. “The doctor said it was as if I was smoking three packs of cigarettes every day for three years. Those were the kind of lungs I had,” said Akbar, who was the sole female firefighter dousing the oilwells. For Hall, who was exposed to the toxins for a week during his time in Kuwait, his diagnosis in 2017 with pulmonary sarcoidosis, a rare disease forming small lumps of inflammatory cells, is a damage that will last a lifetime. “It’s likely from the toxic exposure to oilwells and burn pits,” he said. “I now have no immune system.” These hazards, though recognised by the Kuwait government and international communities, have only slowly led to remediation efforts. The money is there. In 2005, The UN compensation commission awarded Kuwait with approximately $3bn (£2.2bn) to tackle the environmental damage caused. The largest portion of the funds, amounting to more than $2bn (£1.5bn), went towards the remediation of 114 sq km of damaged sites and efforts to conduct revegetation. But the delays have been incessant. After a series of delays from a prolonged tendering cycle, long bureaucratic procedures and last-minute cancellations, the Kuwait Oil Company, which is spearheading the work, awarded two tenders in 2020, with a third expected to be issued before the end of the year to remedy the oilfields focusing in the north and south-east of the country. The company says it plans to complete the remaining amount by 2024. But that timeline is greeted with disbelief by most people. “It’s a huge amount of soil,” said a representative of Green Line, who asked to remain anonymous. “The process by itself will take time and effort. Even if they were realistic about this timeline, there’s no way they’re going to make it.” Kuwait Oil Company was approached for comment but did not respond. Initial plans involved burying contaminated soil in landfills, with an aim to build more than a dozen more. But fears of intensifying the problem later on led Kuwait to consider proposals to use bioremediation, a process using microorganisms to naturally break down and decay hydrocarbons. “I think we are on track for complete clearance of all contaminated soil,” said Akbar. “But it took a long time with the bureaucracy. Finally, I think with these contracts we should be fine.” Others are not so optimistic, as bioremediation techniques are proving to be arduous and complicated. Recent field research is showing that due to the high presence of petroleum hydrocarbons and the concentration of salt content in Kuwait’s contaminated soil, bioremediation may not be effective. “The problem is how effective it will be, and even if it does work, it will probably take much longer because of the salinity of the soil that’s working to counteract the effectiveness of the microorganisms,” said Mahmoud. The swift response to recap the burning wells 30 years ago was regarded as a considerable achievement worldwide, but the efforts of postwar environmental restoration have yet to be seen. Iraq has paid out more than $50bn (£37.85bn) in reparations worldwide for losses incurred during the first Gulf War. An outstanding payment of $1.7bn (£1.3bn) remains for Kuwait. “Kuwait is working hard to restore the damage. However it will never go back to its pristine stage,” said Asem.I once lived with a militant vegetarian who had grown up near an abattoir. With a thousand-yard stare, he’d talk about how its bloody runoff would seep into his local playground. He hadn’t touched meat since those days. You often hear this sort of thing from vegetarians and vegans: that if you looked at what went on inside (or even outside) a slaughterhouse, you’d switch to Quorn full-time. In a similar vein, if you want to quit smoking, I recommend watching someone go through lung cancer. I could never look someone in the eye and tell them smoking isn’t both immensely pleasurable and cool-looking. What I would say is this: my mum was diagnosed with lung cancer in 2017. Over just a few months I watched her shrivel, become obscured by tangles of medical tubing, and begin to suffocate to death as her lungs filled with fluid. She died that same year, and it was a relief to know that her unimaginable suffering was over. I apologise if this description has either put a damper on your next fag break, or stressed you into taking a fag break when you didn’t even have one planned. As a former smoker, I can understand either scenario. But I quit smoking the moment my mum had her diagnosis. She’d never actually been a smoker, but I didn’t want to push my luck. Having seen lung cancer play out in front of me like a horror film, you’d think – perhaps – I’d support New Zealand’s ban on smoking for the next generation. Under these plans, those aged 14 and under in 2027 will never be able to buy tobacco products legally. The legal smoking age will increase with every year that passes – meaning that in 2073, someone who is 61 will be able to buy cigarettes whereas someone who is 60 will not. But, as the government ramps up anti-drug measures in the UK at the same time, you have to ask – when has criminalising a substance ever worked? When alcohol was banned in the United States, under prohibition, Americans wanted to carry on drinking. So they did. They just bought their alcohol from the likes of Al Capone, rather than legitimate, tax-paying businesses. And speaking of the US, I hear its war on drugs is still going brilliantly. Mass incarceration, predominantly of black men; brutal, militarised policing; and – to top it all off – a ton of drug addicts. In 2019, according to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, nearly 50,000 Americans died of an opioid overdose. Back to the Antipodes, though. It’s difficult for me not to stand by New Zealand giving the tobacco industry a much-needed kick in the balls. But criminalising tobacco is simply the wrong approach. If people want to smoke, they will, and they’ll buy their cigarettes from whoever happens to be offering them. And, for New Zealand’s Māori and Pasifika communities (who are statistically poorer than white Kiwis), rates of smoking are higher. In the runup to the all-out ban on smoking, New Zealand plans to reduce the amount of nicotine in cigarettes. This, in itself, is something opponents of the new measures have argued will simply force people to spend more money on more cigarettes to get the same hit. While I believe everyone should quit smoking (and am happy to dish out scare stories to anyone struggling to quit), I also believe that before banning substances that people use to self-medicate the unbearable shiteness of everyday life, you need to implement major life-improving social and economic change. Even in New Zealand, a country with a decent welfare state, rates of poverty (especially among people of colour) are rising. Since the pandemic, in fact, there’s been a 10% increase in child poverty. You can’t ban smoking without – first and foremost – creating a society where people no longer feel compelled to smoke. Just as you can’t ban drugs and expect people not to take them when life is so hard for some. Cigarettes – much like sugar and alcohol – should, I believe, be allowed to die out on their own, rather than be dealt a premature final blow. Makers of sweets and fizzy drinks are already starting to sell lower sugar versions of their products. There’s Cadbury’s “30% less sugar” Dairy Milk, and the (albeit much-complained about) reduced-sugar Irn Bru. What’s more, smoking is already losing popularity with young people. A survey by GlobalData this year found that – globally – 38% of people have never smoked, and – for Gen Z – 68% had never smoked. Zoomers, it seems, don’t want crow’s feet and yellow teeth in their TikToks – so just let them lead the way and they’ll apparently do all that’s needed to eradicate smoking. By all means, ramp up the terrifying public health campaigns. That British Heart Foundation ad from 2004, where fat is squeezed out of a smoker’s artery, still haunts my nightmares. Perhaps add to the library of graphic images on cigarette packs a picture of Nigel Farage sucking down those sweet, sweet carcinogens. But if stressed, bored and unhappy people feel the need to smoke, and you have nothing to offer up as an alternative, let them smoke. Eleanor Margolis is a columnist for the i newspaper and DivaEnes Kanter Freedom has had an intriguing basketball career. He was barred from playing college basketball at the University of Kentucky because he had received benefits from his time playing professional basketball in Turkey as a teenager. And since being drafted as the No 3 overall pick in the 2011 draft, he has played for five different NBA teams and is currently in his second spell with the Boston Celtics. But it is off the court where Freedom has attracted the most attention. He has spoken out on human rights violations both in China and Turkey, where he grew up. His criticism of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, led to reprisals against his family and Freedom’s Turkish passport being cancelled. More recently, he has taken aim at LeBron James for his sponsorship deal with Nike and the company’s alleged ties to forced labor in China. Then last month, he became a US citizen and legally changed his name from Enes Kanter to Enes Kanter Freedom. Freedom’s political activity down the years went mostly unnoticed to most of America. If there was a reaction, it was generally one of support across the political spectrum. The right welcomed his attacks on one of their foes, Communist China, while liberals admired his fight against Erdoğan, a leader in the mold of Trump. That all changed when Freedom went on Fox News’s Tucker Carlson Tonight. He appeared to attack players like LeBron, Colin Kaepernick and the entire new generation of athlete activists who have spoken out about human rights violations in the United States: state-sanctioned violence including the murders of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, Terence Crutcher, Atatiana Jefferson, Botham Jean, Sean Monterrosa, Willie McCoy, Eric Garner, Tamir Rice and many others. “I feel like they should just keep their mouth shut and stop criticizing the greatest nation in the world and they should focus on their freedoms and their human rights and democracy,” Kanter told Carlson, who couldn’t hide his exuberance that Freedom took the bait. The backlash was swift. In the Atlantic Jemele Hill wrote that “the subtext of Carlson’s question was obvious: Most NBA players are Black, and Carlson frequently portrays people of color who seek political and social change as ungrateful and unpatriotic.” In the Nation, Dave Zirin said that Carlson “looked like a rosy-cheeked, spoiled child under the Christmas tree. For him, having Enes attack powerful outspoken Black people must feel like getting the gift topping his list for Santa.” I understand the points Hill and Zirin made and agree with much of what they say. And while I’m aware of Maya Angelou’s quote that “when people show you who they are, believe them the first time”, I didn’t believe the Carlson interview was indicative of what Freedom really feels. Many on the left have begun to undermine the altruism of Freedom’s endeavors or ridicule his playing career (a tactic straight out of the right’s playbook when they disagree with an athlete). So I reached out to him to give him an opportunity to clarify or double down on what he told Carlson. We started off by talking about his statement on Carlson’s show that players should appreciate the freedoms they have in America compared to countries like China and Turkey and “stop criticizing the greatest nation in the world”. Was he effectively using a familiar trope of the right: that players like LeBron should shut up and dribble? “What I meant was, where I’m coming from, Turkey is a brutal dictatorship,” Freedom told me. “We have no freedom of speech, religion or expression. We have no democracy. Turkey could have been a branch of Islam in the west, but just because of all the stuff that’s happen ... it’s impossible. “So what I meant was, people should feel lucky and blessed to be in this situation [in America]. And obviously there are many issues in America. I’m definitely not denying it. I recognize many of them and racism is definitely at top of the list. But what I meant was at least, they’re not in a country like Turkey, Syria, North Korea, Venezuela or Belarus.” That, however, does not mean Freedom believes players in America should stay silent about problems in this country. “Obviously I stand for freedom and I would never, ever tell an athlete or not just an athlete, a human being or a celebrity to not use their platform. Because obviously the greatest thing we have is freedom of speech,” he said. Freedom did, however, fall into Carlson’s trap. Tuckums (as MSNBC’s Joy Reid calls him) was actually smiling as Freedom appeared to endorse Carlson’s view that anyone who criticizes America is an enemy of America. During our conversation Freedom acknowledged that his words had been twisted. “I saw some of the op-eds, and some of the interviews, and some of the comments and so many people didn’t understand what I was trying to say,” he said. “And I don’t judge them because obviously somebody used my words ... and some of the words that I used could be twisted or stretched. And I have to be more careful with my words.” I am glad that I sat down with Enes Kanter Freedom and gave him the opportunity to clarify his statements. But there’s no question Tucker Carlson knew exactly what he was doing and his agenda was clear: Get Enes Kanter Freedom on while he is excited about becoming a US citizen and coax him into criticizing other Black athletes who aren’t (in his eyes) as grateful and thankful to be in America as they should be, who have the audacity to criticize America and call out police brutality and white supremacy. Fox News only wants to continue their mantra that athletes (at least the ones who don’t fall in line with their agenda) should shut up and dribble, and not dare to criticize the good ol’ USA. Hopefully, this is a learning experience for Freedom and he won’t allow himself to be played by the likes of Fox News again. They do not care about human rights in China or Turkey. They are only out to use him as a pawn. You can listen to Etan Thomas’s full interview with Enes Kanter Freedom hereIsaac West was searching for a moment of authenticity. He had known Sudanese models Juor and Odur for a few years; both live in the US, as does he. Their brief was to portray a moment of tenderness between a couple. “You’re caring for your girlfriend by cutting her hair,” was West’s direction for Juor, who had the razor switched on. The Liberian photographer adds: “He messed up her hair a bit – he’s a model, not a barber! Luckily, Odur had a real appointment in the diary, so she didn’t mind.” For the International Center of Photography exhibition Inward: Reflections on Interiority, West had been tasked with exploring the introspective using an iPhone. This shot was inspired by his new relationship with his girlfriend, Naima. Clearly a true romantic, he is also a fan of minimalism (“People try too hard to do too much,” he says) and vibrant colours (“I chose the yellow cloth because I wanted the dark skin to bounce off it”). “I love shooting dark-skinned models,” West says. “The secret is in the editing. Most people don’t know how to shoot or edit dark skin – they don’t get the tone right. I want to see contrast, rawness and richness. “People get in touch to say thank you. They say, ‘I used to hate my hair and skin. Now I see myself differently.’”Joe Root spoke of harsh lessons learned but remained unrepentant over England’s selection and strategy after a harrowing nine-wicket defeat at the Gabba that leaves his side needing to overcome 67 years of history in Australia. Only once before have England overcome a 1-0 deficit to win an away Ashes series – the 3-1 victory in 1954-55 when Frank Tyson terrorised the hosts – and thus a tour that has supposedly had two years of planning behind it already appears in jeopardy. Bowled out for 297 on the fourth morning after a tepid collapse of eight for 77 in 30.1 overs, Root could only look on enviously as Australia knocked off a paltry target of 20 to hand Pat Cummins a victory in his first Test as captain. “There are harsh lessons that we’ve learned throughout this Test match,” admitted Root, having earlier fallen 11 runs short of his first Ashes century away from home. “Credit to Australia, they’ve taken every chance that’s come their way and I can’t say the same about ourselves.” Much went back to the first morning, when Root opted to bat at the toss despite cloud cover and grass on the pitch, only to see four wickets fall in the first hour and a lowly total of 147 result. The absence of Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad for the first time in five years became a running theme, with the former not 100% ready after a sparse buildup and the latter overlooked in favour of the heavily punished spin of Jack Leach. “I think batting first was the right decision,” said Root, who suffered a first-innings duck. “Being 40 for four makes it look like that’s not the case. If we had got even 250 in that first innings and the game looks very different altogether. “In terms of selection, I wanted a balanced attack. I wanted to be able to change the momentum of the game and we went with the spinner. Credit to Australia, they took on Leachy. He had to bowl on that wicket at its worst and I was slightly too aggressive with his fields early on. It made it very difficult for him.” Ollie Robinson, Mark Wood and Chris Woakes held their own as the three frontline seamers chosen, even if Leach was pounded for 102 runs in 13 overs and Ben Stokes struggled with both overstepping and some physical strains on his return from a four-month absence. Anderson and Broad will push for recalls come the pink ball second Test in Adelaide, however, the veteran pair’s daily training sessions having been a regular feature of the TV coverage in Australia and the subject of much debate. Ultimately the result came down to the limp batting – something only briefly arrested when Root and Malan put on 162 in the second innings – a dropped catch of David Warner halfway through his innings of 94 and two missed run-out chances. “We’re in the series, we’ve not [much preparation] going into it, so we’ll be better for it.” Root said. Looking forward to the second Test beginning at 4am GMT on Thursday, he added: “We’ve got something to work on for guys who haven’t experienced Ashes cricket before, they know what’s coming now and the challenge they face. We have to be ready. Sometimes the game coming around straight away is what you need, to get back out there and put things right.” Though dominant for all but two of the nine-and-a-bit sessions, Australia did not emerge unscathed. Warner was unable to bat during the run chase after being struck in the ribs by a short ball from Stokes on day two, while Josh Hazlewood was restricted to six overs on the final day, which were down on pace, due to a possible problem with his side. Yet, with Travis Head’s 152 from No 5 vindicating his selection, Nathan Lyon ending a near year-long wait for his 400th Test wicket and Cummins beginning his captaincy with a five-wicket haul and seven victims in the match, the hosts are clearly in the ascendancy. Cummins said: “Someone was smiling over me. I’m really proud of everyone. I thought it was a really complete performance.” Meanwhile, Cricket Australia confirmed on Saturday that the fifth Test which begins on 14 January will now be a second day-night pink ball affair, staged in Hobart, Tasmania, after Western Australia’s hard border saw the fixture moved away from Perth last week.HANDS-ON 1 D. F. Manley: Second to Chambers one must get Don’s fantastic Manual! (h + an + anag.; ref. Chambers Crossword Manual). 2 L. Ward (USA): Massage is so lovely yours truly drops off at end of session (handso(me) + n). 3 C. A. Clarke: Manual worker numbers needing to be contracted going up (hand + nos (all rev.)). VHC M. Barker: In part selfish and so not getting involved (hidden). M. Barley: See osteopath, and so necessarily secure such treatment (hidden &amp; lit.). T. C. Borland: Short of time, don hasn’t prepared practical (anag. less t). E. Dawid: Getting stuck in, one’s tucking into hot cross bun’s last bit (an in h DSO + n). Dr I. S. Fletcher: Manual? What’s needed for clutch, perhaps, is one’s left leg (hand + (i)s + on). R. J. Fletcher (Belgium): Practical, good-looking and a tad naïve. Not me! (handso(me) + n). R. J. Heald: Having manual control cuts times of Honda NSX when racing (anag. less x). M. Hodgkin: Using manipulative means, Henry gets an heir after daughter (H + d in an son; ref. Henry VIII). J. C. Leyland: Playing up-front parts in activities, holding no sinecure or non-executive directorship? (anag. of first letters &amp; lit.). P. W. Marlow: He’s opener, English cricketer, scoring England’s first runs, getting actively engaged (h + (James) And(Er)son). K. Milan: Down-to-earth and so nuts-and-bolts. Does that cover it? (hidden &amp; lit.). C. G. Millin: Food informally served up, and consumed using your fingers? (and in nosh (rev.)). J. Pearce: Have old version of Don’s Manual (han + anag.). W. Ransome: Doing practically enough and so nearly providing the answer (hidden). A. J. Shields: Promoting activity is essential to health – and so necessary (hidden). J. R. Tozer: Order Navy to take on Chinese, favouring action over words (Han + DSO + n). A. J. Wardrop: Midwife needs such experience to deliver a child (hand + son). R. J. Whale: Something in Alpino’s DNA helps when on the ascent, seeing action? (hidden rev.). G. H. Willett: Like some masseuses’ technique, hot as well as very nice, no holding back (h and so n(ice)). HC T. Anderson, D. &amp; N. Aspland, A. Brash, C. J. Brougham, Dr J. Burscough, D. Carter, T. Clement, N. Connaughton (Ireland), M. Coates, P. Coles (Ireland), W. Drever, P. Finan, H. Freeman, A. Gerrard, R. Gilbert, J. Hood, M. Jordan, D. Kenning, A. MacDougall, L. F. Marzillier (USA), P. McKenna, Rev. Prebendary M. R. Metcalf, T. J. Moorey, T. D. Nicholl, D. J. R. Ogilvie (USA), K. Parekh, A. Plumb, J. M. Rees, Dr J. B. Reid, A. D. Scott, R. J. Sharkey, Dr S. J. Shaw, J. Smailes, P. L. Stone, R. C. Teuton, A. J. Varney, J. Vincent &amp; Ms R. Porter, Mrs A. M. Walden, Ms S. Wallace, J. D. Walsh, T. West-Taylor, D. Whisstock (Italy), K. &amp; J. Wolff, A. J. Young. Comments 148 entries. The only error I spotted resulted from failure to solve POPSOCK. Several said they hadn’t understood the clues to ARIL (a composite anagram) and PELF, which depended on knowing that ‘elf’ is German for ‘eleven’. I do allow myself occasional references to commoner words in foreign (almost always European) languages, so be warned. Of the 16 words mentioned as favourites this month the clear winner was ‘Region of SW France suggested by the French?’ for LANDE (foreign languages again!). A thoroughly good competition this month, with a clue word that proved to offer more possibilities than might first have looked possible. I was quite happy to accept clues for HANDS ON as a phrasal verb meaning ‘passes to another’ or ‘bequeaths’. As I’ve mentioned before, the asterisked ‘definition’ is not meant to prescribe the meaning required for your clue. (And I apologise, by the way, for the misprint that yielded ‘Favouring active involving’ in the printed version of the paper, though I was promised a correction, which did make it into the online version.) A special comment is due for Mr Manley’s self-referential first prize winner. Such opportunities come very rarely, and in this instance resulted in an irresistible clue. (He did apologise, and the exclamation mark was for once appropriate!) Another procedural change, prompted by a polite query from a regular. The Rules and requests paragraph has always, going back to the Ximenes era, included the sentence, ‘Entries should be postmarked no later than Saturday’, though the Royal Mail’s franking of mail has for years been a pretty hit-or miss-affair. In future I plan to change the deadline request to read ‘Entries should be received no later than Monday week’.A man like Yuk Luzn Man simply does not retire. From the age of 14, Man always worked. In his twenties he moved to the UK from Hong Kong to work in his brother’s fish and chip shop in Southend. His memories of that time are of a permanent, fugue-like exhaustion borne of 12-hour days behind the counter, interrupted only by sleep. Later, Man worked as a chef at Chinese restaurants across the country: in Manchester, Crawley, Norwich. His last job in catering was at a casino restaurant in Southend. It paid only the minimum wage and the hours were bad – 6pm-2am – but there weren’t many other jobs available. In 2015, at the age of 66, Man finally retired. A lifetime of hard work, with burning shoulders, aching feet and wrists sore from endless chopping, was finally at an end. Man could relax. He lasted two months. “I’d wake up in the morning,” he says, “and think, what should I do today?” Even though Man was now living in London, he would drive to Southend to catch up with his old colleagues at the casino – but most of the time they were too busy to hang out. Which is how Man found himself volunteering three days a week at the London Chinese Community Centre, a maze of rooms overlooking Leicester Square. Now 72, Man does whatever jobs the centre asks of him, without complaint. “I always have a list,” laughs manager Beverley Lin. “He might roll his eyes but he’ll always do it all.” Man cooks food for the centre’s lunch club. He does odd jobs, like setting up rooms for classes, and even hanging pictures. He answers emails. He paints walls, although he finds that task particularly boring. He is, by a million miles, Lin’s most hardworking volunteer. “A lot of volunteers will call two minutes before they’re supposed to arrive to say they can’t make it,” says Lin. Never Man. “If he says he’s here, he’s here. I don’t have to worry.” Too much leisure time, Man thinks, is bad for the soul. It’s better to keep busy. “I’m helping others,” he says, “but in a way I’m helping myself.” Man was born in Hong Kong, the sixth of 13 children. His parents ran a grocery store but money was tight. Man was pulled out of school at 14, but wasn’t too bothered about finishing his education. “I didn’t work hard at school,” he laughs. “I wanted to go out and make money.” When he arrived in the UK in 1975, the first thing he noticed was the cold. And the church bells: it seemed like everyone went to church on Sunday. At weekends, the streets were quiet compared with the bustle of Hong Kong. There was racism, of course. “Older people,” he says, “when they walked past me, they’d spit. Not at me. But next to me.” In his heart, Man still feels like a Hongkonger. He misses his siblings at home, and the community centre helps him feel connected. The centre was founded in 1980 primarily as a place where immigrants from Hong Kong – hardly any other Chinese people were able to move to the UK at that time – could get support with translating legal documents and accessing benefits. With successive waves of migration – including students from China coming to study at British universities – the centre’s remit has expanded. It helps diaspora kids connect with their heritage; it’s a social hub for the older generation; and it assuages university students’ homesickness. Man is a sort of authority figure. He chastises the elders when they gossip about other members. “I remind them,” Man says, “that it’s not good to speak in that way.” During the pandemic, the centre’s role was more critical than ever. Many of the older members lived alone – heartbreakingly, Lin’s team discovered some of them dead in their homes from the virus – and there was a wave of anti-Asian hate crime. “The centre is very important for people’s wellbeing – especially the elderly members,” Man says. Man has rarely earned above the minimum wage, and when he had cash in his pocket, he had no time to spend it. “I always had to work,” he says, “and didn’t have time to do anything. Now I have time, but don’t have the money!” He has always wanted to try the Royal China restaurant in Canary Wharf, which is famous for its dim sum. The Royal China offered Man a £100 voucher, which the Guardian matches, and he headed there one evening in late October for a special meal. Man had hoped to take his wife, but she had a cold, so Man, Lin and other volunteers from the centre enjoyed some of London’s finest Chinese food. “I loved the location and the meal,” says Man. “The food was fantastic. Especially the peking duck and stir-fried beef.” Ever the chef, even in retirement, Man explained how each dish was made, to the amusement of his dining companions. Lin relished the opportunity to get to know her most faithful volunteer better. “He talked about all the places he grew up,” says Lin, “and what it was like, and what he did as a child. It was so nice, to spend some time together away from the centre.” Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comFor the first and perhaps the only time in his pugnacious political career, the California congressman and noted Trump apologist Devin Nunes is inspiring some kind of unanimity across party lines. When news broke on Monday that Nunes was retiring from Congress to become chief executive of the fledgling Trump Media &amp; Technology Group, nobody on the left or the right doubted he’d landed where he belonged. After 19 years as a reliably rock-ribbed Republican legislator, Nunes told his supporters that he wasn’t giving up on fighting his political enemies, just “pursuing it by other means” – and for once those enemies took him at his word. Even Kevin McCarthy, the top-ranking Republican in the House of Representatives and a fellow Californian, failed to raise any hackles when he said in a statement that nobody was better prepared than Nunes to lead an alternative to America’s tech and media giants. Nunes, after all, has spent years filing lawsuits against Twitter, the Washington Post, and a clutch of other media companies that he, and Trump, consider to be part of a “propaganda machine” for the Democrats. In many ways, Nunes is embracing the role his detractors have long accused him of playing, as Trump’s ultimate yes man. Early in the Trump presidency, leading Democrats fumed that he was walking away from his grave responsibilities as chair of the House intelligence committee to be Trump’s “stooge” and “fixer”. Now, though, he is walking away from Congress to serve Trump, without pretending that anything else is at stake. Both sides also broadly agree that Nunes’s surprise career move is a sign of the times. A generation ago, no politician of either party would have given up on the prospect of chairing the House ways and means committee, a job that would have been Nunes’s for the taking if the Republicans were to win next year’s congressional midterms. The position is often described as the best in Washington, because of the sweeping power it grants over a wide range of policy issues. Nunes, however, appears to have calculated that in today’s Republican party the real power lies not in committee but in proximity to the former president, who remains the GOP’s undisputed kingmaker and may harbor ambitions to be more than that as the 2024 presidential election draws closer. Nunes went out his way, while intelligence committee chair, to clear Trump of accusations of collusion with Russia during the 2016 presidential campaign and promptly turned around to investigate the FBI’s reasons for looking into the matter in the first place. Trump rewarded him with a presidential Medal of Freedom, praising his “fortitude to take on the media, the FBI, the intelligence community, the Democrat party, foreign spies, and the full power of the Deep State”. Nunes, 48, is in many ways a poster child for the notion that, in today’s politics, extreme partisanship pays. While his unwavering allegiance to Trump and frequent spouting of freewheeling conspiracy theories caused his popularity in the agricultural district he represents in California’s Central Valley to nosedive – his margin of victory plummeted from 35 percentage points in 2016 to single digits in 2018 and 2020 – his Trump bona fides have made him a formidable fundraiser. Ahead of last year’s congressional race, he raised a whopping $26.8m, the fourth-largest haul of any House member, and he used much of that money to outspend his spirited Democratic challenger, Phil Arballo, by a margin of four to one. Like the man he is going to work for, Nunes has made a career out of divisiveness. He slams the Democrats as socialists and also as the party of the capitalist elite and doesn’t blink at the contradiction. A sampling of recent media appearances, many of them on his own podcast, has him accusing China of being “behind” the Covid-19 pandemic, lambasting the National Security Agency for mounting what he claims to be a political witch hunt against Republicans, and belittling Joe Biden and Kamala Harris as mere “avatars” for Barack Obama. Some of that divisiveness, and the chaos that often erupts in its wake, is likely to greet him as he starts his new job. Two financial regulatory agencies are already investigating a $1.25bn business deal to take the Trump Media &amp; Technology Group public. Nunes and Trump are spoiling for fights with Twitter, which banned the former president from its site in the wake of the 6 January Capitol riot, and a number of other social media platforms they accuse of censoring free speech. That accusation is not without irony for Nunes, who has attempted to silence two detractors on Twitter with the spoof handles @DevinNunesCow and @DevinNunesMom. In a widely ridiculed 2019 lawsuit, he demanded $250m in damages from Twitter and the people behind the handles because, he said, they’d meant to cause him “immense pain”. In California’s 22nd congressional district, the news of Nunes’ departure caused little detectable dismay among his supporters and was greeted by his detractors with both relief and frustration (relief because they say that he has long since placed his political ambitions above the interests of his constituents, frustration because local Democrats believed they had a decent shot at unseating him next year). Nunes, his 2020 challenger Arballo tweeted, “is fleeing from Congress at the end of the month because he would rather cash out and take a cushy gig from Trump than face our movement in a tough reelection campaign.” With California, and the rest of the country, redrawing district maps in the wake of the latest US census, Nunes was heading into a significantly tougher electoral environment. According to the latest provisional map, the 22nd would flip from one that voted to reelect Trump by five percentage points last year to one that voted for Biden by nine points. Nunes had some options if he’d chosen to fight for reelection, since California law does not oblige candidates for office to live in their districts. He could have challenged a Republican incumbent in an adjacent district or contested an open seat further away. Instead, Nunes has responded to the siren call of a man who once flattered him into thinking he “may someday be recognized as a Great American Hero”. Trump’s business ventures have rarely ended happily for those he has roped into helping run them, but his political fortunes have yet to run dry.Maria Ressa and Dmitry Muratov, the first journalists to receive the Nobel peace prize since 1935, share a belief that the world is engaged in an existential battle for truth and against lies. Speaking at Friday’s Nobel prize ceremony, Muratov noted simply, “the world has fallen out of love with democracy”. He remembered his fallen colleagues – the six journalists murdered from Novaya Gazeta, the Moscow-based newspaper that Muratov has edited for 25 years – and asked the audience to stand to stand in solidarity with the journalists of the Philippines, who have “given their lives for this profession”. In Russia, the Philippines and around the world, the same authoritarian playbook is being deployed against journalists: violence, intimidation, legal threats, character assassination. It’s getting worse, according to the most recent report from the Committee to Protect Journalists, which showed a record number of journalists imprisoned around the world. One of them is Zhang Zhan, a blogger and activist who was arrested in May 2020 while reporting on the initial outbreak of Covid-19 in Wuhan, China, and sentenced to four years in prison. Zhang, who has been on hunger strike to protest her unjust imprisonment, is reportedly in declining health. Her shocking treatment shows how China has used brutal force not only to censor its own people, but to undermine global understanding of the Covid pandemic. As both Ressa and Muratov noted, the threats to press freedom extend far beyond authoritarian countries. The problems are acute in many democracies, increasingly led by elected autocrats. Violence against journalists is an endemic problem in Mexico, the Philippines and even India, which has the highest number of journalists killed because of their reporting so far in 2021. Impunity is one of the main reasons. No one has been held to account for 81% of murders of journalists globally in the past 10 years, according to CPJ. Countries that jail journalists are becoming more brazen, impervious to international pressure and condemnation. Blogger Raif Badawi, in Saudi Arabia, has been in prison since 2012: convicted of “defamation of religion”, sentenced to 10 years and 1,000 lashes. Azimjon Askarov died in a Kyrgyz prison in July last year. His 2010 life sentence followed a judicial process “marred by torture, lack of evidence and fabricated charges”. Other journalists have been forced into exile. Award-winning journalists Ewald Scharfenberg and Joseph Poliszuk, of Armando.info in Venezuela, were forced to flee to Colombia after a slew of legal threats. Sonny Swe of Frontier Myanmar recently took the reluctant decision to evacuate his team. A generation of journalists fled Afghanistan after the Taliban took power. Spurious charges are par for the course, too. They paint journalists as criminals and predators, feeding into a cycle of mistrust and polarisation. In July, Omar Radi, a reporter for the Moroccan outlet Le Desk, was sentenced to six years in prison, convicted on charges of sexual assault, espionage and illegally receiving foreign funding. (According to CPJ, sex crime charges are commonly used in Morocco to target journalists.) After a stint in jail, the Kazakh journalist Zhanbolat Mamay was in 2017 sentenced to a three-year restriction on movements and banned from working as a journalist. He was accused of laundering embezzled funds for the country’s exiled opposition: a thinly veiled attack on Sayasi kalam/Tribuna, one of the few independent outlets left in the country. In her Nobel lecture, Ressa spoke of “an invisible atom bomb exploded in our information ecosystem”, adding: “the world must act as it did after Hiroshima. Like that time, we need to create new institutions, like the United Nations, and new codes stating our values, like the universal declaration of human rights, to prevent humanity from doing its worst. It’s an arms race in the information ecosystem.” Ressa is correct that the technology that once liberated information has been weaponised, and turned into a tool of repression. Much of the spyware used to surveil and target journalists is developed and sold by firms in wealthy democracies such as the US, Israel, Italy, France and Germany – and it is used everywhere. The Pegasus project, of which the Guardian was part, revealed how that spyware was deployed to target countless journalists, including Marcela Turati in Mexico and Khadija Ismayilova in Azerbaijan, who spent almost a year and a half in jail, and remains subject to a travel ban. Even as Ressa and Muratov are honoured, countless other journalists are facing violence and repression. Governments that claim to support democracy and press freedom need to stand with these journalists now. A number of new and important commitments have come out of the Summit for Democracy, currently underway in Washington DC. For example, the US announced it will launch a global Defamation Defense Fund to support journalists such as Ressa who face constant legal harassment, and lead a global coalition to curb the global market on advanced surveillance technologies. The Netherlands committed to creating an emergency support fund for at-risk journalists and media workers. Meanwhile, the Media Freedom Coalition, set up in 2019 by the UK and Canada, has now signed up 49 governments to its global pledge on media freedom. That commitment matters, but the coalition has not been sufficiently outspoken in the face of ongoing violations committed by governments, including some of its own members. Meanwhile, the ongoing extradition of Julian Assange sets a terrible global precedent, because Assange is being prosecuted for making public classified information, something journalists do routinely. The Nobel prize honour bestowed on Ressa and Muratov is fitting and deserved. But it won’t be meaningful unless governments step up and assume their responsibility to ensure that the rights of all journalists, especially those working in dangerous and repressive environments, are safeguarded and protected. Joel Simon is the executive director of the Committee to Protect JournalistsWinter is prime shellfish season in the British Isles, so it never ceases to amaze me that we don’t make a bigger fuss of this brilliant native produce over the Christmas period. It’s also incredibly easy and quick to cook, making it a great choice for feeding a crowd, whether that’s in the form of traditional moules marinière (crusty bread obligatory), grilled scallops (ideally topped with garlic butter, parsley, a splash of white wine or vermouth, and a few breadcrumbs; you can thank me later) or a no-fuss chowder; even the no-bake clam pizzas below are way less work than you’d ever expect. So let’s get shucking. Mussel chowder (pictured above) The joy of chowders lies not just in their incredible flavour – plump shellfish, salty bacon, rich, creamy broth: what’s not to like? – but in the fact that they’re so damned easy to scale up or down, depending on how many people you have around. Keep a big pot of the soup warm on a very low heat, stick a ladle in the middle of the pot, have a pile of bowls and some good crusty bread next to the stove, and leave everyone to help themselves. I especially love this with fried bread and lots of parsley. Prep 15 min Cook 45 min Serves 4 1kg live mussels 1 glass (175ml) white wine 50g butter 1 small white onion, peeled and finely chopped 3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped 100g smoked bacon, finely chopped 75ml dry sherry 1 tbsp flour 300ml milk 300ml double cream 2 large potatoes, peeled and cut into roughly 15mm dice 1 big handful curly parsley, chopped, to finish Salt and freshly ground white pepper Tabasco, to season and finish Put a large pot on a medium-high heat, add the mussels and wine, cover and leave for three or four minutes, shaking the pan every now and then, until they all steam open (discard any that don’t). Take off the heat, leave to cool, then pick the meat from the shells (which can now be discarded), and set aside with the cooking liquor. Melt the butter in a second large pot on a medium heat, then gently fry the onion and garlic for 10 or so minutes, until soft but not coloured. Add the bacon and saute, stirring, until just starting to crisp at the edges. Add the sherry, leave to bubble until the alcohol’s boiled off, then stir in the flour and cook out, still stirring, for a couple of minutes more. Slowly add the milk and cream, stir to combine, then add the potatoes and cook on a medium-low heat for 15 minutes, just until they are soft. Add the picked mussels and their cooking juices, simmer for a couple of minutes to warm through, then stir in the parsley. Season with white pepper and Tabasco to taste, and add salt only if needed. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado No-bake pizza ‘claminara’ The idea for this dish was inspired by Pizza Pilgrims in London, which launched a brilliant at-home pizza kit during lockdown that included a short YouTube video on how to make pizza in a frying pan. I thought it was genius, and even more so when I found out it worked. If you prefer folded pizza, just fold it over before cooking and enjoy a “clamzone” instead. Prep 15 min Prove 2 hr+ Cook 45 min Serves 4 For the dough 500g strong, white bread flour 325g tepid water 7g dried yeast 1 tbsp olive oil 5g salt 5g sugar For the sauce 1kg live clams 100ml white wine 1 bay leaf 1 peperoncino, or 1 dried red chilli 20g butter 20g flour 200ml milk 2 garlic cloves, peeled 1 handful curly parsley, chopped 1-2 tsp grated parmesan 1 x 125-150g mozzarella ball, roughly torn into smallish pieces Put the flour, water, yeast, olive oil, salt and sugar in a bowl, and mix with your hands until it all comes together into a dough. Tip out on a lightly floured work surface and knead for about five minutes, until the dough is nice and elastic. Return to the bowl, cover and leave to rest for about an hour to an hour and a half, until doubled in size. Once the dough has proved, knock it back on a floured worktop, divide into four and pinch and shape each portion into a neat ball. Cover again with a towel, and leave to prove for another 30 minutes or so. Meanwhile, make the sauce. Put a large saucepan on a medium-high heat, add the clams, wine, bay and chilli, cover and steam for two or three minutes, until all the clams have opened (discard any that haven’t). Take off the heat, leave to cool, then pick the meat from the shells (these can now be discarded) and set aside with the cooking liquor. Melt the butter in a small pan, then stir in the flour until the mix thickens and forms a roux. Mix the clam juices and milk in a jug or bowl, then pour into the roux and cook, stirring, for three to four minutes, until you have a thick white sauce. Grate in the garlic, stir in the parsley and simmer for another three or four minutes, until the sauce is smooth, creamy and quite thick. Off the heat, stir in the clam meat. On a lightly floured surface, either by hand or with a rolling pin, shape each ball of dough into a disc big enough to fit your frying pan (you’ll need a heavy-based, ovenproof one). With your hands, push up a slightly raised rim all around the edge. Meanwhile, set the ovenproof frying pan over a high heat and, once it’s good and hot, lay in one round of dough. Spread the clam sauce liberally over the top and up to but not over the rim, then sprinkle over some parmesan and dot liberally with mozzarella. Leave to cook in the hot pan for four to five minutes, until the base is crisp and the edges start to rise. Meanwhile, heat the grill to high. Transfer the pan to the hot grill and cook for two or three minutes, until the edges rise and blister and the cheese melts and browns. When your pizza looks full of appeal, take it out and serve. Repeat with the remaining dough and sauce, until you’re full or until you run out of both. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Mitch Tonks is chef/co-owner of the Rockfish chain of restaurants on the south coast and The Seahorse in Dartmouth, Devon. His latest book, Rockfish: The Cookbook, is published by Jon Croft Editions at £18.Don’t be fooled by the supreme court’s nominal hedging on its endorsement of SB8, the Texas abortion ban that deputizes private citizens to sue anyone who assists in an abortion after six weeks’ gestation. In a ruling on Friday, the court held that a lawsuit by Texas abortion providers could go forward – but only on narrow grounds. Only those state officials responsible for licensing medical providers may be sued, the court ordered – no one else involved in the state’s practical maintenance of SB8 is liable. The ruling said, for instance, that the providers could not sue court clerks, those bureaucrats tasked with actually docketing the lawsuits that would enforce SB8. For providers, it seems that the best possible outcome for the suit now is that they may be able to secure an injunction preventing medical providers from being delicensed. These perplexing limits placed by the court on which parties can be sued to challenge SB8 ensures that though the suit against the law will be at least partly allowed to go forward, it will be largely toothless. In the meantime, SB8 will remain law. Women in Texas are effectively banned from securing a legal abortion in the state, even though the still-standing Roe v Wade decision says that they have a right to one. It’s likely that SB8 will remain in effect at least for the duration of Roe’s lifetime – meaning that Texas women will not be able to obtain legal abortions after six weeks for the foreseeable future. Many of the initial media responses to the court’s opinion emphasized that since the suit was allowed to go forward, on technical grounds, the ruling was a narrow win for the abortion providers. But in reality Friday was a massive win for the rightwing Texas government, and for anti-choice forces nationwide. That SB8 has been allowed to take effect – now for the second time – by the supreme court reflects the justices’ eagerness to gut abortion rights. The fact of the matter is that the court is already set to overturn Roe and allow states to ban abortion outright. That much was clear to anyone who listened to last week’s oral arguments in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health, a case surrounding the constitutionality of a 15-week ban in Mississippi, which devolved into grim misogynist spectacle as the Republican appointees held court on the supposed ease of giving infants up for adoption and their own robust comfort with overturning long-settled precedent. That ruling is scheduled to come down in late May or early June. When it does, a slim majority of states are expected to ban abortion, either immediately or very soon thereafter. That means that soon SB8 – and the copycat bills that it has inspired in states like Florida and Arkansas – won’t be necessary for the anti-choice lobby to achieve their aims. Instead of concocting an elaborate enforcement process in which rogue anti-woman vigilantes enforce their abortion bans, the states will be able to enforce their bans themselves. SB8, then, and the supreme court’s embrace of it, can be understood not only as a harbinger of the justices’ deep contempt for the abortion right, but also of their childish impatience to exert this contempt upon American women. They can’t even wait six months. They want to ban abortion right now. In pursuit of this goal, the supreme court has proven itself willing to undermine its own capacity to oversee state laws, to enforce federal supremacy, and to protect constitutional rights. The anti-choice substance of the court’s decision in SB8 was not surprising; its embrace of Texas’s tactics perhaps was. Aside from its direct attempt to undermine women’s rights, SB8 also took aim at judicial authority. By banning abortion long before viability, the law flouted the supreme court’s precedents in Roe and Planned Parenthood v Casey. But that much a slew of vehemently anti-choice justices would probably forgive: all six of the Republican appointees clearly believe that Roe was wrongly decided, and at least five of them (all but Roberts, who seems more trepidatious) appear eager to overturn it. But in its novel enforcement mechanism, SB8 sought specifically to evade judicial review – not just to give the court an opportunity to overturn its own precedent, but to make it so that within Texas borders supreme court precedent didn’t matter. In her dissent, Justice Sonia Sotomayor compared SB8 to the views of John C Calhoun – a nineteenth-century pro-slavery campaigner who argued that states have the right to nullify federal laws that they do not like. America fought its civil war in no small part over this question. By first allowing the SB8 to go into effect, in September, and then by gutting the lawsuit against it this Friday, the supreme court has, shockingly, endorsed a scheme to undermine its own power, and granted a state the ability to evade federal precedent. Nullification, it seems, is back in style. For years, court watchers have wondered whether the justices’ institutionalist instincts would overcome their misogynist ones: if the Court had to choose between maintaining its own power and legitimacy, and overturning Roe, which would it choose? Now, it seems, we have our answer. Moira Donegan is a Guardian US columnistThe Treasury has been forced to defend officials holding an “impromptu” drinks party to celebrate Rishi Sunak’s autumn spending review during lockdown. A spokesperson insisted it was a “small number” of staff who celebrated around their desks, despite reports putting the number closer to two dozen civil servants at the event. A team of officials working on the chancellor’s spending review announcement stayed after hours for the party on 25 November last year, the Times reported. Government sources said the drinks were not planned but the civil servants involved bought beer and wine from a nearby supermarket. A Treasury spokesperson told the Guardian: “A number of HMT staff came into the office to work on the spending review 2020. We have been made aware that a small number of staff had impromptu drinks around their desks after the event. “The Treasury did not organise an in-person departmental party last Christmas.” It is understood that Sunak was not at the event and was not aware of it taking place at the time. During the November lockdown, non-essential shops, and leisure and entertainment venues were closed, as well as pubs, bars and restaurants. People were told to stay at home except for limited reasons including work if it could not be done from home. The latest controversy comes as Downing Street and the prime minister, Boris Johnson, face criticism over allegations of Covid rule-breaking parties held in the run-up to last Christmas. The prime minister’s now director of communications, Jack Doyle, is reported to have addressed staff and handed out awards last year at a No 10 Christmas party that is currently under investigation. Doyle, who was then the deputy director of communications at Downing Street, is believed to have addressed up to 50 people and presented awards to the press office at the gathering on 18 December 2020. The prime minister announced on Wednesday that an internal investigation led by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, would look into reports of the event. The investigation was later widened to include another festive celebration and a reported staff leaving do. Downing Street said it had cancelled plans to hold a Christmas party this year. Johnson’s former aide Dominic Cummings tweeted on Friday that there were “lots” of photos of parties in No 10 that would “inevitably get out”. Reports of government officials allegedly breaking lockdown restrictions while the rest of the country could not see friends and family last Christmas have seen the Labour party move ahead in opinion polls. Meanwhile, two police officers have been disciplined for attending a party and breaking Covid rules. Police were called to the gathering at a house in Hove, East Sussex, at 8.46pm on 15 May where they found several off-duty colleagues. At the time, coronavirus regulations stated that people should mix only with their own household or linked households. Fixed penalty notices of £200 each were issued to 10 officers for breaching rules. A police spokesperson said an internal investigation resulted in one of the police officers being handed a written warning, while an acting police sergeant was given “reflective practice”, which requires officers to reflect on their actions. DS Rachel Carr added: “We have taken Covid-related breaches very seriously and we do not tolerate this kind of behaviour which falls below the standards we expect of our officers and staff.”Formula One has sometimes failed to fire the imagination in recent years but the duel between Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen has gripped fans across the world and evoked the sport’s most compelling rivalries. While the drivers have fought on the track across 21 races before Sunday’s showdown in Abu Dhabi, the Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, and his Red Bull counterpart, Christian Horner, have acted as figureheads for their respective teams. When they speak it is for not only the drivers but the pit crews, engineers and mechanics, designers and hundreds of factory staff. Horner is the longest-serving principal in F1, in charge at Red Bull since 2005. Wolff has been with Mercedes since 2013. Both are well established and accomplished figures but some of their exchanges this season have been a little undignified. Horner called his rival a “control freak”, leading the Austrian to venture that the Englishman was a “windbag who always wants to be on camera”. “The more Toto gets wound up, the more fun it becomes,” Horner fired back, an idea Wolff assessed as “worrying”. “Sometimes I was carried away when I heard comments that annoyed me,” Wolff admitted last week. These outbursts have set the tone for an increasingly acrimonious contest. Verstappen said on Thursday his view of Hamilton had changed, and “not in a positive way”. It is clear Wolff and Horner now share that feeling about each other. “I have no issue with Toto,” Horner told Donald McRae in October – nothing personal, it appeared. By the time the teams arrived in the Middle East for this weekend’s high-stakes decider in Abu Dhabi, that neutrality had evaporated. “We’re both competitive,” Horner said on Friday. “I have respect for Mercedes, I have respect for Toto but it doesn’t mean I have to like him.” Both men have instinctively backed their drivers on racing incidents that remain open to interpretation. As the season has unfolded there have been flashes of anger and claims of injustice from either side. If there was a single moment when the mood darkened it was the accident at Silverstone in July when Verstappen slammed into the barriers at Copse. The Dutchman was taken to hospital while Hamilton streaked away to victory. Horner insisted Hamilton’s 10-second penalty for that incident, when he clipped Verstappen’s rear left tyre heading into that flat-out corner, was insufficient. His sense of outrage was manifold: accusing Hamilton of “dirty driving”, he complained of Verstappen’s life being placed in danger, along with the team losing a badly damaged engine and car. “I don’t think I have to apologise for anything,” Hamilton countered, while Wolff, before the next race in Hungary, said Horner had been “below the belt” in his criticism of Hamilton. The tension – and danger – was ratcheted up further when Verstappen and Hamilton crashed again at Monza in September, the shaken seven-times champion saying the halo on his cockpit had saved his life after the Red Bull bounced on top of the Mercedes in a chicane. “We don’t want a situation where … someone gets really hurt,” Wolff said. The heat has risen steadily and Horner suggested Wolff was experiencing a new kind of pressure. “He came into the sport with Mercedes in 2013 and the structure was already in place,” Horner told McRae. “He’s never experienced anything other than winning. So it’s a different type of pressure now. It’s tough.” Will Horner regret those words given the ruthlessness with which Hamilton – and Wolff – have roared back? During Friday’s media duties Horner produced the necessary lines about the season’s “amazing journey” and the excitement of a winner-takes-all race. But compared with Wolff, he looked tired and flat, no doubt privately annoyed at seeing Verstappen’s lead reduced to nothing. Wolff, meanwhile, looked genuinely relaxed, insisting he had not expected to be in contention for the drivers’ title after Verstappen won in Mexico. “Marvellous,” was how he described forcing a winner-takes-all decider. “We have only to gain.” Wolff aimed to defuse tension – and perhaps take the sting out of questions – by shaking hands with Horner. “Good luck. May the best man and the best team win,” he smiled from behind his facemask, leaving little doubt as to who he thought was the best team. “It’s been intense between the two of us,” Horner said. “It’ll be intense next year, and the year after,” adding he was not planning to invite Wolff on holiday. Wolff pondered the idea briefly before coldly replying: “I don’t know if it would be so much fun.” The pre-race mood appears civil, yet guarded. It remains to be seen whether Wolff and Horner will be shaking each other by the hand or by the throat in Abu Dhabi on Sunday.On Sunday, Clapton Community FC will become the first seventh-tier side to compete in the third round of the Women’s FA Cup when they travel south to play Plymouth Argyle. By beating Hounslow 3-1 on penalties, the Greater London Premier League club became the first to beat a side from four tiers higher in the competition. But instead of being rewarded for their success or handed the funds to further support the London club’s impressive development, Clapton have found themselves out of pocket. The huge discrepancy in prize money dished out to teams competing in the men’s and women’s FA Cups means they will earn just £1,250 should they win, contrasting starkly with the £82,000 offered to men’s teams at the same stage. “We’re reaping the benefits of the Women’s Super League being successful,” says Alice Nutman, the club’s captain. “But if you have that success at the top it means that is going to have a knock-on impact lower down. We’re going to see increased numbers of girls and young people playing football, and if we don’t have investment at that stage, if we don’t have viable options for them to go into the game, then investing in the top is pointless. Top-down development, trickle-down economics, we know they don’t work, and the same is true in football.” Nutman adds: “We’re not asking for equal pay. That’s a myth. We’re asking for investment in grassroots and we’re asking for spaces in which women and non-binary people are able to play football, which currently do not exist. “Unfortunately, when the FA is the body that banned women’s football for a 50-year period, you then need to do things to reverse that and, at the moment, that’s not happening. For anyone tier three and below that money makes a huge difference. “It means that you’re not living hand to mouth each month. We struggle to pay for our training pitch. That’s the reality of playing grassroots football in this country as a woman.” Set up in 2018 by fans and players unhappy with the direction of Clapton FC, Clapton Community FC is fan-owned and pioneering a different way of doing things. For supporters who have fallen out of love with the commercialism of the game, clubs such as Clapton offer something different and Nutman believes breaking the mould is what women’s football should try to do more often. “That’s the next step for women’s football, to not try and fit the same model. We’re not able to fit the same model because we didn’t play for such a long period of time [due to the ban]. So it’s about how can we get to the same level of eliteness and the same level of engagement in a better way.” Having the ideological engagement in what the club are doing has been vital during their extraordinary FA Cup run. A broad and active fanbase believes in Clapton’s success off the pitch as much as on it. “The positives of us being a fan-owned club means that lots of [the financial difficulties caused by FA Cup progress] have been hidden from the players,” Nutman says. “There’s been lots of squirrelling away behind the scenes in order to get the cheapest possible transport, in order to get some accommodation. That’s organised by people who own and have a hand in the club. Teams who are higher up are in very similar situations, they also don’t have the funding from the FA that is going to make this possible.” To meet the soaring costs, by being drawn away in each round, Clapton set up a crowdfunding appeal which exceeded the £3,000 target in two days and is now more than £4,000. “We’re so very, very grateful for everyone,” says Sophia Axelsson, who plays and also leads on financial strategy for the women’s first team. “But it’s also come at a very, very tricky time for us because we’ve also started a fundraiser to build changing rooms at our ground, which we don’t have. Had we been the men, we would have been able to build these changing rooms already with the success that we’ve had. But because we’re women, we have to do fundraisers for literally everything that we do within the club.” Against Hounslow, with the score at 0-0 at the break, belief suddenly filtered through the team. “We didn’t know, before we played the game, that it would be the first time a team had ever done it,” Nutman says. “And I’m glad we didn’t, because that would have added to how nervous we were feeling. “In a similar way to going into this weekend against Plymouth, it looks like something that shouldn’t happen. It looks like something that we shouldn’t be capable of. But the FA Cup means we’re playing 90 minutes, anything could happen. That’s why football is so glorious.” Should they beat Plymouth, the fourth round could see them drawn against a WSL side. “The thought of getting through is us being able to live out the dreams that we had when we were 20 years younger than we are now. Most of the squad are in our 30s,” says Nutman. Axelsson adds: “I would lie if I said that some of our players hadn’t already dreamt about it. Having a home tie against Arsenal and having their team bus rock up at our community changing rooms in Walthamstow would be pretty incredible. “We’d love to continue this journey that we’re on, this adventure, we’re making memories for life. We’re very proud of where we’ve gotten so far. If we could go even further that would just mean the world.”Over the past 30 years, I have read and heard David Baddiel’s thoughts on many subjects, including sex, masturbation, religion, antisemitism, football fandom, football hooliganism, his mother’s sex life and his father’s dementia. “I am quite unfiltered,” he agrees, “mainly because I am almost psychotically comfortable in my own skin.” But today I have found the one subject that makes him squirm. How much time does he spend on social media a day? “Oh, um, too much,” he says, his usual candour suddenly gone. What’s his daily screen time according to his phone? “It says four hours, which is a bit frightening.” I’ve been up to five, I admit. “OK, I’ve been up to five, too, I cut it down a bit now,” he says with a relieved laugh. “I always think, ‘But that’s not fair, you mean I’ve just had [the phone] open!’, like I’m arguing with my phone. You find any justification to do what you want to do. Fuck knows how much time I’ve wasted on Twitter.” He might not be able to quantify the hours, but he can do the wordcount: since 2009, he has sent 65,000 tweets. We are in Baddiel’s book-stuffed house on the edge of Hampstead Heath in London, and his appearance is rumpled yet cerebral, like a well-worn loafer. Also living in the house with Baddiel is his daughter, Dolly, 20, who is studying for a BA in theatre dance with classical ballet specialism, his 17-year-old son, Ezra, who is studying music, and his wife, the writer Morwenna Banks. All around us are souvenirs from Baddiel’s career, which has made him a semi-ubiquitous, Zelig-like figure in Britain over the past four decades: a photo from when he was on early 1990s swotty-but-also-rock’n’roll comedy show The Mary Whitehouse Experience, with Rob Newman, Hugh Dennis and Steve Punt; many more of him with Frank Skinner, from his years as a TV football bloke and with whom, along with the Lightning Seeds, he wrote the England team’s unofficial but undeniable anthem, Three Lions; stacks of his successful children’s books, and last year’s surprise publishing success, Jews Don’t Count, his polemic against modern antisemitism. It is an almost parodic image of happy creativity, a household in which everyone is free to pursue their passions. Yet Baddiel, 57, has spent an unbearable-to-think-about amount of time in it bent over his phone – not writing more books, not admiring his views of the heath, not hanging out with his family, but talking to and arguing with strangers. He is – like millions of others – addicted to social media. Twitter, in his case, and he tweets regularly to his 780,000 followers about everything from news events to the time he accidentally set his glasses on fire in a microwave. But why? “We are living in a very narcissistic time, and what’s the most narcissistic thing you can do? Always have an audience, and that’s what social media gives you,” he says. I tell him that I think of Twitter as being to the 21st century what cocaine was to the 1990s: too many celebrities and media figures are on it, it makes you anxious and angry, but you worry if you quit you’ll miss out on what the in crowd are saying. “That’s true, but it’s also more than that: Twitter, for example, pretends it’s a marketplace of ideas, but it’s not. It’s a marketplace of identities, and you broadcast your identity via political opinion, and the only way you can claim that identity is to be the loudest and the angriest, and to do it in opposition to everyone who thinks differently from you,” he says. He talks in fast, thoughtful paragraphs and I feel as if he’d be happy for us to have a conversation just about anything, as long as I kept up my end and talked about it in an interesting way. He knows that many people roll their eyes about social media, and it’s a snobbery he has little time for. “It’s ridiculous to be high-minded and say it’s not real life when it’s clearly having massive effects on society. It drives a way of thinking, a lot of political agendas and what goes in the newspapers. It’s not a fringe discourse – it’s at the nexus of power,” he says. People who dismiss social media as an irrelevancy, he says, are like people in the 1950s who thought television was a frivolous fad. After all, a book almost entirely about Twitter, Patricia Lockwood’s No One Is Talking About This, was shortlisted for the Booker prize this year. Baddiel thinks a lot about social media. He recently finished touring his live show, Trolls: Not the Dolls, in which he looked at how abusive discourse is being normalised online (the Guardian gave it four stars). Now he has made a sober BBC documentary, David Baddiel: Social Media, Anger and Us, which was born out of a wider interest (he wanted to know how social media is changing the world) and a personal ambition (he hoped making the show would shame him into quitting Twitter. Spoiler: it does, but only very, very temporarily). The documentary has two real strengths: the first is that Baddiel is neither John Cleese nor a Silicon Valley proselytiser, so he doesn’t take either of the usual, simplified stances. “Usually you get, ‘This is just snowflakes tweeting what they had for breakfast’, or ‘This is disempowered people finally getting a chance to speak.’ I don’t think either is necessarily true. The truth is always more complex,” he says. This is where the documentary’s other strength comes in: its contributors. The always interesting philosopher and computer scientist Jaron Lanier is especially good, pointing out the overlap between countries that have seen a rise in populism in the past decade and countries that have Facebook, and I enjoyed commentator Ayishat Akanbi’s description of social media as the place “where the formerly bullied feel justified to bully”. But the one who really goes beyond the generalities to the personal is Baddiel’s daughter, Dolly. *** I first met Baddiel about 15 years ago through a mutual friend. After that, we would occasionally bump into one another, but the majority of our interactions were – predictably – over social media. A couple of years ago he asked if we could meet for coffee. He wanted to talk because he knew I’d been anorexic as a teenager and his then teenage daughter, Dolly, was in hospital for anorexia, and he was frantic with worry. I didn’t help much; he found my determined optimism about Dolly a little hard to take when it all felt so hopeless to him. But she did, thankfully, recover, and she is in the documentary talking about the part social media played in the development of her illness. It’s the first time she and her father have talked publicly about her anorexia. I ask Baddiel why he never spoke about Dolly’s illness before, given that he talks about everything else. “My process in life is, if something is difficult to talk about, then I will talk about it. But this was Dolly’s thing, not mine, and it was so dangerous while it was going on that I thought, ‘I cannot disturb this in any way that might be counterproductive to her getting better,’” he says. Also, unlike his father’s dementia, which he often tweets about, and his late mother’s infidelity, which he made a live show about in 2016, the brilliant My Family: Not the Sitcom, he couldn’t see a funny side to it. When he asked Dolly if she’d like to be in his documentary, it wasn’t, he says, because he was thinking about her eating disorder. “I thought, I need to speak to a young person who has grown up with social media and I know she’ll have stuff to say about that. It was only when she started talking about the anorexia that I thought, ‘Ah. Of course.’” As he’s recalling this, the front door slams shut: Dolly is home from college. She and her father greet and tease one another – her lateness, his chattiness – with the ease of people profoundly comfortable with one another. But she tells him that she’ll talk to me more easily without him there, so he leaves us alone. Dolly first got into social media in her second year of secondary school. “I think it was Instagram first, where you’d see photos of the popular girls going to parties. Then it was Tumblr and there was already a strong identity politics thing coming through on that. It was the prime social justice warrior era there. So I had these two instances of young people claiming these very different kinds of identity online,” she says. In the documentary, Dolly talks about her generation’s fascination with identity: “We’re so desperate to put ourselves in a box, in terms of sexuality, gender, race, class. I think it feels nice to feel like you have a solid identity when you actually don’t. But attaching yourself to a movement is an easy way to run away from self-hatred.” Did she feel as if she had an identity before she became ill? “It’s hard to say because – and I think this is where the problem lies – you’re not supposed to have a fully realised identity at 13, 14. But I think social media has exacerbated this need to have an identity, because otherwise you won’t be seen and you won’t have a tribe, basically. I think it’s especially damaging when it comes to young and vulnerable people; they’ll see something that slightly aligns with them and they’ll click into it because it provides them with a sense of safety.” Young people are not the only ones who establish their identity online. Baddiel’s Twitter biography is, simply, “Jew”. “That was supposed to be a joke, because the identity is complicated – I’m an atheist, non-Zionist Jew,” Baddiel later says when I point this out. “But people don’t want complicated identities, especially on social media, maybe because it makes them seem nebulous.” And while the identity may have started as a joke, it has arguably become the reality. When researchers in the documentary look up what words appear most often in the abusive tweets sent to him, the main one is “Jewish”. This, more than “comedian” or “football fan”, is how people – at least on Twitter – now primarily see him. Dolly did have a bit of an online identity at 14. She was into David Bowie, so posted a lot about him, and about her love of dance. “I always had something I was obsessed with, and that’s partly because I’m quite an obsessive person,” she says. She had told people when she was younger she wouldn’t develop anorexia, having seen others do so. “But once I was in it, I was chasing it to no end. It’s not just about the eating disorder, but also that subconscious desire to carry out a role in a certain identity. No one goes into it wanting to be anorexic, but that identity part is very insidious, and it can happen without you realising,” she says. Dolly had struggled with some issues before, such as anxiety. But when she was 15, the anorexia bit into her deeply, and soon after that she was diagnosed. This is when social media became a problem, but, while her father is addicted to Twitter, it was Instagram that hooked Dolly. “After I was diagnosed, I entered that online eating disorder recovery space,” she says. Eating disorder recovery is very big on Instagram. A decade or so ago, there were panics over “pro-ana” and “ana-inspo” sites, where people with anorexia egged one another on to lose more weight, and posted photos to display, with pride, their sick bodies. These have largely been shut down by regulators and are replaced with eating disorder recovery accounts. This might seem like a positive shift, but anorexia is generally a competitive sickness and too often “eating disorder recovery” is just an anorexic humblebrag, in which people post proud photos of their frail limbs and nasogastric feeding tubes. “We weren’t allowed phones in hospital, but when I’d come out I’d struggle a lot and look at all this eating disorder content online and become all-consumed with the journeys of strangers,” she says. One day, she texted her father to ask if he’d send her a photo he took of her right after she was discharged from hospital. Unbeknown to him, she wanted to post it along with one taken before she was admitted. “There are a lot of ‘before and after’ photos on anorexia recovery sites, but it was just performative, and I think that’s so applicable to other things about identity stuff online. I wasn’t better, I was just trying to portray a narrative that I’d seen online, the idea that there’s a neat beginning and end to an eating disorder, and it’s not like that. It’s just fake,” she says. Dolly is now in recovery. I ask her how she thinks social media affected her eating disorder. “It didn’t cause it. It annoys me when people blame anorexia on diet culture, because it runs so much deeper and is totally individual. Feeling lost comes from something deeper than social media, but once you are in that mindset and are vulnerable, social media exacerbates it,” she says. *** Yet, if social media had no good sides, it wouldn’t attract billions of users. Like Baddiel, I use Twitter way too much, and, also like him, I enjoy it because I’ve made new friends on it, stayed in touch with old friends and I’ve read thousands of interesting articles I otherwise wouldn’t have seen. It’s also destroyed my ability to concentrate, caused me overwhelming anxiety, and twice forced me to call the police when I was sent death threats on it. A part of me suspects that one day people will see social media like alcohol: fun in doses, but not to be chugged on all day, and not good for kids. A bigger part suspects that this particular horse has long since bolted. I ask Baddiel if he knew Dolly was so deep into Instagram while she was ill. “Not really, because she became much more secretive. She is not naturally someone who lies, but that is what the disease does.” He gets material and – to a certain extent – enjoyment from the combativeness of social media, but for his daughter it was extremely damaging. Partly this is because he is an adult and she was a child; he was healthy and she was sick and vulnerable; he’s “psychotically comfortable” in his skin, and she very much was not; he’s a public figure and she’s a private citizen. But it’s also because they’re different people. Related, but different. Social media isn’t one thing or the other. You can think it’s important, and also be ashamed of how much time you spend on it. The truth is always more complex. Baddiel knows he wastes too much time on social media, and his family is bewildered by his addiction. “I think, ‘OK, I’ve written a paragraph of my book, so I can reward myself [with Twitter].’ But you’re going to a place of reward that may punish you,” he says. So – I ask again – why? He hardly needs the publicity. Why bother fighting with strangers online? “I don’t do it as much as I used to,” he says, a teeny bit defensively. “But I think, ‘I’m a comedian, I have to respond.’ In standup, I’ve been heckled many times, and I know what it’s like to have abusive men, mainly, shout at me, and I know how to marshal the room against them with comedy, and it feels like it’s the same process on Twitter. But what you don’t get in comedy is 2,000 people telling you to die.” You don’t, but you also don’t have thousands of people instantly telling you how funny you are. Social media hits a very human sweet spot, being two parts narcissism to one part masochism. And sometimes, that balance tips. In the late 90s, when Baddiel was hosting Fantasy Football League with Skinner, he did impressions of the footballer Jason Lee, in which he blacked up. He has since apologised, but many people, especially on Twitter, regularly use it as an excuse to discredit him when he talks about antisemitism. “For people who get a thrill from anger, apologies make no difference. There’s a notion now online that shouting itself has a kind of nobility, that it’s the voice of the disenfranchised,” he says. If Baddiel wasn’t on social media, this embarrassment from his past would have been largely forgotten. Because he is, it has become part of his identity and, online, identities stick. Nonetheless, it hasn’t put him off Twitter. At the end of the documentary, Baddiel comes off Twitter for a few weeks and, almost immediately, he finds that he is sleeping better, feels happier and has improved concentration. Yet, despite all these benefits, he returns to the site. “Partly because of my job of being a performer, and also because I’m frightened of being excluded from the conversation,” he says, and I suspect it’s at least 75% the latter and 25% the former. I, too, am still on Twitter for those same reasons, but also for another: it can be lonely working from home. I miss being in an office surrounded by friendly colleagues. Having Twitter open all day initially felt a bit like that, but since the start of the pandemic, when emotions became even more fevered than usual, it’s felt more like trying to work in a very angry train station at rush hour. So now I rely on a different site for company: WhatsApp, with its small groups of people who are actually my friends. They are at least as funny as strangers on Twitter, and a lot less likely to publicly shame me. According to my phone, I spend just over an hour a day on WhatsApp and 12 minutes a day on Twitter. I can live with that. For a while, following Instagram accounts about anorexia provided Dolly with comfort: her friends from school had no way of understanding what she was going through, and here was a group with whom she could feel kinship. “But even though I was still not in a good way, I made a decision to stop following all these recovery accounts,” she says. She is still on social media, because it’s fun, she says. “I need time to do mindless things, and social media is the perfect vessel for that.” What does she look at online now? She thinks for a few seconds: “Cat content.” • David Baddiel: Social Media, Anger and Us will be shown on 13 December on BBC Two at 9pm. For support and information about eating disorders, call the Beat charity helpline on 0808 801 0677.Born in Bristol in 1984, Jayde Adams is a comedian, actor and presenter known for her bombastic storytelling, extrovert aesthetics and operatic abilities. Her debut standup show – written in the wake of her sister’s death from a brain tumour – was nominated for the Edinburgh newcomer award in 2016. This preceded zeitgeist-skewering shows such as The Ballad of Kylie Jenner’s Old Face, as well as a fruitful TV career as a host for Crazy Delicious and Snackmasters, a guest on panel shows such as 8 Out of 10 Cats and a starring role in this year’s acclaimed comedy Alma’s Not Normal. Adams is an ambassador for the charity Brain Tumour Support . This photograph was taken in Devon Cliffs, a caravan site where working-class people who couldn’t afford to go on planes would take their kids for a holiday. My sister and I would be forced to compete in freestyle disco dancing together. I wasn’t terrible at it, but I was fat. Mum shoved me in skintight Lycra because she didn’t want me to feel different: she wanted to protect my self-esteem, which I had a lot of. My sister, however – slim, athletic, the perfect disco dancer – didn’t have much confidence. So we weren’t that successful, apart from this one time. We danced in these costumes and did so well a tunnel of people were waiting for us when we finished, applauding and going: “Oh my God! You’re amazing!” That was huge for me. I was always lagging behind. On top of that, I was a real people-pleaser who didn’t forge relationships that had any depth. I was desperate for friends, and people would take advantage of that. Jenna was two years older, really popular, and pulled me out of a lot of bad situations. We were a bit like Phil and Grant. One time, a lad at school smacked me in the stomach with a hockey stick. My sister found out, came charging through the corridors and beat seven bells out of him. She used to fight all my battles – so much so that when she died, I didn’t know who or what I was. In 2005, Jenna had a grand mal seizure out of the blue. I was in the second year of a drama degree at what was then the University of Glamorgan. I noticed that my brother Kane had phoned me 17 times – he never, ever calls. When I got through to him he told me Jenna had collapsed in a fit. It happened in the car with my dad and he had to carry her into the hospital. Lucky, it was that daughter; he’d have had to drag me in by my ankles. When Jenna had a biopsy they took out 52% of the brain tumour. It was a major trauma, so she was different afterwards: she used to repeat herself and do things like put her phone in the fridge. A lot of people in her life couldn’t handle the shift and took a step away. Jenna was quite lonely when she died. The last conversation I had with her, she was crying about one of her mates not telling her that she’d got engaged. She ended up living for six more years – she got married, which was important. She didn’t do loads in her life so she got to have that special day; we had the ceremony in the same church we had her funeral in. I’d never tried standup, but when Jenna was ill I started to become aware that I could do it. After her surgery, I was in the hospital with my family, who were all looking really sad while Jenna was in bed. When they popped out to speak to the doctor, Jenna grabbed my hand – quite aggressively, I’ll be honest – and said: “Can you start making everyone laugh? They’re all looking at me like I’m about to die and it’s doing my nut in.” So that’s what I did. I started making jokes. And I haven’t stopped since. Jenna’s funeral was the best standup gig I’ve done in my life. During her eulogy, I made the whole church laugh. It helped that our vicar kept getting Jenna’s name mixed up with mine. She told a congregation of 400 people that Jayde had died and that I was “leaving Jenna and Kane, Mum and Dad”. I turned around and went: “What the fuck is going on?” It brought the house down. I was an absolute mess for about three years after her death. In the end I did drag Shakespeare around Spain. I wasn’t sure what I was doing and felt a bit lost. For a while I thought I could be Adele. I used to do an impression of her when I was performing with the drag queens; thankfully, I found my own shtick. When Lynne [Parker, who runs comedy competition Funny Women] messaged me in 2014 asking me to enter, I decided to go for it – and I won. Then two years later, I went to Edinburgh to do a show about how I found my voice after losing my big sister. Looking back, I wasn’t ready – too many people do standup about their trauma right after it’s happened. When reviewers rock up with their iPads fresh from university, and give you a two-star review for your pain, it does floor you. It wasn’t all bad, though. For the first time it felt as if I’d owned the story of my sister. Everyone was so preoccupied with their own grief that no one ever asked me how I was. So I just did a bloody show where I got to say it. After the fringe, I got booked to do a run at Soho theatre. My parents came to my penultimate gig, but hadn’t told me. That night I did my set in a completely different way; it’s as if Jenna was telling me they were there. At the end of the show, I do this bit about how Jenna was always known as the singer of the family, and how I didn’t know I could sing opera until after she had died. At her wedding, she sang Martine McCutcheon’s Perfect Moment. My parents would disagree with me here – but it wasn’t great. In the show, I do an impression of Jenna. And then I sing Puccini’s O Mio Babbino Caro, and describe how when I sang it to my mum for the first time, she pauses then said: “Your sister was always such a good singer.” After Mum saw me tell that story live, she was livid: “I never said that, Jayde!” I was like, “You bloody well did.” There’s this thing about dead people. This idea that they are special. That they are angels. Especially when they die early – their memory turns them into some sort of noble creature. But Jenna really was, to me. She never gave me any problems – even when I told the boy she was going out with that we shared knickers. She never manipulated me. She just used to sit back and watch me entertain her. If Jenna was alive now, I’m not sure how she would cope with my new world. I don’t think people really understand working-class families. People are so raw and real, and I’ve had to skim off my sides to be able to fit in. You get media-trained and learn how to play the game. That was OK for me – I was always the sister who was a chameleon and could adapt to any social situation. Jenna, meanwhile, never needed to fit in: she was the most alluring person in any room. She couldn’t pretend to be anything other than what she was. Which was an absolute firecracker.Mikaela Shiffrin earned her first World Cup podium in a speed race in nearly two years on Saturday, finishing third in a super-G at St Moritz to maintain her lead in the overall standings. It was Lara Gut-Behrami’s turn to edge Sofia Goggia for victory on the typically tricky Swiss terrain, reversing the result of their duel in Canada last weekend. Gut-Behrami, the world champion, raced down the piste 0.18 seconds faster than Goggia through lightly falling snow on a cold, still morning with a finish-area temperature about -7C (20F). Shiffrin was exactly one second further back in third to complete a high-class podium. It was just Shiffrin’s second World Cup super-G in almost two years after taking a break from speed disciplines on the season-long circuit. She had placed sixth last Sunday at Lake Louise, Alberta when Goggia had beaten Gut-Behrami by 0.11. Gut-Behrami’s aggressive racing style on one of her home Swiss hills earned a 33rd career World Cup win at the same place as her first. Her debut victory in December 2008 was a super-G on the Corviglia course as a precociously talented 17-year-old. The 30-year-old Swiss racer has now won or been second in all eight super-Gs so far in 2021, including taking gold at the world championships in February. Shiffrin was also third that day. Shiffrin, who has wins in slalom and giant slalom this season, earned 60 World Cup points for her third place and leads by 70 from Goggia, who rose to second above Petra Vlhova. Vlhova, the defending overall champion, is skipping the weekend meeting at St Moritz which includes another super-G on Sunday.Immediacy, radiance and an ability to welcome the past into the present: not all there is to say on the matter, but an attempt to pinpoint the essence of James MacMillan’s music. For MacMillan (b.1959), a Scottish-born Roman Catholic, spirituality has been key to his work since a childhood fascination with plainchant and liturgy. His faith has empowered him to freewheel against fashion, gathering a large and responsive audience, from every domain, with him. Who else would dare write a full-length Christmas Oratorio (2019), with Bach’s own example and Handel’s Messiah already cramming the limited seasonal space available? And who would start this work, after a gurgle of woodwind and a lilting Scots air, with that most tinkling, twinkly of instruments, the celesta – best known for its use in a sweeter Christmas favourite, the Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy from Tchaikovsky’s Nutcracker? The celestial reverie is soon punctuated by a volley of solo timpani, an anger unleashed. Human suffering, characterised by Herod’s massacre of the innocents, figures prominently in this two-part work, each half opening and closing with orchestral interludes. Texts, in Latin, English and Scottish Gaelic, are drawn from poetry, liturgy and scripture, deftly interwoven. Scored for a moderate sized orchestra, with a percussion section including the different timbres of hi-hat, cabasa, timbales, vibraphone and xylophone, as well as harp and celesta, it achieves sonic range via economic means. The entire composition – its UK premiere given by the work’s co-commissioners, the London Philharmonic Orchestra and Choir, conducted by Mark Elder – is riven with short fortissimo outbursts as brutal as the four-part choral writing is at times exquisite and hushed. The babe-in-manger chorus at the start of Part 2, O magnum mysterium, from the matins for Christmas Day, could stand alone, though this majestic work deserves full performance. The two soloists, soprano Lucy Crowe at her ethereal best and baritone Roderick Williams, expressive and articulate, provide meditative arias – poetry by Robert Southwell, John Donne and John Milton, sometimes with elaborate, Bach-like violin solo (Pieter Schoeman). The London Philharmonic Choir (director Neville Creed) sang impressively throughout, the tenors, fewer in number than sopranos, altos and basses, occasionally sounding in need of a few more recruits, but always musical and accurate. No surprise to find the audience giving orchestra, chorus, conductor, soloists and, above all, composer a standing ovation. More cheers erupted on Wednesday when Vladimir Jurowski, for 14 years the LPO’s revered principal conductor, returned for the first time in his new emeritus role (also relayed live on BBC Radio 3). There wasn’t one weak link in this ambitious programme. The world premiere of Brett Dean’s revised Notturno inquieto was miasmic and glistening, microscopic in sonic detail, bold in aim (with superb playing, especially, from principal violas, low woodwind, trombones, percussion – OK, let’s say everyone). In two mid-20th century Russian works – Shostakovich’s Violin Concerto No 1 in A minor, Op 77 and Rachmaninov’s Symphony No 3 – the players’ assurance and virtuosity bore golden fruit. The Rachmaninov was taut, intense, poetic. The Shostakovich engages in that same struggle MacMillan confronts in his Oratorio: songlike beauty constantly rising above aural brutality, encapsulated in the stupefying cadenza. Jurowski might have been the returning hero but the solo violinist, the phenomenal Alina Ibragimova, was the night’s brilliant star. Star ratings (out of five) James MacMillan’s Christmas Oratorio ★★★★★ LPO/Jurowski ★★★★★ James MacMillan’s Christmas Oratorio is available to listen to in its world premiere performance from January 2021 in Amsterdam The London Philharmonic Orchestra’s concert with Vladimir Jurowski and Alina Ibragimova is on BBC SoundsUp until a few weeks before his death, Mike Nesmith was touring as the Monkees with Micky Dolenz, the band’s other surviving member, performing I’m A Believer, Pleasant Valley Sunday, Daydream Believer et al, on what was billed as their farewell tour. There was a certain sweet irony in that. Nesmith was famously the Monkee most horrified by how prefabricated the Prefab Four were supposed to be. Already a gifted songwriter when he signed on for the TV show that would make him famous (Screen Gems, the company behind The Monkees, bought a couple of Nesmith’s songs for the show, although they turned down Different Drum, subsequently the song that launched Linda Ronstadt’s career) he was furious at the restrictions placed on them by producer Don Kirshner. At the height of their fame, it was Nesmith who bluntly informed a US magazine that the band didn’t play on their records – “I don’t care if we never sell another record … tell the world we don’t record our own music” – and that their current album, More of the Monkees, was “probably the worst album in the history of the world”. It was Nesmith who legendarily became so outraged by Kirshner and lawyer Herb Moelis’ high-handed treatment of the band that he put his fist through the wall of Kirshner’s Beverly Hills hotel room and informed Moelis “that could have been your face”. It was the first in a number of genuinely groundbreaking things that Mike Nesmith would do: albeit unwittingly, he had singlehandedly minted the figure of the manufactured pop band’s loose cannon, unable to cope with the strictures of being stage-managed, willing to blow the gaff in order to escape them: a recurring character in subsequent pop history. At the time, Nesmith’s behaviour caused chaos – weirdly, rather than laud him for standing up for himself and his bandmates, the press turned on the Monkees, decrying them as “a disgrace to the pop world” – but he eventually won the fight: Kirshner was fired, and the band took control of their own musical direction. Nevertheless, Nesmith’s attitude to the Monkees seemed to remain equivocal at best. The brilliant country rock albums he made in the 70s didn’t receive the reaction they deserved, at least at the time: it was as if the Monkees’ manufactured legacy clung to his name, regardless of the music he made. Even when the Monkees’ oeuvre was reassessed as a subject befitting scholarly box sets and the TV series reshown on MTV to huge success, Nesmith remained detached. He would sometimes take part in band reunion tours and recording sessions, but usually declined. When he did agree, said reunions sometimes ended acrimoniously. “He’s always been this aloof, inaccessible person,” protested Davy Jones in 1997, “the fourth part of the jigsaw puzzle that never fit.” And yet, for the last decade of his life, Nesmith happily participated in projects featuring the Monkees’ name – long tours, and an acclaimed 2016 album Good Times!, which came with songwriting contributions from Paul Weller, Noel Gallagher and Rivers Cuomo of Weezer. On the final tour, according to the band’s latterday manager, Andrew Sandoval, Nesmith was given to making an unscripted speech onstage “about his relationship to the fans … [telling] them he knew and cared about them, and that he liked the Monkees and he liked Monkees fans”. The question of what changed is an interesting one. Perhaps the deaths of Davy Jones in 2012 and then Peter Tork in 2019 caused Nesmith to rethink his past. Or perhaps he felt that his own reputation as a musician and songwriter had become so established that the spectre of the 60s most famous manufactured boyband no longer mattered. Since the rise of Americana as a genre, he had come to be hailed as a genuinely innovative figure in the history of country rock. The Byrds had sneered at the Monkees on 1967’s So You Want To Be a Rock and Roll Star, but a couple of months before they released their genre-defining country-rock album Sweetheart of the Rodeo, you could hear Nesmith pushing the Monkees towards his own definition of cosmic American music on Tapioca Tundra, from 1968’s The Birds the Bees and the Monkees, a direction he explored further the following year on Don’t Wait For Me and the glorious Listen To the Band. His 1970s albums – some with the First National Band, some released as solo projects – had long outgrown their small cult following to be acclaimed as masterpieces of the genre. And quite rightly so: listen to 1970’s Magnetic South, or its follow-up Loose Salute, and you don’t hear someone following in the wake of the Flying Burrito Brothers or the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band, but a supremely gifted songwriter intent on forging his own eccentric path through a musical fusion. Just before Covid hit, Nesmith was to be found performing 1972’s …And The Hits Just Keep On Coming live in the company of alt-rock luminaries Ben Gibbard of Death Cab For Cutie and REM alumnus Scott McCaughey. Meanwhile, his 1974 album The Prison – heavy on synthesisers and drum machines, home to the implausibly beautiful Dance Between the Raindrops, and released with an accompanying novella – went from being dismissed as “ghastly” and the work of a “crackpot” to being celebrated as a uniquely innovative triumph. And then there was the story that Nesmith had subsequently “invented” MTV: always fascinated by the potential of pop video, he had sold his video-based 1979 TV show PopClips to Time Warner, who, director William Dear said, “watered down the idea and came up with MTV”. It became so widespread that he gained a reputation as the forefather of the most powerful force in 1980s pop promotion. It was an entirely deserved and correct rewriting of history, that belatedly gave Nesmith the acclaim due to him. Maybe it altered his view of the band that kickstarted his career and that had, after all, provided a home for a succession of fabulous examples of his skill as a songwriter: not just his early country-rock experiments, but Papa Gene’s Blues; Mary, Mary; You Just May Be The One and Circle Sky, the latter his ferocious contribution to the soundtrack of the cult film Head. Certainly, at the end of his life, Papa Nez, as he styled himself, sounded like a man who had made his peace with his past. “I kind of feel like he wanted to say that he finally got it,” said Sandoval of the speech Nesmith made at the last shows he performed, “that he got why they liked it, whereas he didn’t always.” • This article was amended on 11 December 2021. In an earlier version Don Kirshner’s surname was misspelled as “Kirscher”.It was where many of the best things in life were brought together: art, food, wine, sex, the natural environment. And it had a hand in creating some of the UK’s most highly regarded postwar painters, including Lucian Freud and Maggi Hambling. Benton End was an extraordinary place where aspiring artists lived and studied under the tutelage of Cedric Morris and his lover Arthur Lett-Haines. Now it is being celebrated in an exhibition that for the first time brings together the alumni of the East Anglian School of Painting and Drawing. As well as Freud and Hambling, students included Frances Hodgkins, Valerie Thornton, David Carr, Lucy Harwood and Richard Chopping. They lived and worked at the pink 16th century farmhouse near Hadleigh, Suffolk, where there was as much emphasis on gardening and cooking as there was on art. Several works lent to the Firstsite gallery in Colchester have not been seen in public before. They include The Woodpeckers, a painting by Morris of two red-headed birds astride branches against a wintry backdrop, which for decades has been hanging in a private home, slowly cracking and discolouring with age. Morris and Lett, as he was known, “taught in a very hands-off way,” said Ben Coode-Adams, an Essex artist and chair of the Victor Batte-Lay Foundation, an art collection with a focus on East Anglia. “It was more about working together and, although they were clearly in a leadership role, they weren’t dictatorial. It was really about just doing the work. They were interested in people who buckled down.” Hambling, who began studying at Benton End while still at school, said the farmhouse was “really where life began”. In an interview in 2017, she said: “Part of the attraction for me aged 15 was that it was called the artists’ house and notorious for every vice under the sun.” Benton End was considered very louche, said Coode-Adams. “There were always a lot of people, a lot of drinking, always very good food. It was quite extreme partying for the time.” The house was “notoriously filthy – no one ever cleared up”, and there was plenty of sexual activity, with Lett-Haines taking a series of female lovers alongside his lifelong relationship with Morris. The East Anglian School of Painting and Drawing was established by the couple in 1937, initially in Dedham, Essex. Sixty students enrolled within nine months. After the Dedham house burned down – apparently as a result of a cigarette discarded by Freud – the school was re-established at Benton End, where it continued for 40 years. There Morris devoted as much time to horticulture as he did art, although the two often overlapped when he painted plants and flowers. Students were also encouraged to paint in Benton End’s extensive gardens. He rose at dawn to weed his beloved flower beds, leaving Lett-Haines in bed until noon. Morris produced at least 90 new varieties of iris, travelling frequently to the Mediterranean and North Africa to find species to transport back to Suffolk. He also bred birds. Lett-Haines was uninterested in the garden, but passionate about food and cooking. Hambling recalled him serving couscous, which was almost unheard of in England in the early postwar years. His dishes, served to the artists’ community twice a day, included other foods that were unusual at the time, including garlic, olives, and aubergines grown in the garden. Copious amounts of red wine accompanied meals. Benton End had a certain “vibe”, said Stuart Tulloch, head of programme at Firstsite. “This was a cool place. It was liberal and open.” Although it produced well-known artists, there were others who studied at the school that “have never had that recognition”. The exhibition was “lifting a stone and finding teeming life underneath it”. In keeping with the Benton End ethos, the exhibition rooms are dotted with easels and paints to encourage visitors to create their own works, which will then be hung on the walls next to the main displays. Firstsite is also running workshops on wellbeing, cooking and gardening alongside the exhibition to reflect the character of the school. Life with Art “brings together a stunning selection of paintings, sculptures, etchings and drawings showcasing the amazing artists and creative talent which emanates from East Anglia,” said Sally Shaw, director of Firstsite. The aim was to “evoke a real sense of Benton End”. The influence of the school had been far-reaching, she said. “Morris was the only person of his generation to achieve national status as both an artist and a gardener, and our exhibition explores how these two disciplines intertwined to form one of the most remarkable artistic environments of the 20th century.” In 2019, Benton End was bought by the Pinchbeck trust. It plans to reopen the house and gardens as a centre for art and horticulture administered by the Garden Museum. Life with Art: Benton End and the East Anglian School of Painting and Drawing is at the Firstsite gallery in Colchester, Essex, until April 2022.Every day, tens of millions sink into their sofas, turn on the television and enjoy the earworms of the composers Banks and Wag. They have penned the pulsing tension music when someone is voted off the X Factor. They are behind the buildup when a number drops on the national lottery; the 15-second intro to one of Netflix’s biggest-ever international kids’ hits, Mighty Little Bheem; the most recent theme tune to Blue Peter and – inescapable to anyone who has parented a preschooler in the last six years – the disco-funk opener to CBeebies’ wildly popular show, Go Jetters. And yet, Chris Banks and Wag Marshall-Page remain unknown to almost all those who hear, hum and stream their catchy melodies. “There are not many countries in the world that aren’t showing one of our shows, and yet we are anonymous,” says Banks. The two composers are full of beans and bouncing around their home music studios – Banks in Hertfordshire and Marshall-Page in London – on a Zoom call. This year is their ninth scoring the CBeebies Christmas show. “You see a young audience responding to your music and that’s great,” says Banks. Banks, 43, and Marshall-Page, 46, first met 25 years ago at university in London. Banks grew up in Brecon, Wales, and was inspired by his high school music teacher; Marshall-Page used to hide copies of Guitarist magazine in his GCSE German textbook at school in Newbury, Berkshire. In 1996, at the height of Britpop, they both enrolled at the University of Westminster to study commercial music, and became friends and housemates. They joined “every band going”, including a 15-piece drum’n’bass setup, an indie outfit and a covers group. “We seemed to play every venue Coldplay had just played, but they were the better investment,” says Banks. After graduating in 1999, they picked up radio jingle gigs for Dutch compost and Russian margarine companies among others, and got regular work engineering, programming and performing with early-00s Top of the Pops regulars including Sophie Ellis-Bextor, Blue and the Sugababes. Banks played keys for Busted for two years, touring in Japan and playing at Wembley, while Marshall-Page travelled the world playing bass with his band, Infadels, supporting the Prodigy and Faithless in the UK. Then, around the late 2000s, they had kids. They don’t miss the 4am bedtimes that were typical when touring: “There were no regrets about hanging up the stage clothes,” says Marshall-Page. “We spent less time touring and more time watching CBeebies.” They realised then that it was not only children who were watching kids’ shows, but also the parents. “We felt we could write music that would help to draw them in as well as kids,” says Marshall-Page. “If we could get the premise of Dutch compost over in 30 seconds, we could get the premise of a disco-loving unicorn driving a spaceship over in 30 seconds, too.” He’s referring to the music to CBeebies’s Go Jetters, a show about four explorers who travel the world on a spaceship piloted by their unicorn teacher, Ubercorn. “That’s probably the one we’re best known for. We get sent videos, on Twitter, of kids singing along or messages from mums who’ve found themselves humming it in a meeting till another parent asks: ‘Is that Go Jetters?’” he says. Friends of Marshall-Page’s 11-year-old daughters used to collar him in the playground: “They’d come running up saying, ‘You’re the Go Jetters guy!’ Parents too.” Before Go Jetters, the pair struck up working relationships at the BBC by dialling the switchboard and blagging their way through to producers. In 2010 they penned music for another CBeebies hit, ZingZillas. Jazz singer Cleo Laine and glam rockers the Darkness stopped by for cameos because their kids were huge fans of the show. They do jingles for adults, too, from The X Factor to Radio 4’s Dead Ringers and ITV’s reality spin-off Sam and Billie: The Mummy Diaries. But there isn’t much of a difference between those jobs and writing for CBeebies, says Marshall-Page: “Whether it’s kids, adults or a family, in essence it’s the same approach. A kid might respond to a melody or lyric in a different way to an adult but both compositions rely on finding an idea and refining it until you come up with the best version. The moment you say: ‘Ah bosh it out – this is just for kids’ is the moment you might as well give up.” The secret to a good jingle, says Banks, is building a world which sets the tone for what viewers are about to see: “Sonically, you encapsulate a show in 30 seconds. Hitting on a theme that works basically comes from us wandering around our homes humming to ourselves, enunciating, investigating melodies. If it’s still memorable on day two, that’s when you know it’s sticky.” In March 2019, they briefly topped the Billboard charts in Japan, beating Ed Sheeran and Queen, when their theme tune to a Japanese TV drama [Mr Hiiragi’s Homeroom] became the soundtrack to a TikTok dance challenge. “There’s a video of the Japanese prime minister learning the routine,” says Banks. The line between pop stardom and jingle-writing is far less entrenched than one might think. “You’re also part of a TV and theatre team at the top of their game, working with musicians who toured with pop stars one month and are brass-playing, tap-dancing reindeers the next,” says Marshall-Page. But they are happy with their anonymity. “For us, the fact that we’re two names you might vaguely remember from some end credits means we get to do different, fun projects without any of the baggage of what came before,” says Marshall-Page. “A handful of people on Twitter and Mumsnet know who we are – and we like it that way.” As comprehensive school kids who had no industry contacts, they recently signed up to support the Arts Emergency charity which supports young people trying to break through. “It’s harder now than it was for us in the 90s,” says Banks. “When you didn’t have tuition fees and only had to scrape together £100 a week for London rent, there were lots of people from ordinary backgrounds, like us, in the industry. Now, a lot of people working in telly have to undertake low or unpaid internships, which excludes some young people. If you don’t see people like you or can’t rely on the bank of mum and dad, it’s a real barrier.” Next year promises a new Netflix series, BBC work and talk of writing music for a feature film. The pair meet to work in their south London studio most days but things can be unpredictable – it’s no nine-to-five. “We never know what’s coming and that’s why it’s brilliant,” says Banks. “A couple of years ago, we got a call from the Brand New Heavies. They’d heard the Go Jetters theme and wanted to collaborate. It turns out pop stars are up with the kids at 6am, too.” The CBeebies Christmas show The Night Before Christmas airs Saturday, 9.30am &amp; 3.10pm, CBeebies.Mills in monochrome Taking the baton from Rebecca Hall’s recently released film Passing, C’mon C’mon is another classily shot monochrome affair, this time from US director/writer/artist/all-round-creator Mike Mills (husband of director/writer/artist/all-round-creator Miranda July). Joaquin Phoenix stars; “impressively contrived”, says the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw. It’s Mills’s fourth feature film. That Mike Mills? Mike Mills (director) shouldn’t be confused with Mike Mills (musician) – though at some point you have to imagine their paths crossed in a Gen X version of the Spider-Man meme. The latter, of course, was a key member of alt rock behemoths REM. (Don’t go back to) Portman Road Though REM’s star waned in the 2000s – they gracefully called it quits in 2011 – the group could still pull in a large crowd, such as a UK tour in 2005, culminating in a concert in Hyde Park. Along the way, they played at Portman Road, home of Ipswich Town FC. Back in their late-70s glory days, full-back and captain Mick Mills was a Town legend alongside manager Bobby Robson and John Wark’s moustache. What’s the frequency, Kevin? Mick Mills briefly captained England at the 1982 World Cup, standing in for the injured Kevin Keegan. In his own be-permed 70s heyday, Keegan released a pop single – a strange thing that footballers used to do. Head Over Heels in Love reached No 31 in the UK charts. The song wasco-written by Chris Norman, who had had a 1978 hit, Stumblin’ In, with pioneering rocker Suzi Quatro. Stumblin’ on In 1978, Quatro appeared as Leather Tuscadero in beloved 50s-set sitcom Happy Days. Jump forward to 1994 and you’ll find Happy Days appropriated ingeniously in Weezer’s Buddy Holly video, directed by Spike Jonze. Jonze’s most recent feature, Her, from 2014, also starred Joaquin Phoenix. Both having jumped through commercials, music videos and films at roughly the same time – and both with Coppola connections (Mills has a production company with Roman; Jonze was married to Sofia) – Mills and Jonze are almost as easily confused as Mills (director) and Mills (musician), but not Mills (Mick). Watch 20th Century Women. Mills’s previous feature film was a hazy, poignant 70s family drama led by a brilliant Annette Bening (see also Christopher Plummer’s Oscar-winning turn in Mills’s 2010 Beginners). Eat In Interview magazine, Miranda July charted 15 years of gifts she had been given by a handyman in her east LA neighbourhood, including delicious and healthy(ish) Inka plantain chips.Some of Britain’s most prestigious universities are among those to have shared in funds totalling at least £89m from major oil companies in the last four years, an investigation has found. Oxford, Cambridge and Imperial College London are among the universities to have been given funding from some of the world’s biggest companies, according to new research by openDemocracy. In recent months there has been increasing pressure on institutions to break links with fossil fuel companies. Last month, more than 40 senior academics and scientists signed an open letter vowing not to work with the Science Museum over its financial ties to major oil corporations. The museum faced several resignations over ties with Shell and a newly announced deal with the renewables company Adani Green Energy, part of the Adani Group, which has major holdings in coal. The new research found that Imperial College London had accepted £54m since 2017 – by far the most of any institution surveyed. It included £39m from Shell, with which the college has said it has a “longstanding and fruitful partnership”. Imperial said the confidentiality of private contracts meant it could not reveal exactly what the money was used for, stating that it funded research into “energy transition, lowering carbon emissions in extraction and in carbon mitigation measures”. Cambridge University received more than £14m from oil giants, while Oxford got almost £8m. These include large donations to Oxford’s Said Business School Centre for Corporate Reputation. OpenDemocracy used the Freedom of Information Act to ask universities for details of any funding they had accepted since 2017 from eight of the biggest oil firms: BP, Shell, Total, Equinor, Eni, Chevron, Exxon or ConocoPhillip. The figures include donations, gifts, grants and research funding. In total, 36 universities said they had received funding from eight oil giants, with others refusing to disclose whether they had received similar funding. Southampton, Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Bath universities also took more than £1m each from the oil firms. In total, universities said they had received £89m – but the true figure could be far higher, because many failed to provide details. “By accepting millions of pounds in grants and sponsorship from the fossil fuel industry, UK universities are complicit in propping up and legitimising the existence and operations of some of the most harmful companies on the planet,” said Rianna Gargiulo, divestment campaigner at Friends of the Earth. “The revelation of these sponsorship deals tarnishes the reputations of the UK’s leading academic institutions, including those like the University of Cambridge that have committed to divesting from fossil fuels.” Caroline Lucas, the MP for Brighton Pavilion, said: “Let’s be clear – there is no justification for taking money from oil and gas firms and no justification for being complicit in greenwashing of these big corporations.” Some universities refused to reveal details of any links. The London School of Economics said it could not reveal any information because it would “prejudice the commercial interests of the school, by making it more difficult to raise funds from private donors in the future”. The University of Surrey also refused to disclose details of its research funding from BP, on the advice of BP itself. “After contacting BP, they confirmed that they consider the specific amount of the funding as being commercially sensitive,” the university said. Imperial College defended its funding, saying it helped to “develop meaningful solutions to climate change”. It added: “We are using our influence and expertise to accelerate this transition, and we actively engage with energy companies to push them toward the Paris agreement targets.” Cambridge University said that since October 2020, it had accepted funding from oil companies only if the collaboration would help the UK “transition to decarbonised energy”. It said: “Over the past five years funding from traditional energy sector partnerships represented about 0.5% of the University of Cambridge’s combined annual research and philanthropic income.” Oxford University said: “Those donating money or sponsoring programmes at the university have no influence over how academics carry out their research or what conclusions they reach. Our partnerships with industry allow the university to apply its knowledge to real challenges of pressing global concern, with funding often going directly into research into climate-related issues and renewables.”Exo One transposes the humble, tactile pleasures of rolling a marble along a gulley or skimming a pebble across a clear lake into a planet-straddling adventure told with all the humming sci-fi style of Stanley Kubrick’s 2001. You pilot a spherical spacecraft, powered solely by kinetic energy, across barren alien vistas, using the rise and fall of the land and your ability to increase or diminish gravity’s effect on your craft to fling your ship into the air. While soaring, you may momentarily flatten your ship into a discus shape, using air currents to provide further lift until your store of glowing power is exhausted, when you must return to the land below to recharge. On each planet your goal is simple: reach the ramp-like monolith somewhere on the horizon that is firing a beam of incandescent guiding light into the stratosphere. When touched, the monolith will shoot you into a vortex of rippling lights and flickering images on to the next planetary body. Each planet varies widely in terrain. One is covered in blustery deserts, another in rolling, milky seas. Your ship is impervious to lava, Plutonian colds and the kind of gravitational forces that would suck the rivets from the hull of an aeroplane. Much of the game’s tactile pleasure comes from gaining momentum to soar high above the land and take in these exquisite, desolate vistas. There are none of the dials and tickers that usually clutter the screen in sci-fi games and films: your HUD is empty save for the occasional text prompt to inform you of your distance to the monolith, or the raindrops that smear across the screen. The uninterrupted views and undulating rhythms invite a near meditative state, the thrill of which deepens as your skill at manoeuvring the craft increases. A joyous, otherworldly ride.The parents of a 15-year-old autistic girl who died by suicide after her school did not monitor her online activity have described the circumstances of her death as a “catastrophic failure” as they warned the Department for Education (DfE) against complacency. Frances-Rose Thomas, known as Frankie, took her own life at home in Witley, Surrey, on 25 September 2018 after reading a story that involved suicide on a school iPad, which had no safety features. Her parents, Judy and Andy, said their daughter “was not safe at school” and hoped their girl’s death could at least be a “wake-up call” to DfE. Frankie was allowed unfiltered access to the iPad while attending Stepping Stones school in Hindhead, in contravention of her “bespoke education plan”, an inquest into her death heard earlier this year. An investigation into the device after her death found Frankie had been able to access online material relating to self-harm and suicide over several months. Coroner Karen Henderson described the way in which schools self-moderate material online as the “wild west” and said she was satisfied this was an “enormous and systemic failure on the part of the school”. She told the education secretary action should be taken to prevent future deaths, and called for the DfE to impose rules every educational establishment must follow. Existing guidelines issued by the DfE, she added, “require updating and are insufficiently robust to ensure their effectiveness”. “I find the way in which Stepping Stones school failed to ensure sufficient e-monitoring of Frankie’s iPad, and follow her bespoke educational plan, more than minimally contributed to her actions later that day,” Henderson said. Frankie’s parents, Judy and Andy Thomas, thanked the coroner for her report, which they said “mirrors many of our concerns about the lack of robust guidance from the Department for Education regarding e-safety in schools”. They called for more thorough inspections exceeding mere assurances from a school about their policies, such as monitored safeguarding alerts, and physical control checks of a school’s e-safety equipment. They said: “Frankie was not safe at school, despite inspections, and parents need to know that their child’s internet access at school has full protections in place. “The internet can be an extremely dangerous place, particularly for those with special educational needs like Frankie and what happened to her was a catastrophic failure. “There really are no words to describe the shock of your child suddenly dying one day – just like that – which you can never change, and we hope it will be a wake-up call which will sharpen focus regarding safety, and not just be another sad story with nothing significant changing by the Department for Education. “There must not be any complacency and there should be proactive commitment to a plan to enforce this guidance and continuously update it to reflect the ever-changing nature of the internet and the various sites that pupils may try to access. “We trust that policies will be enforced, and that guidance will not just be ‘a choice’ when pupils’ lives may be at real risk, and that this will truly result in the prevention of future deaths.” A government spokesperson said: “This tragic case highlights the vital importance of protecting children, but particularly the most vulnerable, from harmful content online – both at home and at school.” They added that the forthcoming online safety bill would help “prevent children from accessing self-harm and suicide content”. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.A former Tory councillor has been convicted of killing his wife by deliberately running over her in his Mercedes at their home in France. David Turtle, 67, was found guilty of murder by a French court and sentenced to 14 years in jail. The court at Agen in south-west France decided Turtle had deliberately driven his estate car at his wife, Stephanie, after an argument over a television programme. Police found the victim under the Mercedes in March 2017; her chest had been crushed and she had suffered severe internal injuries leading to suffocation, according to an autopsy. Turtle had claimed it was a terrible accident and he had no idea his wife, 50, was in front of or under the car when he drove off. Defence lawyers said the accused loved his wife, had no motive for killing her and there was no proof he had done so. Turtle was taken from the court to jail, but has announced he will appeal against the verdict. However, Maître Matthieu Chirez, representing the victim’s sister Catherine Seymour, told the court: “It’s not possible that he is unable to explain what happened. To say Stephanie Turtle voluntarily lay under the wheels [of the vehicle], knowing that he wanted to drive off, doesn’t make sense.” Chirez said Turtle had changed his version of events in the time since the accident. Experts said Turtle would have had great difficulty running over his wife without enormous acceleration of the car. “And that’s what he did, he ran her over … For those few seconds, that’s the horror he did to her,” Chirez told the court. The public prosecutor Patrick Serra said: “David Turtle could not have been unaware that Stephanie Turtle was in front of the car when he drove over her body.” He said there was no evidence the body had been dragged along by the vehicle. He said the accused had begun to change his story as soon as he had access to the investigation file. “He says: ‘I am the only one who knows what happened’, but this doesn’t mean that he is telling the truth … when he pressed the [accelerator] pedal, he crushed her and he couldn’t ignore the fact that she was in front,” Serra added. Maître Laurent Bruneau, from Turtle’s defence team, argued that while Turtle had killed he wife, he had not done so deliberately and said the case had been built on assuming the accused’s guilt. He said that his client was being tried because of inconsistencies in his version of events and asked: “Can anyone be coherent in such situations, after the death of his wife?” “In losing her he lost everything. Of course he killed her, how can it be said otherwise? But it was an accident. He did not see her, and has always said that.” Major Alain Chauvin, a former police officer who investigated the death, told the court that none of the witnesses questioned in connection with the death believed it was an accident. He said Turtle’s wife could not have got in front of the car without him seeing her. In a blog she kept, Stephanie Turtle mused on whether her husband treasured his new car more than he did her, saying he “mollycoddled” the vehicle and lavished it with near-obsessive attention. Jayne Clarke, 63, a friend who lived nearby, suggested David Turtle, who had not learned French, was unhappy in his new home. “I felt David was anxious, he didn’t want to stay in France any more. I felt that David was withdrawing from the [bed-and-breakfast] project and that his enthusiasm seemed to have diminished,” Carmen said. Catherine Goupil, a clinical psychologist, told the court that Turtle had received 140 letters of support from friends who couldn’t understand how he could be accused of murder. She said the couple had “a rather fusional relationship”. The couple had met in Turkey on a holiday for single people in 1996 and had no children. He had left his job as a Mercedes dealer and resigned as a Conservative councillor in Bournemouth’s Kinson North ward, and Stephanie left the human resources department of Dorset council in 2016, to move to Prayssac to run a bed-and-breakfast. “I loved my wife and I love her even more now than before because my heart is broken after what happened,” he said. “Stephanie was the love of my life. It took me 40 years to find her,” Turtle told the court. After the three-day hearing, Chirez told the Guardian: “David Turtle’s version of events made no sense. It’s perfectly impossible that he didn’t see her or hear her that evening, and so it is clear that he deliberately ran her over and killed her. “The technical investigations confirm this fact, and this is what the jury decided. Stephanie’s family and especially her sister are relieved and will continue to show the same decency they have since this terrible crime happened. She was extremely close to her sister and it is obviously a huge loss for her.” He said he and his colleagues would continue to assist the victim’s family.For a double national treasure, one who could justifiably be claimed by two countries, Neil Young is hardly the most enigmatic of musical elder statesmen. Put together, the Canadian-born American’s last two albums (2019’s Colorado and now, Barn) state exactly where, and how, they were made – in a barn, in this longtime Californian’s recently adopted Colorado. Largely recorded live, both albums pair Young with his most charged powerhouse of a backing band, Crazy Horse. Perhaps more significantly, Barn is probably the least frustrating new Young album in some time. These are 10 cogent songs about love and life, about the recent past, the years long gone and our future, delivered with verve, emotion and snarls of six-string authority. Infamously, Young’s one-time label Geffen sued this prolific but bloody-minded artist in 1983 for delivering records that “were not commercial in nature and musically uncharacteristic of Young’s previous records”. Laughably, Barn actually fulfils most of those criteria. This is a Crazy Horse record that is both raucous and highly tuneful, saturated with in-band bonhomie. “The horse’s gait in the rhythm I feel somehow/ And the melody I play,” Young croons on the album opener, Song of the Seasons. He might be referring to the equine lope that underpins a number of Barn’s tunes, but it’s no leap at all to imagine Young means the other seventysomethings arrayed behind him in the draughty outbuilding, a structure captured on the video for another of Barn’s nuanced and engrossing tracks, Welcome Back. The Horse have shape-shifted a little of late, of course: guitar stalwart Frank “Poncho” Sampedro retired after 2012’s Psychedelic Pill. As on Colorado, his place is filled by Nils Lofgren, who played with Crazy Horse in the early 70s before becoming a pillar of Bruce Springsteen’s E Street Band. Lofgren’s presence is key: subtle but undeniable. Naturally, Lofgren turns up his amp for the classic, two-guitar Crazy Horse workouts – the swinging, growling Canerican, say – an autobiographical ballad in which Young pledges his troth to those twin motherlands as the band hit their resonant stride. “Canerican is what I am,” he avows, “all colours is what I am/ Stand by my brother for freedom in this land.” There’s plenty of gnarl on offer on tracks such as the furious Human Race, which imagines the blasted heath of “fires and floods” that gas-guzzling humanity is leaving in its wake. Just as often, though, Lofgren plays honky-tonk piano or accordion, lending Barn a shimmying prettiness that goes beyond the more typical Crazy Horse cordite burn. The fault that seasoned NY&amp;CH fans will find with Barn is the relative dearth of guitar fireworks. The fadeout at the end of Canerican, mid-solo, is a perverse and self-defeating act. But the tilt towards tinkle and wheeze means that bittersweet songs gain in melancholy, as with the harmonica-and-accordion call-and-response on Song of the Seasons. Another key track, Heading West, galumphs along cheerily, Young’s guitar to the fore, recalling his idyllic childhood and his parents’ divorce, retold here as a road trip out west with his mother. The song’s breeziness is underpinned by Lofgren’s insouciant work on keys. At 76, Young is all about embracing change, prompted to some degree by his relationship with actor and environmentalist Daryl Hannah. She’s the subject of the album’s gooey centrepiece, Shape of You (nothing to do with the friskier Ed Sheeran song). Love suffuses a number of these tracks, few more so than the final cut, Don’t Forget Love. Emphasised by Crazy Horse’s falsetto backing vocals, it’s an admonition to lean into one’s better feelings. The crowning glory of this album, though, pairs Young’s tendency to baldly auto-describe with a sense of profound, possibly existential uncertainty. On one level the slow-burning They Might Be Lost finds Young and his other half pacing on the porch waiting for some guys in a truck, maybe to move some of the couple’s gear from one rural redoubt to another. (Young and Hannah recently bought a property in Omemee, Ontario, where he grew up.) This domestic scene finds Young killing time, reminiscing about the old days through “the smoke that I burn”. But the weather is changing. The truck is late. “The boys” might be lost. It’s hard to know. And the past? Who knows about that either. “The jury is out on the old days, you know,” sings Young, “the judgment is soon coming down/ I can’t quite remember what it was that I knew.” This song about not-knowing finds Crazy Horse at their most elegant and consolatory: Young’s warm harmonica and Lofgren’s discreet keys having their own quiet conversation as the rhythm section of Ralph Molina and Billy Talbot bears a steady, unobtrusive witness to Young’s thousand-yard stare.Judith Csiki is an art historian and curator at Sammlung Moderne Kunst in the Pinakothek der Moderne, focusing on contemporary art from the Middle East and east Asia Food One of my favourite restaurants is Schumann’s bar, which offers classic cocktails and a canteen-style reduced menu of five or six dishes, including Bavarian potato salad and steak. Even late at night, when the kitchen has closed, they serve a “TV plate” with German bread, cheese, ham and pickles. In summer you can sit out front, facing the busy Ludwigstrasse, or in the back, looking over the Hofgarten, a beautiful retreat which was part of the former royal residence. Bratwurst Glöckl, near the Frauenkirche cathedral, serves traditional fare, such as Kaiserschmarrn (fluffy shredded pancake with rum-soaked raisins). Even if you just want a beer, they have one of the last of the so-called Stehausschank (standup bars) in the city centre. And Soy, opposite Massmannpark, serves great Vietnamese vegan food. Inspiration The Kunstareal – art district – is an area with outstanding museums such as the Glyptothek (Greek and Roman sculptures), the Lenbachhaus (Munich painters), the Museum Brandhorst (contemporary art), and of course the three Pinakothek museums. In the Alte Pinakothek you’ll find great works, such as Albrecht Dürer’s Self-Portrait from 1500. While the Neue Pinakothek is being renovated, it also houses works by Gauguin, Klimt and Van Gogh. The Pinakothek der Moderne features work by Adnan, Beckmann, Claerbout, Flavin, Neshat, Sander and Palermo. Since the two universities are close by, there are many cafes and restaurants in this neighbourhood, plus the Words’ Worth and Munich Readery English-language bookshops. For a Christmas experience the Bayerische Nationalmuseum has a world-famous collection of nativity scenes made in the Alps and Italy between 1700 and the beginning of the 20th century. Neighbourhood Beyond the Kunstareal and universities district, the Glockenbachviertel, south of the city centre by the Isar River, has a lot of beautiful cafes and small shops, and is known for its vibrant nightlife and pub culture. I also like Giesing – home of the TSV 1860 football team and lots of Boazn (small local pubs) – and the Westend, with its multicultural community. If you’re into vinyl, check out Black Wave Records. Green space Munich is blessed with lots of beautiful parks, such as the Nymphenburger behind Nymphenburg Castle with all its pleasure palaces. And there is the Englischer Garten, which runs right through the northern half of the city along the River Isar. If you start at Ludwig Maximilian University, there are two ways to go: head north to the “wild” side of the English Garden, where you can walk through fields with grazing sheep. Head into the park and turn south, and it is busier, with attractions such as the Monopterus (Apollo Temple), the Biergarten am Chinesischen Turm and the famous human-made wave popular with surfers right next to the Haus der Kunst. Also in the southern half of the city, people swim in the Isar and enjoy a barbecue on the banks in an area called Flaucher. Nightlife I enjoy hanging out at the Favoritbar – a down-to-earth, shop-front bar near Munich’s main shopping mile of Kaufingerstrasse – and the High bar, a colourful cocktail bar that plays a lot of hip-hop.Kafe Kult is an underground live music venue a bit further from the centre, while the Blitz club hosts international DJs. Stay The Splendid Dollmann boutique hotel (doubles from €150 room-only) is furnished with 18th- and 19th-century antiques. It has a bar, a lovely garden, and is handy for the Englischer Garten, main sights and museums.The two genders: men and ‘earthen vessels’ Forget everything you ever thought you knew about pregnancy: a 26-year-old congressman, who will never be pregnant himself, has helpfully stepped in to explain the process to everyone. A fetus is just like a photograph, according to Madison Cawthorn, a rightwing congressman from North Carolina. During an anti-abortion speech on the House floor last week, Cawthorn proclaimed that having an abortion is like snatching a half-developed photograph of a sunset out of someone’s hand and ripping it to shreds. (You could almost see his brain working as he spoke: a photo develops … an embryo develops … wow, I am very smart!) I’m afraid it gets worse. Having delivered this torturous analogy, Cawthorn (who has been accused of sexually harassing college classmates and once advised mothers, “if you are raising a young man, please raise them to be a monster”), then switched to religious rhetoric. “Eternal souls woven into earthen vessels sanctified by almighty God and endowed with the miracle of life are denied their birth,” Cawthorn declared grandly. Weirdly, a lot of women weren’t too keen on being described as “earthern vessels,” and Cawthorn’s remarks quickly caused online outrage. Whenever women get upset about their rights being taken away by misogynistic extremists, you can always rely on a Reasonable Man™ to swoop in and explain how everyone’s overreacting. This incident was no exception: Grayson Quay argued in the Week that the women getting angry on the internet had misunderstood the biblical passages to which Cawthorn was alluding. “[I]t seems Cawthorn, a vocal evangelical Christian, was using ‘earthen vessels’ to refer not to the mother’s body, but to the body of the unborn baby,” Quay wrote. Even if that is what Cawthorn was referring to, it’s not much better is it? The separation of church and state is supposed to be a pillar of US democracy: we should all be alarmed by politicians who seem to think they are actually preachers. Cawthorn, after all, isn’t the only high-profile figure who seems to be trying to advance a Christian nationalist agenda. Josh Hawley, a pro-Trump senator from Missouri, has spoken about the need to “take the lordship of Christ, that message, into the public realm and to seek the obedience of the nations – of our nation … to influence our society, and even more than that, to transform our society to reflect the gospel truth and lordship of Jesus Christ.” And then, of course, there’s Michael Flynn, who served as Donald Trump’s first national security adviser in 2017. Last month Flynn made headlines by calling for the establishment of “one religion” in the US. “If we are going to have one nation under God, which we must, we have to have one religion,” Flynn told a crowd in San Antonio. “One nation under God and one religion under God.” I could go on and on: there are endless examples of influential leaders in the US calling for the creation of a “Christ-centered republic” and for the bible to influence policy. But while that rhetoric is alarming, it’s not as alarming as what’s been happening behind the scenes. In 2018 the researcher Frederick Clarkson exposed the existence of a Christian supremacist initiative called Project Blitz, which aimed to flood state legislatures with bills undermining the separation of Church and State. A 116-page strategy manual laid out the plan. 1) They’d smuggle Christianity into policy with covert strategies that gave the appearance they respected religious pluralism. “The playbooks advise legislators to cloak their religious mission in the guise of more secular intentions and they’ve renamed several bills to make them sound more appealing,” Clarkson reported. 2) They’d overwhelm state legislatures with so many bills that trying to fight them would be like a game of “whack-a-mole”. 3) They’d start with less controversial bills, such as those requiring or allowing the display of “In God We Trust” in public schools, and establish small victories first. Then they’d escalate. Clarkson’s reporting on Project Blitz, and the various exposes that followed, forced the project’s organizers into stealth mode, but they haven’t disappeared. Far from it: radicalized Christian nationalism is a growing threat to American democracy, as a relatively small but incredibly organized faction working to turn the country into something resembling a theocracy. Indeed, if the insurrection on 6 January had gone ever so slightly differently, people like Flynn might be turning their dreams of “one nation under God” into a reality at this very moment. Germany gets its first gender-equal cabinet After 16 years at the top of German politics, Angela Merkel is taking a well-deserved break. The country may no longer be led by a woman but Olaf Scholz, the new chancellor, has kept his election promise to appoint a gender-balanced cabinet. Germany also now has its first female foreign minister and its first female interior minister. Finnish PM apologizes for staying out clubbing until 4am despite Covid exposure Not a good look for Sanna Marin, 36, who has apologised for her lack of judgement. (Still, you’ve got to admire her stamina!) Poland plans to set up register of pregnancies to report miscarriages The proposed register would come into effect January 2022, a year after Poland introduced a near-total ban on abortion. As I wrote in last week’s newsletter, what’s happening in Poland is part of a global trend: countries around the world are escalating attempts to coerce women into having children. What, exactly, is an ‘underage girl’? As the Independent notes: “The Ghislaine Maxwell trial has revived a meaningless term that needs to be abolished: ‘underage girls’… Call them children, teens, teenage girls or minors, and call the crime committed against them what it is: sexual abuse. Not ‘sex with an underage girl’.” Camels enhanced with Botox barred from Saudi beauty contest Even camels are forced to adhere to unrealistic beauty standards! The week in pawtriarchy “It is likely that all cats have an element of psychopathy as it would have once been helpful for their ancestors in terms of acquiring resources,” a new study declares. If you’re wondering whether your furry friend falls into that cat-egory, there’s an online quiz you can take called the CAT-Tri+. In the meantime, maybe sleep with one eye open. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for orderI first met Charlie Watts in 1946, when I was four and he was five. We moved into new prefabs built after the war in Wembley Park – we were number 22, he was number 23 – and our mums hit it off pretty much straight away. We were very close, Charlie and me, throughout our lives. There was one point after he joined the Stones when we didn’t see each other for years, but when we did eventually reconnect, we picked up where we left off. Our relationship never really changed. From an early age we were both interested in jazz. It was a mutual thing. I used to listen to records in Charlie’s bedroom, discovering musicians such as Charlie Parker, Duke Ellington and Jelly Roll Morton. Later, when his dad bought him a drum kit and I got a double bass, we’d only been playing for a few months when we heard that a jazz band was doing auditions for a drummer and bass player. We did the audition and as we were the only ones that turned up we got the gig with the Jo Jones Seven and started doing weekly sessions at the Masons Arms pub in Edgware. He was always much sharper than me. He had style, Charlie, natural style. I’ve got some pictures of us playing at the Masons Arms, me in a scruffy old cardigan, him impeccably dressed in an Ivy League jacket. He was quiet and studious and very particular about things. One of his hobbies later on was collecting autographed photographs of famous jazz musicians. He also had a complete collection of PG Wodehouse first editions, each book in a little case. He absolutely adored his “stuff”, as he called it. He loved classic cars as well, though he couldn’t drive. He had a 1937 Lagonda and he used to just sit in it and turn the engine on. He loved it as an artefact. He had somebody who used to take him out for a spin. What a lifestyle! But it wasn’t a question of “look what I’ve got”. Everything he owned – Donald Bradman’s cricket cap, Sonny Greer’s drum set – he owned because he loved it. It’s a pity he didn’t open a museum. The Jo Jones Seven broke up after about a year and we went our different ways. Five years later, Charlie was touring the States with the Rolling Stones. Although he was terrific with the Stones, his first love was jazz. At the gigs, his room backstage was called the Cotton Club and he’d be playing Duke Ellington before going on stage. Joining this huge rock band was an accident. He was joining bands every other week and breaking up and he thought it would be the same thing with the Stones. When it took off, he was as surprised as anybody. He was always quite diffident about the Stones. It never affected him, it was just the thing that he did. He was the clean living one in the band, the family man. He hated going away on the road, he wanted to be home with his wife, Shirley. Although he did have a very shaky period in the mid-80s. I don’t know what sparked it off but he got involved with drugs quite seriously. Which is amazing, after 20 years of not touching anything. But then he just stopped overnight, because he realised he was in danger of losing everything. I really admire that. For a while afterwards, he didn’t do anything at all: he didn’t drink, he basically just lived on nuts. He denied himself everything for a year or two. We started playing together again in the 80s, when he formed the Charlie Watts Big Band, one of his many jazz projects. The last thing we did together was The ABC &amp; D of Boogie Woogie, from 2009 to 2012. He was a very thoughtful guy and always very polite. At Ronnie Scott’s, people would come to get things signed, books and records and stuff, and he did it without any qualms. As a drummer, he was a team player. He didn’t like doing solos. He never regarded himself as a star. He was playing for the band. Which is how he approached everything he did. He didn’t want the spotlight. But even though he blended in, he was a very strong presence in the Stones. I always felt like I couldn’t imagine the Stones without Charlie. He got on with the other members. They just happened to hit on the right chemistry from the beginning and it’s been going on nearly 60 years. Mick Jagger, Keith Richards and Charlie had really built up this strong relationship and then Ronnie Wood joined and it became what it is. They were completely different characters, all of them, but the chemistry held the band together. I miss Charlie very much. The last time I spoke to him was when he turned 80 in June. I called him on his birthday and we had a chat and everything was fine. He said: “Hope to see you soon.” And then a few months later I found out that he’d been in hospital for nine weeks. I was really shocked by that. My abiding memory of Charlie is of his kindness, his generosity, his thoughtfulness as a person. I deeply loved him. What can you say about somebody you’ve known since you were four years old? Growing up together, discovering music together, we became so close. How will he be remembered? Well, he’s a legend, isn’t he? He would say: “No, I’m not.” But he was a legend of drums, playing with the greatest rock band in the world. He won’t be forgotten.Living with my grandmother is probably my earliest memory, realising my mother had died and not really understanding it. Then, discovering food with my grandmother and learning to cook by her side. The most vivid memories are of standing in the kitchen and the smell of food. That stayed with me, the comfort of it. I’ve still got the Chitty Chitty Bang Bang car my mother gave me for my fourth birthday. It was the last birthday present she gave me. That means a lot. It sits on my shelf. She was 31 when she died. They don’t really know what it was, whether it was heart disease of some type. People say to me: “Does it make you a different person?” I have no idea. I had a fantastic childhood. We were allowed to be as adventurous as we wanted. We moved back with my dad when I was turning 10. Our back gate opened on to the beach in Melbourne. In 1970s Australia, there was no support for a single father. He had to get on with it. He was trying to create an orange juice business; he brought the Tetra Pak into Australia. An inspirational man and driven. I’ve always loved cooking. It was a thing I felt very comfortable doing. You can hide away in the kitchen and it’s a great place to find yourself. I like to feed people. I like to see people smile. Maybe it’s wanting to please them. When you cook for people, it’s giving. There’s a lot of you in food – and a lot of love. We chat incessantly, my wife Lisa [Faulkner] and I. I’ve never chatted to somebody so much in all my life. It’s really weird. What’s the secret to a happy relationship? Respect. Give and take. Allowing each person to breathe and have their say. People say: “She takes the mickey out of your accent and you prod her…” That’s our relationship, it’s a good one. I’m called Papa because, when I first had children, I didn’t want to be called Dad. I found it a really harsh word. I’m still Pumps or Papa. I love being a father. I’m a father and stepfather to five. They keep me young. They keep me interested. They keep me thinking. They keep me loving. They get me frustrated every so often, but that’s OK. The pandemic has made me realise I don’t need to go so fast or do so much. I can take time out and breathe. I can be OK about what I’ve done in my life and not beat myself up. I’d like to be remembered for my sausage rolls. Whoever decided to put mashed-up sausage inside pastry is a genius. Mine are pretty tasty. I add water and a little garlic and make sure they are ice cold before they go in the oven. The water blows up the protein, so when it cooks, it steams from the inside and the sausage meat puffs up. They are delicious. I don’t mind getting older. I look at my hands and see these funny spots. I remember seeing those on my dad’s hands when I was a kid and thinking: “What are they?” He’s 84 now, fit and healthy. He’s just decided he’s not going to do Meals on Wheels any more. I was talking to a friend and he said: “He’s not going to get them?” I said: “He doesn’t get them. He’s been delivering them.” Celebrity MasterChef Christmas Cook-Off is on Tuesday 21 December at 8pm and Thursday 23 December at 9pm on BBC OneHow fitting, in a Formula One season that has been impossible to predict, that the drama should continue unabated as it draws closer to an impossibly tense denouement. For this duel in the desert Max Verstappen drew first blood with pole position for the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, relegating his title rival Lewis Hamilton to second on the grid and with work to do if he is to take the title in Sunday’s decisive showdown. With both drivers acknowledging they were in a contest for the ages, the setup delivered in qualifying at the Yas Marina circuit leaves the finale delicately poised. Some imponderables remain but with the two protagonists tied on points they know the blunt reality that after 21 races in a season where the lead has swung between them five times, all that matters is who takes the flag. For Verstappen and Red Bull, claiming this vital pole was the best possible start to his attempt to seal his first championship, especially after how strong Hamilton and Mercedes had been. The serious business remains but the Dutchman was rightly pleased to have taken pole. Passing has been notoriously difficult at Yas Marina in the past. The circuit has been altered this year, including the removal of two chicanes to be replaced with faster corners to improve overtaking, but how successful tthis has been remains to be seen. If Verstappen can hold his lead on the short run through turn one, he will have every chance of converting it to victory. If Hamilton is to take a record eighth title, he knows he will have to pass his rival. While relations between the pair have been strained as the tension has ratcheted up and they have had repeated track incidents, on the eve of the finale there was a sense of calm focus from them both as they enjoyed the part they are playing in what has been a truly memorable season. “This year we have been pushing each other to the limit,” said Verstappen. “We really are trying to get everything out of our cars to the last lap, the last corner. It has been really enjoyable for most of the time. In 20 years’ time myself and other people will look back on it and remember this year.” Hamilton was apparently unfazed by being denied pole. “It has been an incredible year,” he said. “An amazing battle. I am grateful I have had such a close battle with Max and his team. They have done an exceptional job, shown true strength and pushed us to the limit in ways that we needed. I hope we have many more seasons like this.” Toto Wolff, the Mercedes team principal, said: “I have confidence it will be hard but clean and this is what this epic championship deserves as a final.” Of course this might yet be the calm before the storm. Certainly for all the conciliatory words no quarter can be expected from either driver and Verstappen has a slight edge. Tied on 369.5 points apiece, Verstappen has nine wins to Hamilton’s eight. Should both drivers fail to finish – in the event, say, of an incident between them – Verstappen will take the title based on win-countback. Both frontrunners have expressed their desire to keep it clean but, with two major crashes already between them and repeated incidents at the last round in Saudi Arabia, the prospect of a further clash has been the talk of the paddock. However, the FIA has pointedly reminded drivers that it can impose a points deduction for untoward driving, should it feel it necessary. Verstappen was immense when it mattered in Q3 as twilight succumbed to darkness in the desert. On their first hot laps in the final session fastest times were traded over the first sector but the Dutchman was superb through the second and third and enjoyed a minor tow from his teammate, Sergio Pérez, with Hamilton a full half a second back after a small lock-up at turn five. Verstappen’s time of 1min 22.109sec was a benchmark. The final laps of qualifying of 2021 were charged. Hamilton went out first and, push as he did, he was down in the first and second sectors and could not make up the gap to his rival. He finished over three-tenths back while Verstappen did not improve but had already done enough. “We couldn’t answer that lap,” said Hamilton. “It was a fantastic lap from him but we are in a good position.” Yet variables remain. Hamilton and Verstappen set their best times in Q2 on alternate tyre types with which they will start the race. Hamilton is on the mediums but after Verstappen flat-spotted his medium rubber potentially damaging a tyre, Red Bull opted to set another time on the softs. The Dutchman will have the potentially faster tyre off the grid but Hamilton will be able to go longer before he pits in what is expected to be a one-stop race. Calling it for either driver at this stage is beyond reason, as this fascinating season looks set to deliver a fascinating finale. The constructors’ title is strongly in Mercedes’ favour with the team leading Red Bull by 28 points and looking to secure a record eighth consecutive title. Lando Norris was a superb third for McLaren, Red Bull’s Pérez in fourth and Ferrari’s Carlos Sainz in fifth. Valtteri Bottas was sixth for Mercedes, Charles Leclerc in seventh for Ferrari and Yuki Tsunoda in eighth for AlphaTauri. Esteban Ocon was in ninth for Alpine and Daniel Ricciardo in 10th for McLaren. Fernando Alonso was in 11th for Alpine, Pierre Gasly in 12th for AlphaTauri. Lance Stroll and Sebastian Vettel in 13th and 15th for Aston Martin and Antonio Giovinazzi in 14th for Alfa Romeo. Nicholas Latifi and George Russell were in 16th and 17th for Williams, with Kimi Räikkönen in 18th for Alfa Romeo. Mick Schumacher and Nikita Mazepin placed 19th and 20th for Haas, but only Schumacher will start after his Russian teammate tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday morning.Raheem Sterling’s 100th Premier League goal came via the penalty spot and gave Manchester City a sixth consecutive win in the competition. This is a precious victory as here was a curious contest that featured serial ill-temper, head clashes, a ridiculous sending-off for Raúl Jiménez and, until Sterling’s intervention, Wolves threatening to escape with a point despite the mountain of chances created by the champions. Even Jonathan Moss’s award of Sterling’s spot-kick was controversial as Bernardo Silva’s cross hit João Moutinho’s armpit – is this, actually, handball? – and VAR duly backed the referee. Sterling’s penalty was one of those slow, straight-down-the-middle affairs that had José Sá diving right and therefore out of the way. Bruno Lage was particularly nonplussed. “The referee saw his arm and the rules say he is trying to create a bigger body,” the Wolves manager said. “But the ball touched here [his armpit]. But after the referee whistles it’s a VAR decision.” In scoring the spot-kick Sterling became the 32nd to achieve the century, joining Harry Kane, Jamie Vardy, Romelu Lukaku, Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané as those on the list still playing. “It’s a lovely achievement. There are some fantastic players in that list – I’m really honoured to be in it now,” said Sterling, who is up to five strikes in his last eight appearance for City after two in the previous 31. Pep Guardiola’s shuffle of his stellar pack had left Kevin De Bruyne, Phil Foden and Riyad Mahrez on the bench against an XI featuring Adama Traoré, who scored both in Wolves’ 2-0 win here two years ago. Instantly what would be the pattern was set. City prodded the ball about in those familiar percussive rhythms, while Wolves hoped to nab it and unleash the speed of Traoré, as when Jiménez hit a pass along the left and Rúben Dias was turned. Silva has been receiving weekly notices for his dazzling displays and Romain Saïss soon saw why. João Cancelo thumped the ball to his feet and a hip-sway later the Portuguese was firing marginally wide of Sá’s goal. Next came a pause due to the fierce head-clash between Rúben Neves and Max Kilman. The latter, face bloodied, was bandaged up and continued, as did the former. Moments later, another break in play. Sterling galloped past Saïss who appeared to receive a hand in the face. Cue the Moroccan going down and being branded a “cheat” by the home faithful. In a strange passage, Jiménez’s sending-off trumped all. After being booked for fouling Rodri he stood at close range, blocked the free-kick, saw yellow again then red. The Mexican became pantomime villain, dawdling, twice throwing one of his gloves to the ground, all to the jeers from the crowd punctuating this. Lage said: “The first yellow card, he did not touch the guy and it’s in our half and we had 10 men behind the ball. [But] he knows he cannot do that [for the second yellow].” Guardiola’s men had been disrupted and thus the second half had to be about them finding their usual poise. “We were patient,” said the manager. Yet more frustration followed when Ilkay Gündogan’s header was cleared off the line by Conor Coady. But City thumped at the door and Sterling was the one to finally force a way through, Wolves ruing an added-time chance to pilfer an equaliser as Ederson made a late and brilliant save from Kilman’s header. The Brazilian then secured a 100th City clean sheet and Guardiola’s team have won 32 of their 40 Premier League games in 2021 (losing six); only Liverpool in 1982 have won more matches in an English top-flight calendar year. Guardiola said of Wolves: “It is so difficult when a team doesn’t want to play.” Lage shrugged this off. “This is his opinion and I respect him.”That’s it from me, I’ll leave you with Jamie Jackson’s match report. Bye! The thoughts of Bruno Lage “Our plan was right. When we played 11 v 11 we were [in control]. In the end, zero points, but I am very proud of my penalty. For me it wasn’t a penalty – the referee’s decision and the VAR decision were very, very strange. VAR is very good for modern football, but come on. “[Raul Jimenez] knows he cannot do that, I have already spoken to him. But the first yellow card was harsh - he didn’t touch [Rodri] and we had 10 men behind the ball. I don’t like to talk about referees. We move on now, eyes on Brighton.” The thoughts of Raheem Sterling “Every time we play Wolves it’s difficult, they’re always tough to break down. It’s a lovely achievement [scoring 100 Premier League goals]. There are some fantastic players who’ve done it to so I’m really glad to be in there. “Each game has different challenges, and against 10 men we had to be patient. They kept it really tight but we know that if we kept playing we’d get an opportunity, and we did.” “Not to labour the point but Kilman’s block at the end there hit his arm,” says Toby Podmore. “Where is the refereeing consistency?” I thought we’d established that it’s only a penalty when it doesn’t hit your arm? Still want more? Sure you do. City were much the better team, even before Raul Jimenez was sent off in first-half injury time, but they needed a questionable penalty to break down an admirable Wolves defence. Raheem Sterling scored it, his 100th Premier League goal, and Wolves never really looked like equalising. Peep peep! Manchester City stay top of the Premier League after a laboured win over 10-man Wolves. 90+2 min The resulting corner hits the unsighted Kilman, six yards out, and loops through to Ederson. With a clear view of the ball that would have been a decent chance. 90+2 min: Ederson saves from Kilman! Wolves almost steal an equaliser. Ait-Nouri plays in the overlapping Podence, whose deep cross is headed towards goal by Kilman. Ederson stretches to tip it over - a comfortable save, in truth, but a dramatic moment and a reminder of Ederson’s existence after 90 minutes of anonymity. 90+1 min Kilman makes a great block to deny Foden, who was eight yards out when he sidefooted Sterling’s cross towards goal. Wolves’ three central defenders have all played really well. 90 min Four minutes of added time. 89 min Sterling shoots straight at Jose Sa from 25 yards, a tame effort. Sa has made a lot of saves today, but they’ve all been relatively straightforward for a quality goalkeeper. It’s been a weird game. Wolves will certainly feel they could have held out, even with 10 men, but for that dodgy penalty. 89 min Zinchenko’s low cross finds Foden in a bit of space in the area. He smacks a shot on the turn that is beaten away by Sa, moving smartly to his left. 87 min Another change: Daniel Podence replaces Dendoncker. 85 min Wolves are having a decent spell, their best of the match in terms of possession. Ederson is still able to meditate, mind you, as it’s all in the middle third. 83 min De Bruyne slightly overhits an angled through ball to Jesus, which pushes him wide. With the perfect weight of pass, Jesus would have been clear on goal. 82 min Another change for Wolves: Trincao replaces Ruben Neves, which means as switch to 5-2-2 for the last 10 minutes or so. 81 min Cancelo is booked for fouling Hwang, who has been bright since coming on for Traore. 81 min The resulting corner is headed straight at Jose Sa by Rodri, six yards out. 81 min De Bruyne plays a through ball to Jesus in the inside-left channel. He takes the shot first time from a tight angle, battering it with his left foot, and Jose Sa pushes it past the near post. Good save. 80 min Rodri, who has already been blocked, fouls Ait-Nouri on the halfway line. It didn’t merit a second yellow card, but it did stop the attack. For all their brilliance with the ball, City are world-class at judging what fouls they can and can’t get away with. 78 min “You’ve got to feel for Moutinho, because his arm WAS in an unnatural position, but the ball didn’t hit it,” says Toby Podmore. “If he had had his arm in a natural position, the ball would have hit it and that, ironically enough, would have meant that it wasn’t handball.” 77 min This game is over, City are just passing the clock down. I’m still trying to evaluate that penalty decision to be honest. 74 min “That was never a penalty,” says Rick Harris. “What is the point of having VAR if Jon Moss’s mate won’t point out to him the ball was deflected on to the arm by the player’s body?” Is that still the law? I can never remember what they did and didn’t change during last season’s moral panic. 73 min The inescapable futility of life, part three: Jack Grealish is replaced by Kevin De Bruyne. 72 min More chances for City, again created by a run down the right from Sterling. His low cross finds Grealish, whose backheel is blocked. The ball runs to Bernardo Silva, whose shot also hits a Wolves defender. 70 min: Grealish misses an excellent chance! The tireless Sterling scampers down the right and curls in a wicked cross. The stretching Jesus misses it and Grealish, six yards out at the far post, slices it wide. It bounced a bit awkwardly, and he might have seen it late, but he should still have scored. 68 min Wolves have brought on Hwang Hee-Chan for Adama Traore, who worried City without really threatening to score. 67 min You have to feel for Wolves. I’m not sure it was a penalty in the first place. And even if it was, the law is an ass. Sterling has never been much of a penalty taker, but he took that one with aplomb. He waited for Sa to dive to his right and then passed the ball slowly down the middle. That was like watching Eden Hazard in his Chelsea pomp. Raheem Sterling scores his 100th Premier League goal! PENALTY GIVEN! VAR check A replay from the side shows that the ball hit Moutinho’s side first, and then probably deflected onto his outstretched arm. Bernardo Silva’s cross from the right hit Moutinho, who had his arm raised - but the issue is whether it hit him on the arm or just below the armpit. It’s hard to be sure but I think it was the latter, and therefore not a penalty. But you can argue it’s inconclusive and therefore not a clear and obvious error by Jon Moss, and here we go again. 63 min: PENALTY TO CITY! Wolves are absolutely fuming. 63 min “I think games like this expose City’s lack of a direct goalscorer,” says Mike Gleeson. “A quick Google told me that Jesus has underperformed his xG every season for City. If they don’t get a proper goalscorer in January, I can’t see them winning the league or Champions League this season. Games like this could cost them.” Cristiano Ronaldo would have scored 50 goals for this team, wouldn’t he? Haaland will probably score 500. 61 min Cancelo’s long-range shot is blocked, and it almost feels tautologous to say that Coady was the defender in question. 60 min Sterling runs at Ait-Nouri and goes over in the area. At first I thought Ait-Nouri got the ball but replays show he didn’t. I’m not sure he fouled Sterling either, though, and more importantly nor does Jon Moss. I’d like to see it again, mind, as I don’t think Sterling dived this time. 59 min Zinchenko’s deep, hanging cross is headed straight at Jose Sa by Bernardo Silva, a few yards out. He was backpedalling but still, that was a chance. He should probably have headed it back across goal or left it to Sterling behind him. 59 min Sterling plays in the overlapping Cancelo, whose fast cross is punched away by Jose Sa. It’s a matter of time. 58 min Zinchenko mistimes a shot from 20 yards that bobbles through to Jose Sa. I think it was going wide anyway. 57 min Jon Moss has a word with Conor Coady about Wolves’ leisurely approach to restarting play. 56 min A City change: Ilkay Gundogan is replaced by Phil Foden. 55 min: Off the line by Coady! City worked the ball from left to right, where Cancelo lifted a nice cross back towards the far post. Gundogan pulled away from the Wolves defence and headed over Jose Sa, only for Coady to appear and head off the line. He’s having a terrific game. 54 min “Jack Grealish is still, I think, the player with the most transitions (both runs and passes) in the Premier League this year,” says Joe Harvey. “ A player like that is useful for limited teams because it means you don’t need to sacrifice an attacker for another player who can advance the ball. City aren’t a limited team and they refuse to play two forwards so…. both Sterling and Grealish look a bit pointless sometimes. Pep’s good at this, and Grealish is good positionally, but it’s still weird.” It wouldn’t shock me if it didn’t work out – Pep has had a few over the years – but I’d definitely give it two seasons. It’s daft how quickly new signings, especially creative players, are judged these days. Did we learn nothing from the Pires Principle?! 53 min Sterling makes a brilliant, weaving run into the area and then dives after feeling a slight tug on the arm from Ait-Nouri. No penalty. 53 min Cancelo’s cutback is volleyed over by Jesus, launching himself in front of Coady at the near post. It came at breast height so it wasn’t a great chance. 52 min Grealish’s teasing cross is headed away by Coady, perfectly positioned at the near post. 51 min Cancelo’s cross is headed behind by Dendoncker, which gives City their fifth corner of the second half alone. 50 min Rodri’s long-range shot is blocked. City have been brilliant since half-time, with Wolves sstruggling to get out of their quarter. 48 min The intensity with which City have started the second half suggests Pep had the hairdryer out at half-time. They win two more corners in quick succession, the second after Laporte’s shot hits the heel of the outrushing Coady. 48 min Traore beats three players on a promising run before being dispossessed by Zinchenko. 47 min “Ferdinand makes an interesting point re: Kilman’s lean (sounds like a real ale actually),” says Stephen Carr. “Perhaps the VAR boffins could deploy the same technology that a newspaper used to assess Jeremy Corbyn’s perceived lack of respect by not bowing to an acceptable angle at the Cenotaph a few years back.” 46 min An early effort from Jesus, whose left-footed shot from 16 yards deflects behind off Coady. 46 min Peep peep! City begin the second half. On BT Sport, Rio Ferdinand points out that Max Kilman did lean in to that cross from Grealish just before half-time, so a penalty could legitimately have been given. His arm was by his side, but you could argue he was not in a natural position because he was leaning. I can see both sides! Half-time reading “Evening Rob,” says Neill Brown. “I think that Jack Grealish’s talents don’t fit this team. He’s an all-action, give-it-to-me, ‘Roy of the Rovers was based on me, actually’ player like Le Tissier or Gerrard. Are we currently seeing with Grealish what we could have seen with Le Tissier at Man U or Gerrard at Chelsea? i.e. a leading man underwhelming in a supporting role. Asking Grealish to play this way is like asking Adele to whisper Tricky’s vocals in Aftermath: poor use of excellent resources. Anyway, I look forward to his second half hat-trick.” I know exactly what you mean, though Pep likes to reassign mavericks. I’d be loath to judge him until his second season. But you reminded me of Aftermath, so that’s a good thing. That was a bit weird. Wolves did a fine job defensively, restricting City to half chances. But their job will be a lot harder in the second half after Raul Jimenez was sent off for rank nincompoopery on the stroke of half-time. 45+7 min Grealish appeals desperately for a penalty when his cross his the arm of Kilman in the area. Jon Moss had a poor view and waved play on. The arm was by Kilman’s side, so even VAR will struggle to give that one. 45+5 min Zinchenko’s fast cross is absorbed by the left boot of Bernardo Silva near the penalty spot. He tries to find an angle for the shot, can’t and instead plays the ball back to Gundogan in the D, and his mishit shot bobbles well wide. 45+5 min Wolves are now playing 8-0-1, with Adama Traore as the one. 45+4 min It took Jimenez about two minutes to leave the field. Ruben Neves has also been booked for dissent. Not sure what Wolves are complaining about really - it was utterly brainless from Jimenez. There were 48 seconds between the two yellow cards. Having just been booked for fouling Rodri, Jimenez stood two yards away from the ball to stop him taking a quick free-kick. Eventually Rodri took it, Jimenez stuck out a leg to block it, and Jon Moss was a slave to the laws of football: he wearily showed a second yellow, knowing he was about to get pelters for doing his job properly. The Wolves players obliged. 45+2 min Oh this is sheer ridiculous football. 45+1 min Now Jimenez is booked a foul on Rodri. Pep is waving his arms around about something or other; he doesn’t exactly look high on life. 45+1 min There will be seven minutes of added time, mostly because of that clash of heads between Kilman and Neves. 45 min Gundogan’s deflected cross from the left is headed behind by the diligent Coady. Grealish takes the corner and Jimenez heads away. 43 min Now Rodri is booked for a foul on Traore, who was just about to go through the gears. City are scared of him, NQAT. 43 min Gunodgan’s cross is headed clear. Wolves have defended with calm authority in this half. 42 min Grealish, hitherto quiet, is fouled 22 yards from goal by Coady. The free-kick is almost in line with the right edge of the penalty area, with Gundogan over the ball.It’ll be a cross rather than a shot. 40 min Ruben Dias goes through the back of Traore near the halfway line and is booked. 40 min Saiss is now being booed every time the ball goes near him. 39 min When the corner is finally taken, Laporte heads wide from Grealish’s outswinger. That was half a chance, though he might have been put off by Rodri (I think) diving in front of him. 36 min Sterling gets the wrong side of Saiss in the area and slides a cross that is put behind for a corner. By that stage Saiss has gone down holding his face, and there’s a bit of posturing by the players on both sides. My first thought was that he was trying it on, though replays show that Sterling did catch him with a flailing arm. It was similar to that Son/McTominay incident at Spurs last season - Sterling caught Saiss him with his fingers, possibly in the eye, rather than an elbow. 34 min Play resumes approximately five minutes after the clash of heads. 33 min Neves is on his feet now, having a concussion test as I type. He wasn’t cut, as it turned out, though Kilman is sporting a nice black bandage around his noggin. 32 min Neves is sitting up now. It looks like both players want to continue, though I’m sure they’ll be given concussion tests first. 31 min Bruno Lage takes the opportunity to give Jimenez and Traore some detailed instructions. It pains me to say it, but I fear the days when tactical instructions amounted to “go and cause some bollocks, Billy” might be numbered. 30 min Kilman is having his head bandaged. Neves is still lying on his back, though he is conscious. 29 min There’s a nasty clash of heads between Kilman and Neves, who were both concentrating only on the ball. Kilman has some blood running down his face; Neves is still on his back receiving treatment. 28 min Grealish is challenged well by Neves, with the ball going behind for a corner. Gunodgan clips it in and Jose Sa punches clear. 26 min Wolves haven’t been able to get Traore in the game. I can remember only one attack, that promising break in the sixth minute, when he has been on the ball for more than a couple of seconds. 24 min Another bit of Cancelo culture, a lovely flip over the top that almost puts Sterling through on goal. Jose Sa comes off his line to clear the danger. 23 min Jimenez is fouled on the left wing, 40 yards from goal. Ait-Nouri’s outswinging free-kick is headed well wide by Jimenez on the edge of the area. I’m no xG hero but I can tell you that wasn’t much of a chance. 22 min Make that two saves: Cancelo cuts across a drive from 25 yards that is well held by Jose Sa. 21 min City have been totally dominant, though Jose Sa has only had one save to make, and it was an easy one. 19 min Jesus robs Neves right on the edge of the Wolves area. Having done so he should square the ball to Bernardo Silva, but delays for a split second and is tackled by Kilman. City wantd a penalty; Jon Moss isn’t interested. 15 min We’re having some technical problems, I’m afraid, though you haven’t missed anything of note. 11 min Grealish and Jesus have swapped places. I suspect that’ll happen a few times this afternoon, and I’ll almost certainly fail to inform you every time it does. 10 min Cancelo fires a pass into Bernardo Silva on the edge of the area. He shuffles inside, onto his left foot, and hits a rising drive just past the far post. Another good effort, though not one about which Jose Sa looked particularly worried. 7 min Cancelo, 30 yards out, whistles a rising drive just over the bar. Jose Sa was comfortable that it was off target, but it was still a decent effort. 6 min Now they do cross the halfway line, but a promising attack ends with Neves’s cross dribbles through to Ederson. 6 min I’m not sure Wolves have crossed the halfway line since the kick off 5 min Gunodgan’s corner is poor and doesn’t beat the front man. 4 min Cancelo wins a corner for City, who have started with intent. 2 min An early half chance for City. Cancelo curls a nice pass into Sterling, who gets the wrong side of Saiss but can only force a shot straight at Jose Sa. I think Sterling was half expecting to be tripped from behind as Saiss was right up against him. 2 min City have started with Raheem Sterling on the right, Gabriel Jesus on the left and Jack Grealish as the false nine. 1 min Peep peep! Wolves, in their black change strip, kick off from right to let. City are in sky blue. Here come the players, most of them hiding under tracksuit tops. December in Manchester. “A sterling attempt to create some sense of parity between these two teams, Rob,” says Dean Kinsella. “But there are three players on the City bench in De Bruyne, Foden and Mahrez who would likely be the best player at 90 per cent of the other Premiership clubs.” I make it 89.47368421 per cent, which is coincidentally the amount of possession City are going to have in the first 10 minutes. Pep speaks! “We expect a tough game, as it always is against Wolves. [Is Kyle Walker on the naughty step after his red card against Leipzig?] No, it’s the way we want to attack. We have many alternatives - sometimes we decide to pick one player ahead of another. It’s never because we don’t like them, nothing like that, it’s just the team we have picked for today.” Raheem Sterling: 99 not out Bruno Lage speaks! “I want the players to be confident when we have the ball. City are very patient, which is why I chose an extra midfielder. But they can give you space as well, and when we have space I want us to play our game.” The inescapable futility of existence (Premier League edition) City make two changes from their last league game - Oleksandr Zinchenko for Kyle Walker, Gabriel Jesus for Phil Foden. It looks like an extra man in midfield for Wolves, with Joao Moutinho replacing Hwang Hee-Chan. Manchester City (4-1-2-3) Ederson; Cancelo, Dias, Laporte, Zinchenko; Rodri; Bernardo, Gundogan; Jesus, Grealish, Sterling. Substitutes: Steffen, Walker, Ake, Stones, De Bruyne, Fernandinho, Foden, Palmer, Mahrez. Wolverhampton Wanders (5-3-2) Jose Sa; Semedo, Kilman, Coady, Saiss, Ait-Nouri; Dendoncker, Neves, Moutinho; Traore, Jimenez. Substitutes: Ruddy, Hoever, Marcal, Boly, Podence, Cundle, Trincao, Fabio Silva, Hwang. Referee Jonathan Moss. Styles make fights. Wolves aren’t quite the rock to Manchester City’s scissors, but they are dangerous opponents for a Pep Guardiola team. The reasons for that are pretty simple: streetwise defending (only the top three have conceded fewer goals this season), the guile of Raul Jimenez and, most of all, the spasmodic unplayability of Adama Traore. Traore produced two of the best performances of his career when Wolves did the double over City in 2019-20. Even last season, when City beat Wolves 3-1 and 4-1, they had to work pretty hard. The first of those games was 2-1 after 90 minutes; the second was 1-1 after 79. I realise I might be reaching, trying to convince myself this won’t be another routine home win for City, full of longeurs in which we - and the Wolves players - ruminate on the inescapable futility of existence. City are starting to look ominous, and they went top for the first time this season when they beat Watford last weekend. But if you look a bit closer, their home form in the league has been relatively poor. Since starting the season with back-to-back eviscerations of Norwich and Arsenal, their results at the Etihad have been 0-0, 2-0, 0-2, 3-0, 2-1. Ten points in five games: Pep out. Wolves are in eighth place, the best of the Small 14 apart from West Ham, but their form isn’t great either. They’ve scored only once in their last five games, in a 1-0 win over the aforementioned Hammers, and suffered a distressing last-gasp defeat to Liverpool last week. In short, nobody knows anything, but we’re about to find out. Kick off 12.30pm.Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang was left out of Arsenal’s matchday squad to face Southampton due to what Mikel Arteta described as a “disciplinary breach”, understood to involve returning late from a trip abroad earlier in the week. The club captain did not train on Friday and was subsequently not named in the party to face Saints at the Emirates. Arteta did not give a more specific reason for omitting Aubameyang, who was dropped to the bench for the defeat against Everton on Monday night after a period of spluttering form. “Unfortunately due to a disciplinary breach,” Arteta said when asked about the reason for Aubameyang’s absence. “We’ve been very consistent that there are certain non-negotiables in the team that we have set ourselves, and as a club, and he’s not involved today.” Questioned on whether the ban would extend beyond Saturday’s game, Arteta said: “It starts today. But certainly it’s not an easy situation, a situation that we want to have our club captain in.” Arteta would not elaborate on Aubameyang’s punishment after Arsenal’s 3-0 win. “You’re not going to get anything else from me, unfortunately it happened,” he said. “I explained what happened and the reason he wasn’t involved and that’s where I’m going to stay on it.” He did not confirm whether Aubameyang would retain the captaincy or whether he would return to face West Ham on Wednesday. Arteta has taken action against Aubameyang for punctuality-related reasons before, dropping him to the bench for the derby against Spurs in March after he reported late. He was also reminded of his responsibilities by the club in February after apparently breaching Covid-19 regulations to get a tattoo. The latest infraction will exasperate Arteta and may cast his status as captain into doubt. Aubameyang has not scored in his last six appearances and was only afforded five minutes of action at Goodison Park, with the out-of-favour Eddie Nketiah introduced as a substitute before him. Alexandre Lacazette started at centre-forward against Southampton, as he did in the Everton fixture.It is hard to find something to dislike about Michael Sheen. You have to really try: I managed to squeeze out the fact that he didn’t much enjoy his bow tie in Good Omens, but it took some effort. In an interview with the Big Issue last week, Sheen raised the Decent Bloke stakes again by explaining that he had “essentially turned myself into a social enterprise, a not-for-profit actor”. This is not some Jeremy Strong-style method approach, in which Sheen, playing the role of Social Enterprise, goes all-in to benefit the community. Or maybe it is, in a way; he revealed that he is putting the majority of his future earnings into good causes. “I don’t want to just be someone who enjoys the fruits of what other people have done and then pull the drawbridge up and go, ‘Well I’m all right, Jack, I’ve had a nice time’,” he said. I thought about Sheen’s decision, to have enough for himself and to do something good with the rest of it, when I read another piece, by Courtney Love in the Financial Times, in support of the paper’s campaign to advocate for wider financial literacy. One idea stood out and, although it is not radical, I was surprised to find that it sounded as if it was. “I don’t think artists should be expected to be billionaires,” she said, arguing that a poet, for example, doesn’t need a second home. “I think artists should get what we call ‘right-sized’ about what to expect from their careers.” In their individual ways, both are raising the question of what it means to have enough. It’s old-fashioned as an idea. We live in an era, and a culture, that not only prioritises growth for the sake of it, but fetishes it. Everything is about having bigger, better, more, from desserts piled high with other desserts until they’re photogenic enough for Instagram, to the absurd expansion in car size that means parents drive their kids down the road to school in vehicles more suited to country tracks or Ben Nevis. The wealth gap in Britain has widened to a sickening degree during the pandemic. Obviously, I am talking about one end of it and that is not the people struggling to put food on the table with any regularity. In the world of work, we are largely expected to strive for more: promotions, a pay rise, more status, more money, infinite growth. Philosophers and economists have long grappled with the idea that this is unsustainable. On an individual level, though, we are rarely asked to consider what is enough. To consider what is “right-sized” for us. Bernie Sanders’s mittens broke the internet Google’s annual end-of-year round-up of search trends showed that in 2021, the world searched for a lot of cricket, a lot of superhero movies and a lot of Squid Game. In the UK, we still preferred football and made space for Line of Duty, wanted to know when Love Island finished more than we wanted to know when lockdown started, were less interested in Pete Davidson than we were in Matt Hancock and persisted with making the ubiquitous banana bread. But most shocking was the news that searches for “mittens” reached an all-time high in January, thanks to Bernie Sanders keeping his hands warm, cottagecore-style, at the presidential inauguration. It was shocking because how, by any measure, apart from calendars and clocks, was that this year? I don’t wish to deny mittens their moment in the spotlight, because it’s taken them forever to hit that record for most searches. But I could have sworn that Sanders wore those mittens at least 15 years ago, that those memes about him sitting grumpily loaded up slowly on a BlackBerry screen. As if that happened less than 12 months ago. I simply refuse to believe it. And Just Like That: no sex in the city for these baffled gal pals It had to be done. The Sex and the City reboot And Just Like That… was a rare moment of must-see TV, at least among my friends. On Thursday, there was a synchronised press-play, a flurry of texts, though “are you watching?” quickly became “what... are we watching?” The cast ploughed on gamely, but it was a strange experience; there was little sense that these characters had actually aged while they were off screen, more a sensation that they had been picked up in 2004, when Sex and the City ended (I am ignoring the films, which is a kindness), and plopped back down in the present day, where they stared, baffled, at a world in which people said “woke” and confused them with their newfangled podcasts. One of the oddest things was the feeling that the characters were too famous to be believable on screen. This is fairly normal with actors; there are some who only play tweaked versions of the same thing and look like Bambi on ice when they try to do something different. But I didn’t get the impression that these famous women were struggling to lose themselves in the characters, more that the characters were struggling to lose themselves in the story. Also, there was hardly any sex, not helped by the most fond-of-sex character Samantha being famously indisposed, although I did enjoy the loose explanation as to why she’d chosen London over this. Until that twist at the end of episode one, I don’t think anyone could blame her. Obviously, I will be watching every week, just to make sure. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistAn adrenaline-pumping knife chase through graffiti-sprayed lanes takes place in the comedy-thriller The Outlaws, while class tensions simmer at a lavish student ball in the legal drama Showtrial. The city providing the backdrop and inspiration for both these series is Bristol – a location now so popular with film and TV makers that crews are actually falling over themselves in the streets. The city council has been inundated with requests to film in the city’s dank alleys, high-rises and grand Georgian squares since the beginning of the year, according to Bristol Film Office, which is part of the city council. It has seen a 225% increase in drama production on pre-pandemic levels. In the first quarter of 2019/20 there were four major drama productions under way in Bristol – but this more than tripled to 13 in the first quarter of 2020/21. Since January, 15 high-end TV dramas have been filmed in the city. “The last year has been like nothing we have experienced,” says Natalie Moore, who manages Bristol Film Office. “We were totally inundated by the amount of filming. It was noticeable in the city too – everyone seemed to come across filming. There were a few clashes. We had crews turning up on the same day on the same street.” The city has long been a hub of nature films and animation; it is the home of the BBC’s Natural History Unit and the Oscar-winning Aardman Animations. But now, drama writers are increasingly setting the action in Bristol and drawing on its diverse cultures and rich, evolving history. The city’s role in momentous national events, such as the toppling of the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston, has inspired plotlines. The Outlaws, filmed in locations throughout the city, follows seven bickering lawbreakers, including Myrna, a veteran anti-racist campaigner, who is ordered to do community service for “tearing down that statue of Edward Colston”. Stephen Merchant, who wrote and starred in the show and grew up in Bristol, rewrote parts of the script while filming to reflect the mass protest in June last year. The city was more than just a backdrop, says Merchant. “For The Outlaws, I wanted Bristol to be another character in the show. Although a lot of filming takes place in Bristol, the city is often doubling for somewhere else; it hasn’t played itself very often, but it’s such a visually interesting place. I’m actually nervous about extolling its virtues too much because it will be overrun with productions and I won’t be able to get anyone next time I film there.” Whereas The Outlaws takes viewers into the deprived, desperate parts of the city, Showtrial dwells on the lives of wealthy students. Simon Heath, its executive producer, feels the city has too often been overlooked: “It has its own unique identity, culture and accent – yet has hardly been seen in TV drama. We needed a city known for having a prestigious university sought after by students from privileged backgrounds. So Bristol was a no-brainer.” Another successful drama, this time from Channel 4, Before We Die used many locations around the city, with one of the producers calling it “an interesting, quasi-European” city. The public sector has provided much of the infrastructure for the city’s drama boom. Ten years ago, the council turned an abandoned bottling plant in one of the most deprived wards in the country into the largest studio facility in the west of England. The Bottle Yard Studios, which is one of only two council-owned studios in the country, has eight stages, with three more opening next summer, following an £11.3m investment from the West of England metro mayor, Labour’s Dan Norris. The forthcoming BBC and HBO psychological thriller, The Girl Before, has been filmed in the studio and on locations in Bristol. “It is very unusual to have a council-run studio but it has been hugely successful,” says Laura Aviles, who manages the complex. “It allows us to deliver social benefits, including training local people to work in the industry.” Thispublic investment – alongside Bristol’s burgeoning reputation as a “Green Hollywood” of natural history film-making – has allowed independent production companies to take root in the city. According to research by the University of the West of England, Bristol has the largest concentration of such companies outside London, with a growing number making dramas. “There are now 188 production companies in Bristol,” says Prof Andrew Spicer from UWE. “The city has developed a critical mass of expertise. There is a large pool oftalented production staff and cheaper studio space than London.” For Bristol deputy mayor Craig Cheney, the turnaround in the city fortunes is striking. “[The boom in high-end drama is] bringing Bristol to a new audience that less than a decade ago may have seen us as a west of England backwater but now see a different, confident city with all the challenges and complexities an urban area brings.”Born in Canada in 1972, the actor Tanya Moodie began her career in theatre. In 2020 she won a Royal Television Society breakthrough award for playing alpha mum Meg in the BBC Two sitcom Motherland. She has appeared in Sherlock and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker, and performed in numerous stage productions for the RSC, Royal Court and the National Theatre. Moodie has been a practising Buddhist since 1994, and lives in south London with her partner and daughter. Her latest theatre role is in Alice Childress’s 1955 play Trouble in Mind, directed by Nancy Medina, at the National Theatre, London, until 29 January 2022. The Motherland Christmas special is on BBC Two, Monday 20 December, 10.20pm. 1. Nonfiction Lady in Waiting: My Extraordinary Life in the Shadow of the Crown by Anne Glenconner I couldn’t tear myself away from this book. My Buddhist faith is primarily concerned with developing an indomitable spirit through overcoming life’s many ups and downs, and Lady Glenconner’s memoir reads as a manual for doing just that. She was a lady-in-waiting to Princess Margaret, and you could look at someone like that and think their life is perfect, but she overcame a lot of personal struggles. She is a consummate storyteller, and her compassionate nature jumps off the page. And I like autobiographies because I get to be nosy; I spent a lot of time Googling the people she talked about. 2. App Shazam I am a song magpie, and frequently use Shazam to identify and immediately download any song I hear that I suddenly can’t live without. BBC Radio 6 Music is on at our house all day, every day, and it’s always an eclectic mix – I Shazam a lot of stuff from Guy Garvey’s show on Sundays. I listen to just about every genre: my last two downloads were a 1955 album compilation of Bulgarian folk songs and Aaliyah’s 2000 single Try Again. I will definitely caterwaul along to all of it. 3. Food Bunsik, London WC2 My daughter and I have fallen in love with these Korean corn dogs from Bunsik in Covent Garden. It’s not a well-rounded meal. It’s not one of your five a day. But it’s really fun street food – eating one is an event. We both just get such a kick out of it. So sometimes as a treat, if I’m in that part of town I’ll pop in and get some for us and reheat them in the oven at home. Our favourite is the one that’s half hotdog and half mozzarella stick, covered in cornmeal batter and breadcrumbs and deep fried. It’s just fantastic. 4. TV Succession My boyfriend and I are addicted to Succession. I mainly spend each episode shouting at the television. It’s the family we love to hate. I love the King Lear structure of it: “Prove to me who loves me the best.” I keep saying to my partner: “Why don’t they just walk away?” and he’s just like: “Because they want the money, babes.” Everyone’s work is impeccable: it’s extremely well written and well researched. I was at Rada with Matthew McFadyen and I just love him to bits in real life. It tickles me to scream at his character every week. 5. Film Kill Bill: Volume 1 and 2 (dir. Quentin Tarantino) An important part of our courtship when my boyfriend and I met was exchanging lists of our favourite films and then watching each other’s suggestions. One of mine was Kill Bill – I will never get tired of it. I practically have passages memorised. I love that it’s a classic hero’s journey, but Tarantino has borrowed from all these other cinematic and literary styles and brought it all together in such an incredibly satisfying and exciting way. My daughter alerted me to “good for her” films – in which the girl triumphs in the end – and I would put Kill Bill in that category. 6. Artist Abe Odedina I’ve been collecting Abe’s paintings for some years now: I used to drive by his gallery in Brixton and I loved his work. He used to be an architect, then took a hiatus, went to Brazil and started to paint. The pigments are vibrant and rich, and he describes himself as a folk artist – he’s inspired by African art and magical realism. I have a painting by Abe called Amazing Grace: it’s a woman standing on a red backdrop in a royal blue dress. She has very dark ebony skin and red lips, and the whites of her eyes are very bright. I was mesmerised. Trouble in Mind is at the Dorfman, National Theatre, London, until 29 January 2022 The Motherland Christmas special is on BBC Two, Monday 20 December, 10.20pm“I’m Lucille Ball – when I’m being funny, you’ll know it,” says Nicole Kidman, who plays the comic actor without so much as a wink. With her pencil-thin eyebrows, corkscrew curls and elastic mouth, Ball was known and loved for her starring role in the 1950s sitcom I Love Lucy. Kidman and writer-director Aaron Sorkin are less interested in recreating her gift for physical comedy than they are in fleshing out her serious side. Kidman has been funny before (she’s a hoot in To Die For and The Paperboy). Not so here. “I care about what works. I care about what’s funny,” she says, forehead wrinkling. Still, it’s a brilliant performance; witty, fierce and technical. Taking place over the course of a single episode of the show, from Monday’s table read to Friday’s live audience taping, the film mostly plays out on soundstages and Hollywood backlots. We also get a behind-the-scenes glimpse into the crumbling relationship between Ball and Desi Arnaz (Javier Bardem), her husband both on and off screen. Both are digitally enhanced in flashback scenes, a technique that is at once distracting and creepy. The film is obsessed with deconstructing good screenwriting, the way a line lands, and ensuring clear character motivation. Fans of Sorkin’s own dense, rhythmic screwball dialogue will enjoy watching Alia Shawkat and Jake Lacy trade zingers in the writers’ room. In cinemas now and on Amazon Prime Video from 21 DecemberClose the curtains. Light the fire. Then prepare to be terrified; it’s Christmas. For although the word “cosy” may be closely tied to festivities at this time of year, so it seems is the word “ghost”. In northern Europe people understandably cope with the shorter days and darker evenings by drawing in around a roaring hearth, metaphorical or otherwise. Light and warmth: it makes sense. But what kind of stories are told while friends and families gather together? The answer, of course, is the spookier, the better. The most effective of these frightening Christmas tales tend to begin with a carefully paced account of an uncanny experience that once troubled a former acquaintance, leading to a chain of events so appalling that, even in the retelling, goosebumps appear and the skin crawls. Writer and actor Mark Gatiss, an expert in the form, sees a long tradition. “Perhaps it all began with the idea of telling stories round a campfire, of the shadows lengthening and us all clustering together for warmth and security, but there’s always been an affinity between Christmas time and ghosts,” Gatiss told the Observer in a month in which he is tapping into the spooky side of yuletide on stage and screen. “‘There was a man dwelt by a churchyard’, begins Shakespeare’s Mamillius, as he tells a story of sprites and goblins in where else but The Winter’s Tale. I think it’s very deep in the race.” The custom of ghostly yarns at the end of the year is more commonly traced back to Charles Dickens. A Christmas Carol was the Victorian novelist’s most successful ghost story, but not his only one: his novella The Chimes followed in 1844 and soon after The Haunted Man and the Ghost’s Bargain. A generation later came the short stories of Montagu Rhodes James, the Cambridge academic now acknowledged as an early 20th century master of the genre. His stories, repeatedly set in bleak, wintry landscapes, are particularly relished at Christmas and for the last 12 years occasional screen versions of James’s chilling tales have been made by Gatiss, who seems determined to disturb as many revellers as he can. After perfecting the modern grotesque in his television work with The League of Gentlemen, the darkly comic troupe he founded with Steve Pemberton, Reece Shearsmith and Jeremy Dyson, Gatiss went on to write for Doctor Who and to reimagine Sherlock, which became one of the BBC’s biggest hits for many years. Last year he introduced us to Claes Bang’s perturbing Dracula, in a one-off drama series for BBC1. This month, Gatiss’s mission to unsettle the nation is three-pronged. Not content with playing the ghost of Marley in his own adaptation of A Christmas Carol at the Alexandra Palace Theatre in London, he is offering viewers two atmospheric screen treats on Christmas Eve. The first, on Sky, is The Amazing Mr Blunden, a supernatural tale of time travel first adapted in 1972 from Antonia Barber’s novel. His second drama is the latest in his string of James stories made for BBC Two. This time Rory Kinnear stars in The Mezzotint, perhaps the best known short story of the lot. It follows Gatiss’s adaptations of Martin’s Close in 2019, The Dead Room in 2018, The Tractate Middoth in 2013 and Crooked House in 2008. The Mezzotint, which revolves around the hair-raising properties of an engraving of a manor house, has not been adapted as often as other stories, perhaps due to its focus on just one mysterious image. It did, however, make it on to the BBC in the 1950s and was read by Robert Powell on screen in 1986. It has also been plagiarised a fair few times, including in a pilot episode of a 1969 American series called Night Gallery that starred Roddy McDowall. Gatiss has given his cast, which includes Frances Barber and Robert Bathurst, some new twists – and some subtle red herrings. The setting, at the fictional Canterbury College, Oxford, in 1922, has what for Gatiss is the crucial combination of clubbable appeal and demonic dread: something that recalls the duality of the popular Danish idea of “hygge” and its grim flip-side of “unhygge”, a fearful place inhabited by trolls. Christmas is the right moment to savour these contrasting moods, Gatiss believes: “It is a time when we’re inevitably looking back, to all the Christmasses of our past and those who are sadly no longer gathered round the tree. It can be a very melancholy time for many and it’s always seemed to me that, even more than at Halloween, the boundary between this world and the next (if you believe that sort of thing) is at its thinnest. And though the ghost story is a very English tradition, there’s a strong parallel in other countries where the onset of winter and darkness bleeds over into an ancient storytelling culture.” Dickens understood the sombre note struck at Christmas, Gatiss argues, citing a passage in Pickwick Papers in which the family gathering summons up memories of those “whose hearts throbbed so gaily” but have now “ceased to beat”. “There is also the allure of what James called ‘a pleasing terror’,” said Gatiss. “That there’s something especially satisfying about being inside, cosy and warm while telling stories of horrible apparitions and ghastly visitations. James’s readings took place within the delightful walls of his college rooms, as an after dinner treat and though they can be very nasty, they’re also filled with humour, funny voices and all the trappings of a good yarn. So we, like James’s audience, demand a crackling fire, a glass of madeira, frost on the window panes, and then a story to unsettle and chill the blood before order is restored and we plunge off into the freezing night … and perhaps wondering who that dark shape might be that seems so doggedly to follow our footsteps…?”The agate type will show that Magnus Carlsen retained the world championship he’s held for eight years by defeating Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi for a fourth time in six games on Friday, closing out their best-of-14 encounter by a score of 7½-3½ and bolstering his claim as the greatest player of this or any other era. But the Norwegian’s fifth world title match victory – one short of the suddenly imperilled all-time record of six – was freighted with additional meaning by striking a decisive win for a sport that has been dogged by existential questions over its own relevance in an age of supercomputers said to have made the world’s top grandmasters too good to fail. The familiar hand-wringing was impossible to ignore in the early stages of the €2m showdown between Carlsen and Nepomniachtchi that unfolded over the past two weeks in Dubai. Not only did they play to five straight bloodless results to open the proceedings – extending a record streak of 19 draws in classical world championship games extending back to Carlsen’s final two with Sergey Karjakin in 2016 and all 12 against Fabiano Caruana in 2018 – but engines evaluating the moves indicated it was to that point the most accurate title match in the event’s 135-year history. For years observers have bemoaned the recession of humanity of a sport that has increasingly – and never more than in the generation since Deep Blue v Kasparov, 1997 – become informed by the machinelike objectivity of the supercomputer. Once again a parade of draws borne from near-perfect chess was threatening to overshadow the sport’s biggest spectacle, prompting renewed calls to revamp the format, including shorter time controls that might induce the world’s best players into the types of mistakes that make decisive results possible. All of that went silent with game six, a heart-pounding psychodrama worthy of the sprawling canvas only the classical format can provide: two world-class players going toe to toe over eight gruelling hours within the lonely confines of a sound-proof glass box. Nepomniachtchi went from having Carlsen on the ropes under clock pressure at the first time control, to coming within five seconds of losing on time himself, to finding himself squeezed toward submission in a positional endgame by a relentless foe operating with engine-like precision as Friday turned to Saturday until finally giving in with an inaccuracy on the 130th move. When the Russian resigned after midnight and the curtain dropped on the longest game ever played in a world title match, the playing hall erupted in applause. It was a contest of extreme cognitive, emotional and physical intensity – and Carlsen admitted that dragging his opponent into deep waters, making it a test of endurance and stamina as much as skill, was in his plan. “Part of it was by design at some point,” he said. “I thought I should make the game as long as possible so that we would both be as tired as possible when the critical moment came. That turned out to be a good strategy.” For Carlsen, who turned 31 last week and is regarded as no worse than the third best player in history with Kasparov and Fischer, it was a legacy-defining affair: perhaps the one game from thousands that will be invoked when his career is finished as emblematic of what made him different. Carlsen’s preternatural ability to spot harmony where others see chaos, to build pressure over time, to hold nerve and never give, to take every infinitesimal advantage given and grind out wins from seemingly dull positions that appear bound for draws – to squeeze blood from a stone – has been the Norwegian’s calling card from when he first came to prominence in the early aughts as a fresh-faced, precocious teenager breathlessly touted as the “Mozart of chess”. To accomplish it in his competitive prime on the biggest stage of all, in one of the rare moments every few years when this cloistered sport asks the public to lean forward and pay attention, elevated it from simply a memorable game to one of the greatest ever played. “There’s only one player in the world against whom Ian would have lost this game today,” said Viswanathan Anand, the former champion turned commentator who ceded his title to Carlsen in 2013. “Unfortunately for him, that player was sitting opposite. Because as late as move one hundred and something, Ian still had the draw. But this guy just wouldn’t stop and that’s the reason he won.” Further, game six embodied a triumph for a classical format dismissed as hidebound and obsolete by laying bare a human frailty that no amount of backroom technological advances can fully subsume. Grandmasters, like prizefighters, are avatars for wills. And the weeklong unravelling that ensued once Nepomniachtchi’s was shattered, while frankly difficult to watch, offered heightened gladiatorial drama no less panoramic and compelling than a five-set war of attrition at Wimbledon or the rare championship boxing match that ennobles both men while taking something out of one he may never get back. The careless blunder that cost him in the eighth game was unbecoming of a player ranked in the world’s top five, which he is. The even more elementary gaffe that donated Carlsen the ninth, extinguishing his already threadbare comeback hopes, was among the most egregious in the annals of world championship matchplay. As Carlsen had said only days before: “Pressure gets to everybody.” The flailing challenger, bruised by self-doubt and unable to even pinpoint how exactly it had gone wrong, punctuated his self-destruction with yet another extraordinary pawn blunder in Friday’s 11th game, gifting Carlsen the match. The margin of four wins and no defeats is the most lopsided result in a world championship since Capablanca’s triumph over Lasker exactly 100 years ago. Carlsen will now keep the title for another year and a half before he is required to defend it in early 2023. The eight-man candidates tournament to determine his next challenger happens next summer. Nepomniachtchi will be there, though many believe Carlsen’s stiffest test could come from Alireza Firouzja, the teenage prodigy ranked second who punched his ticket after winning last month’s Grand Swiss in Riga. For today, though, the winner is chess itself, which endures into tomorrow as it has for centuries, arresting imaginations across all cultures with the unceasing promise of infinite potential: all of it within those 64 tiny squares that contain more possible games than atoms in the observable universe. If there’s anything the past fortnight has shown – from the dizzying heights of Carlsen’s epochal game six win to the unpleasant denouement of his foil that followed – it’s that maybe there’s something still intrinsically human in this after all.Albert Benaiges, the former head of FC Barcelona’s youth system and the man who was credited with having discovered Andrés Iniesta, has been accused of sexual abuse of children in his charge over 20 years, accusations the 71-year-old strongly denies. According to an investigation carried out by the Catalan newspaper Ara, more than 60 witnesses have come forward to detail his actions when he was a PE teacher at a school in the Les Corts neighbourhood of Barcelona during the 1980s and 1990s. One former student has made a formal statement to the police and others are expected to follow. The accusations include Benaiges exposing himself to boys and girls at the school, touching children, making them undress in front of classmates and masturbating with them while watching pornographic videos. There have been no accusations from players at the Barcelona academy where Benaiges was a coach from 1992 to 2012. He had been sacked by Mexican club Chivas after complaints from parents in 2014. In 2018 he joined Vissel Kobe in Japan, where Iniesta was playing. In April this year he rejoined Barcelona as academy director but left his post this week due to personal issues. He had been made aware of the publication of the report the previous day. “I have never hurt anyone and if I have done it hasn’t been intentionally,” Benaiges told Ara. “I have an adopted son and four foster children; my conscience is very clear, I have never forced anybody and I have denounced paedophiles.”The speed at which scientists worked to develop the first Covid jabs was unprecedented. Just nine months after the UK went into lockdown, 90-year-old Margaret Keenan officially became the first person in the world outside a trial to receive the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. But the virus is mutating, and the emergence of the Omicron variant last month is already focusing attention on the next generation of jabs. So what do we know about the new Covid-19 vaccines? One change is with delivery mechanisms, such as San Francisco firm Vaxart’s vaccine-in-a-pill, and Scancell’s spring-powered injectors that pierce the skin without a needle. But the biggest development is in T-cell technology. Produced by the bone marrow, T-cells are white blood cells that form a key part of the immune system. While current vaccines mainly generate antibodies that stick to the virus and stop it infecting the body, the new vaccines prime T-cells to find and destroy infected cells, thus preventing viral replication and disease. (The current vaccines also produce a T-cell response, but to a lesser extent.) After a recent study published in Nature, scientists said vaccines targeting a T-cell response could produce much longer-lasting immunity, and be better at fighting virus mutations. “The first-generation Covid-19 vaccines were a rapid and massive victory – far greater than we dared predict,” said Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College London. “But they’re only the first generation of quick wins, which is how they should be regarded. Moving forward there are challenges to consider.” Here are some of the companies on the cutting edge of development: Medicago-GSK Last week, Canada’s Medicago and UK-based GlaxoSmithKline announced “positive efficacy and safety results” from a global trial for what they say is the world’s first plant-based vaccine. It is based on a relative of the tobacco plant, used to produce a particle that mimics the virus, and is combined with an adjuvant made by GSK, which boosts general immune response. The late-stage trial, which involved 24,000 adults across six countries, showed the jab had an overall efficacy rate of 71%, rising to 75% against the Delta variant. The study did not include the new Omicron variant. Medicago, majority-owned by Japan’s Mitsubishi Chemical Holdings since 2013 while Philip Morris International holds a one-third stake, is filing for regulatory approval in Canada and is also in talks with US and UK regulators. The World Health Organization has described plant-derived vaccines as “a new and exciting possibility”, cheap to produce and easy to store. Vaxart The Nasdaq-listed biotech firm has developed what it says is the world’s first oral Covid vaccine, which elicits a T-cell response and generates some antibodies in the nose. The firm dosed its first patients in a mid-stage clinical trial in October. It is also testing if the tablet works against Omicron. A larger international trial with 800 participants will follow next year. Full data from the US trial is expected by March. The tablets can be stored without refrigeration, which makes them easier to use around the world and overcomes the problem of needle phobia. “If you give a pill and a glass of water, you can go a lot faster,” says Dr Sean Tucker, who founded Vaxart 17 years ago. “The mucosa is where the virus invades, and if we stop it there, we keep people healthier and fight off this virus and its variants.” Scancell The spinout from the University of Nottingham, now based in Oxford, is testing two vaccine candidates that induce antibody and T-cell responses against the original and variant Sars-CoV-2 viruses in 40 healthy volunteers in South Africa. The first patient was dosed in October and Scancell will conduct a further trial in the UK, with the first data from the early-stage clinical trials expected by June. The vaccines have been developed with Nottingham’s two universities, with £2m of funding from Innovate UK, and are based on a modification of Scancell’s DNA vaccine technology. They are given via needle-free, spring-powered injectors that use a narrow stream of fluid to penetrate the skin. Founded in 1997 by Lindy Durrant, professor of cancer immunotherapy at Nottingham University and the firm’s chief executive, Scancell specialises in developing cancer vaccines. It listed in London in 2008. Its two main shareholders are the US health investor Redmile and the Singapore Vulpes Life Science Fund, while Durrant and other management together own 1.8% of the company. Emergex The Oxfordshire company has developed a T-cell vaccine that will eventually take the form of an easy-to-administer skin patch. It has recruited 26 people for its first human trial in January. The product can last for up to three months at room temperature. Emergex, founded in 2016 by Thomas Rademacher, emeritus professor of molecular medicine at University College London to develop T-cell vaccines is owned by Singaporean venture capital firm Vickers Venture Partners, its management and high-net worth individuals and family offices. The Vaccine Group The University of Plymouth spinout, which is part-owned by intellectual property specialist Frontier IP, has developed a herpes-virus-based vaccine that has been shown in animal studies to work against both Covid and Sars. It stimulates a strong T-cell response, would be effective against other variants and could boost other vaccines, says Jeremy Salt, the chief executive, a trained vet who has worked for Pfizer in vaccine development. The group is looking for a commercial partner that can produce the vaccine at scale for human trials next year. It will be given as an injection or as a nasal spray.James Reed has zipped into the London head office of the jobs website that bears his family name on a bright blue Vespa scooter modishly emblazoned with his initials. In the midst of the worst worker shortage Britain has seen for decades, the chairman of Reed – one of the UK’s biggest recruitment websites, used by more than 11 million people a month – is the busiest he has been in the quarter-century he’s been at its helm. It’s a far cry from last year, when the company – started by his father, Sir Alec Reed, six decades ago – was in crisis, with turnover plunging as the global jobs market crashed. “It’s unlike anything I’ve seen. We had a jobs bust last year; now it’s a jobs boom,” he says in his office in Holborn, central London. “It’s the most interesting period I’ve experienced in my career, and in many ways the most challenging. There’s a huge demand for workers and a great shortage of supply.” In a trend mirrored across the western world, huge numbers of workers are on the move in Britain as part of a “great resignation,” under way since lockdown restrictions were lifted this summer. Official figures show a million people moved jobs in the three months to September, and vacancies are at a record high of almost 1.3 million. This has been a boon for Reed, which makes money from vacancies posted on its website. There are more than 250,000 jobs advertised on its platform right now, from lorry drivers and cleaners to City lawyers and bankers. Judging by the empty banks of desks outside his corner office, the worker drought has also hit Reed itself. We’re meeting before Boris Johnson ordered a return to working from home where possible, but it’s still deathly quiet. With a laugh, Reed assures me the firm’s 3,500 employees in 180 locations worldwide are all busy. “Everyone in here went home, and we all learned very quickly how to work from home,” he says. “We had to reinvent ourselves. I was a big working-from-home sceptic before this, but I’ve realised it can be super-efficient.” It ought not to be a surprising conversion for a company that specialises in online recruitment. In the run-up to Christmas especially, James Reed’s focus is on the total of funds raised on the website of the Big Give – a charity event started by Sir Alec in 2007. Now among the biggest in the country, it offers donors match-funding from big companies and philanthropists. The ticker on the website has clocked up nearly £25m in donations this year, for more than 900 charities, including those working with homelessness, refugees and the environment. His family’s charitable arm, the Reed Foundation, is a major donor, and also owns an 18% stake in the jobs website, so staff effectively work one day a week to fund good causes. Despite being a convert to working from home, Reed says some things are always better in person. Before Christmas, he is taking more than 120 long-serving members of staff – those who have been with the company for more than 10 years – to dinner at the Ritz in London. It will be done over several evenings, in groups of about a dozen at a time. “We cancelled this last year but are continuing it now. It’s a big thing in our company.” Last year he had planned a party at which he would give each London office employee a bottle of honey whisky made by his wife, Nicola, using honey from bees kept on the roof of Reed HQ. Handing me a bottle labelled “Jimmy Reed’s Honey Whisky”, he says they had crates of it left over when Christmas 2020 was effectively cancelled. The bees were a present from a friend for his 50th birthday in 2013, and he says that though beekeeping adds to the firm’s environmental credentials, it’s also fun: “If you put the suit on, people think you’re a bit of a hero.” It’s also amusing, he tells me, that after his Harley-Davidson motorcycle was stolen last year, the machine he chose to replace the rockers’ bike of choice was a modish Vespa: “The name means wasp in Italian, and wasps kill bees!” Economists fear Omicron could make for a difficult winter and badly derail the recovery from Covid-19, amid concerns that Britain’s strong jobs market might also catch a chill. Reed says he had never heard the name before (“I never studied Greek”), but remains remarkably upbeat: “We’ve seen some reports of hospitality being affected but haven’t seen that in our business. The jobs numbers remain robust. I think people are unsure, but are not yet jumping to make decisions that are radically different from where they were a couple of weeks ago.” The pandemic has changed a lot about the jobs market, he says, exposing skills shortages and deficiencies in education. His solution, rather than encouraging large numbers of young people to go to university, would be to increase the focus on vocational education and apprenticeships. He thinks the shortages will persist into next year: “Our data suggests 2022 will be a strong year for jobs as well. I expect it to be a good year if you’re looking to move.” In a dapper houndstooth tweed suit, cashmere jumper and black Chelsea boots, Reed looks more hip than you might expect for the chairman of a private company with a turnover north of £1bn. But then again neither he nor his father is a typical boss. The company was founded in 1960 in Hounslow, by 26-year-old Alec Reed, who used £75 from the pension fund he had built up while working at the nearby Gillette razor factory. “He tells me I wouldn’t have been allowed to work at Gillette because I’ve got a beard, but maybe that’s fine nowadays. He used to say you’d get fired for having one.” Like his father, Reed is a colourful, affable character in an often bland corporate world. Yet he is also a rich son stepping into a wealthy father’s shoes, which many would say is inappropriate for a large modern company. It’s an issue Reed is all too aware of. “Someone once said, ‘Well, how do you answer the charge of nepotism?’ And I said, ‘I don’t. I’m guilty as charged’. But I feel that now, after almost 25 years as chief executive, and seeing the company change as it has, I have earned my spurs. I think he would credit me that too.” Having added a jobs website to its network of high street recruitment agencies earlier than many rivals, Reed has grown to be among the biggest online recruitment firms in the country. When James Reed took charge of the company in 1997, Sir Alec handed him a conductor’s baton in a glass case, which still has pride of place in his office. But now, after nearly 25 years at the helm, he is turning his attention to who might take over. “I’d like it to continue as a family business, but it’s got be right for the company and right for the individual,” he says. “I’m wondering who to give the baton to next. I’m going to need to at some point.” CV Age 58 Family Wife Nicola and six children. Education Scaitcliffe prep school in Surrey and St Paul’s in west London. Degree in philosophy, politics and economics He graduated from Oxford then an MBA from the Harvard Business School. Most proud of “My family, I suppose, is an obvious one.” Biggest career mistake There have been lots, he says. The most recent was a failed attempt to create a digital-only IT contractor website. Although it lost money, Reed has no regrets. “You win some, you lose some. You’ve got to keep trying things because if you don’t you’ll never succeed.” How you relax Horse riding, walking and being out in nature. He enjoys driving his mare, Joleen, around the country lanes of Wiltshire, as well as long-distance walks with his wife. “You really see the country. You stay in pubs, you meet people, and it’s just fantastic.” Guilty pleasure An occasional cigar Most overused word or phrase The company advertising slogan, “Love Mondays”, is on the wall behind him in neon . “I do use that. My kids would say I do.” Last holiday Malta, where his mother-in-law is from.Jazz of the past filtered through 21st-century ears: that’s the nearest I can get to explaining what makes Kansas Smitty’s music unique. The band, under its American leader Giacomo Smith, has always managed to bring it off with that mixture of seriousness and levity that goes down well with British audiences. Now, apart from the bass player and Smith himself, it’s a new band and a new set of ears, attuned to hip-hop. For them Smith has devised a set of pieces based on samples taken from works by Jelly Roll Morton, Bix Beiderbecke and others – including Maurice Ravel! With some, such as opening track High Society, the samples are so obscure that there’s no apparent connection with the original, which seems rather pointless. Others, for instance Morton’s New Orleans Bump, work beautifully. This has a real character of its own, more subdued and mysterious than the original. I’d say the balance between these two extremes is about 50/50. I hope the band aren’t turning all arty on us. But Water Dance (from Ravel’s Jeux d’Eau) makes a great job of the tricklings and splashings.As I write, Tesla, the manufacturer of electric vehicles (EVs), has a market capitalisation of $1.051tn, which makes it the world’s sixth most valuable company by market cap. Tesla shares are trading at $1,047, which is 64% higher than at this time last year. Elon Musk, the founder and CEO of the company, currently has a net worth estimated at $300bn, which makes him the richest person in the world. Enormous wealth, like power, acts as an aphrodisiac that warps people’s perceptions of those who possess it: it’s as if they’re surrounded by a reality distortion field. Similar force fields have enveloped Bill Gates and Steve Jobs in their time and now it’s Musk’s turn. Because he’s uncommonly voluble on social media, especially on Twitter, where he has 65.7 million followers, his every utterance is assiduously parsed by besotted fans (all of whom call him “Elon”, as if he were a buddy of theirs). This gives him an influence way beyond that of any other corporate executive, influence that, on some occasions, even affects global financial markets through what the normally sober Financial Times calls the “Tesla-financial complex”. A closer examination of his Twitter feed, though, yields an impression of a really complex individual: a baffling combination of formidable intelligence and ungovernability – part visionary, part genius, part fruitcake and part exploiter of tax loopholes and public subsidies. And it raises the question: what (or where) is the real Elon Musk? The answer, I suspect, lies in his mastery of the business of manufacturing complex products. One sees it, for example, in the way SpaceX, the aerospace company he set up to reduce the colossal costs of space travel, has become the first non-state organisation to: successfully launch, orbit and recover a spacecraft; send a spacecraft to the International Space Station; manage the first vertical takeoff and vertical landing for an orbital rocket; and send astronauts to the International Space Station. Anyone who thinks this stuff is easy has never done it. Compared to SpaceX, you’d have thought that the business of manufacturing electric cars would be child’s play, especially since, compared to vehicles powered by internal combustion engines, they’re considerably simpler. (Basically, an EV is like a massive skateboard where the huge battery is the board.) Even so, when Tesla started making them in 2008, the world (not to mention Ford, General Motors, BMW, Mercedes, VW and Toyota) sniggered, which, oddly enough, reminded this columnist of the way Nokia and Motorola sniggered in 2007 at the idea of Apple making a mobile phone. The story is the same in the case of the car. Tesla did eventually figure out how to make them – making bodyshells out of aluminium and then kitting them out with all the stuff that goes into a vehicle using a combination of robots and humans – and now its Model 3 is emerging as the bestselling new car in a number of markets. But it turns out that, just as with Apple and the smartphone, mastering the art of conventional manufacturing was just the beginning. Some time ago, Musk seemed to have had an epiphany, perhaps triggered by a conversation with a grizzled veteran of car manufacturing named Sandy Munro, who allegedly likened the rear end of a Tesla shell during manufacture to a patchwork quilt. Why, Musk mused, couldn’t the entire bodyshell be die-cast in one piece from molten aluminium, just as reproduction toy cars are? You can guess where this is heading. Tesla bought a number of colossal press-casting machines – inevitably christened “Giga Presses” – from Idra, the Italian company that makes them. And they are now deployed in some Tesla factories turning out the rear half of Model Y bodyshells as single pressure-moulded pieces. Suddenly, a task that required 70 different parts to be assembled by 300 robots is being done by a single giant machine. The obvious next step is to use the same process to make the complete bodyshell in one fell swoop. This step – and the huge investment needed to implement it – suggests a new way of thinking about Musk: as the spiritual heir of Henry Ford. Since the early days of the car, there have only been three major paradigm shifts in the manufacturing process. The first was Ford’s introduction of a moving production line, memorably satirised in Charlie Chaplin’s Modern Times, which could turn out a completed Model T in 90 minutes. The second paradigm shift came from Toyota in the postwar years – the famous “lean” production method that involved minimising inventories and arranging supply chains for just-in-time delivery of components that arrived just before they were needed at the relevant stage in the manufacturing process. Although invented in Japan, and initially ignored by the US car industry, in the end every car has been made the Toyota way. Lastly, the arrival of the Giga Press and the thinking behind it is what suggests that, in the end, Musk might be remembered not so much as the oddball who dreamed of colonising Mars (or possibly expired thereon), but as the guy who found a new way of making terrestrial vehicles. He will doubtless be frustrated by this thought, but – hey! – that’s a price the rest of us might be prepared to bear. What I’ve been reading Words of wisdom How to Fix Social Media is a long, thoughtful and historically informed essay by Nicholas Carr in the New Atlantis. Woolf at the door The Work of Living Goes On: Rereading Mrs Dalloway During an Endless Pandemic is a lovely essay by Colin Dickey on the dystopian undercurrents in Virginia Woolf’s famous novel and its echoes in our attempts to “move on” from Covid. On the bright side… Why Humans Aren’t the Worst (Despite, Well, Everything Happening in the World) is the title of an intriguing interview with the journalist and historian Rutger Bregman by Kara Swisher.Anya Chalotra is watching me. I have half-threatened to order a Venezuelan sandwich from the chalkboard at the London café we’re in – we are talking just after lunch – but I don’t trust myself to maintain a serious line of questioning and not get guacamole down my front while doing it. “Are you sure? I don’t mind,” she says. No it’s fine, Anya, please. Later, the café owner tours the tables to tell us they are closing in 20 minutes. “And what about your sandwich?” Anya points to me. Honestly, please, I had a flapjack, it was hearty. And after the interview: “Do you want to stay and have your sandwich now?” I mean I would, but they are closed, so it’s too late now, isn’t it? Lunch aside, the point is that Anya Chalotra is a gifted and enthusiastic people-watcher. She confesses to this up front: “I’m obsessed with people,” she says, not not sounding like a serial killer, “and I’m obsessed with analysing people.” But it bulges out of every anecdote she gives, too. On being recognised in public: “Oh, I’m always stuffing my face. They always come up to me when I’m stuffing my face. Because I don’t mind going to the pub on my own, or eating on my own – I just sit in the corner and watch people – but they always get me stuffing my face.” On pandemic activities: “I was just staring into space, mainly.” On filming in multiple difficult climates as her character in Netflix series The Witcher traversed magically across continents: “The whole crew was in the sea, jeans rolled up, or wearing trunks. And I don’t know how I wasn’t cracking up, looking at all these people in their jazzy little trunks. It was quite a serious moment.” On east London parks, an objective ranking thereof: “Victoria Park. Always. The dog-watching there is hilarious. I just find their mothers’ meetings, in the park, hysterical.” Watching, watching, watching. Which is what 76 million people did when the first series of The Witcher dropped in December 2019. This is partly because The Witcher was so much better than it had any business being: classically, television based on video game source material (it is, before anyone starts, also a book) has been hard to get right. But also, while other fantasy shows have tried to establish layer upon layer of lore they hope Redditors will squabble over forever, The Witcher pivoted, telling an overarching story of Henry Cavill’s Geralt of Rivia meeting his epic love-match in Chalotra’s Yennefer of Vengerberg, but set against a backdrop of an X Files-style monster-of-the-week format. Essentially, despite having magic and witches and m’lords, it was fun, erring towards the pesky mischief of old folklore rather than the trudging macguffinery of modern fantasy. Chalotra’s Yennefer became crucial to the show’s success because, over the course of the timeline-bending first season, it was her character who appeared in so many iterations. When we first meet her, she has a curved spine (Chalotra wore a prosthetic hump for weeks on end: “We burned it,” she says, in actually quite a scary way) and a misaligned jaw, and is sold to a witch for half the price of a pig. But from there she grows into power, is unleashed as a dark adviser to various kings and is soon strutting around the continent, double-crossing lords, feuding, having sex so effectively the tower she’s in explodes, and the whole thing ends in a battle that gets “quite spicy” and ends up with most of the world in front of her being on fire. We see her grown up, youthful, nervous and powerful, which is a lot of parts to play for an actor relatively fresh out of drama school. Chalotra did her foundation course at Lamda and a subsequent three-year degree at Guildhall, but she cut her teeth “performing for attention” by being born as the middle child in a family of three to a traditional-ish family in Lower Penn, Staffordshire. She performed in that classic childhood way all kids do: rouge on the cheeks, wearing adults’ shoes. “Oh God, my brother. I found a clip the other day where I’d dressed him up as Gareth Gates, because I was obsessed with him from Pop Idol. And another one – he was Peter Pan, my cousin was Wendy, and I have no idea who I was, but I was in a costume and I was bossing them about.” She was smart-but-not-in-that-super-academic-way at school. “I was annoying, more than anything. I remember, like, having to sit on my own… quite a bit.” But it was only when she was accepted by Lamda after an audition at 18 that she started thinking of herself as someone who could do acting as a career. “I had to get into a drama school,” she says, “because in my family – I’m very heavily influenced by my Indian culture – my dad typically wanted me to be a doctor or a dentist or a pharmacist or a journalist or… Anything that was more academic than, you know, prancing about in costume for a living. So that was what I focused on throughout that whole process: treating it like exams.” The initial foundation course at Lamda was a full-throttle year of shows, rehearsals, pretending to be a tree – classic drama school fare – before she was catapulted up towards Guildhall. “That’s why I think it’s more interesting to take people who are a little bit older into drama school,” she explains, “because they’ve had that experience of university and they’ve lived and they’ve gotten some work on their own terms for a while, before they enter a world which, I wouldn’t say you have to ‘know yourself’, but it would be nice to know what I liked and disliked a little bit more before I went. I hadn’t properly developed my opinion on things and it’s probably only in lockdown that I really feel like I’ve grown in that way. I really feel like through lockdown I just developed a taste for things because I’ve had time. I never had time to watch the amount that I do now.” It’s interesting to think of someone going through the dual whirlwinds of back-to-back drama schools and then being cast in one of the most-watched TV shows the world’s biggest streamer ever made sitting down and actually becoming a person, but that’s what Chalotra, now 26, spent the last year doing, thanks mostly to pandemic lockdowns stopping all known whirlwinds in their tracks. “What do I like now? Hmm. Well it’s a really obvious answer [this is not an obvious answer, by the way], Danish film. Thomas Vinterberg. That’s what I’m really into, right now. I like the writing, I like the space, I like the colour grade.” A lockdown interest for photography was going well until The Canal Incident. “My recent camera… well, I kicked it in a canal, basically.” Why? “A bike bell dinged. I’d been crouched down taking some pictures of flies on the surface of the water – beautiful – and I thought I’d put it in my bag. But then I kicked it and it just… dropped.” It’s a harrowing story, actually, to hear Chalotra tell it. “It was like slow motion. I could hear the soundtrack in my head and then the music stopped. I called my brother – he has the same camera – and was like, ‘You’ll never guess what happened: the camera, the grand camera, has just gone in the bloody canal’. I didn’t go in there because… I just saw it sink to the bottom. There were bubbles. So now I’m just on my iPhone and a disposable, until I can earn myself a new one.” I’m intrigued about how someone who so fanatically watches dogs, flies, trunk-wearers and sandwich avoiders deals with suddenly being the one who is watched. Obviously, actors are used to being perceived – before The Witcher, Chalotra appeared in another Netflix show, Wanderlust, and in the John Malkovitch-as-Poirot series, The ABC Murders (there was a very modern non-kerfuffle, about her character singing Somewhere Over the Rainbow – a song released in 1939 – in a series set in 1933), as well as receiving critical praise for her turn as Jyoti in the Theatre Royal Stratford East’s production of The Village. But there’s a difference between being described as “compelling” in a four-star Guardian review and going from 400 to 914,000 Instagram followers almost overnight. Was that weird? “Oh, I never wanted a blue tick in my life,” she says, airily, and it’s one of the first times I’ve ever heard someone say that where I’ve actually believed them. “I was on, like, MSN and Facebook so late. Like, so late. And I think it’s because I have such a huge family – I have about 35 first cousins – so I come from a big family, and I’ve always been quite content with that world.” Did she have to archive any embarrassing old selfies when the dumptruck of fame rolled around? “Never a selfie taker. Was never a selfie taker. But what I had to hide was, well, family photos. They don’t need to be part of that at the moment.” She’s still fairly offline – “I choose to go on when I have a nice collection of photos to post” – so busies herself away from the hum of social media with photography, cooking (“I cook so much. I love cooking my meals – it’s a great joy”), sitting in the corners of pubs darkly watching people go about their lives and kicking expensive electronics into bodies of water. After Chalotra’s photoshoot, as I got in everyone’s way and annoyed the photographers who were just trying to pack up and leave, I asked them what they thought of Chalotra while we waited for her to emerge from the dressing room in civilian clothes (in a very timely four or five minutes – there is no “this actress was really late” gossip to be had here, sorry). ‘Very hard-working,” they said, and humoured me with, “a perfectionist. And loves her clothes.” Do you love your clothes, I ask her? A moment of pondering. “I do. I love love love fashion. But I’m very specific. In terms of buying, I like charity shops and secondhand designer pieces – I’m into that. Because then you get the quality without such a huge investment.” She starts talking with the frantic excitement I recognise from a fellow eBay-head, and I ask her the best thing she’s ever got from the auction site, which is apparently the most serious and difficult question I’ve asked all afternoon. “Oh God that’s hard,” she says. “Probably a chair? A lovely chair. That’s my best eBay get. Ooh, but I can tell you my dad’s: a 99p printer. My dad went to collect it and said, ‘Keep the change.’ ” Another actual question spurred by a photographer trying to get me out of the way of some cables: is she a perfectionist? Is she a better actress in this series than she was in the last one as a result? Chalotra rues, a little, going into The Witcher with only a couple of smaller experiences of working on screen, but recognises her performance came off as green to pretty much none of the 76m viewers apart from her. “I don’t want to undermine other people’s enjoyment of it, but when I watched season one I was cringing at most parts,” she says, “but it doesn’t mean I wasn’t so proud of the work that I’d done. I criticised every part of it and felt that I didn’t believe enough about my work, but I put so much work into it, so I can really appreciate when I watched it, like, the emotional attachments in each scene and what I had to go through to deliver that.” After a leave-it-all-on-the-floor approach to last season – there was screaming, destruction, rebirth, nudity – season two’s Yennefer is a more stable, fully formed character, and gives Chalotra a chance to build on the good work of two years ago without exactly returning to the well of it. “I suppose because I exposed so much of myself in season one – it was actually fulfilling, because it just means I have done everything now – I really have shown so much of myself to the world, and being a perfectionist I’m like: well, I’ve done that bit now. I’ve done the ‘learning in public’. Am I better now? I dunno. We’ll see.” The Witcher season 2 is out on 17 December on Netflix Stylist Hope Lawrie; photographer’s assistant Espen Øydvin; hair by Dayaruci at Wall Group using Sam McKnight; makeup by Justine Jenkins using Seeds of ColourThe best and the worst of racing over jumps was on stark display, as Coole Cody bounced back from a crashing fall two from home here last month to win the Racing Post Gold Cup. His brave, compelling victory was marred, however, by a fatal injury to the eight-year-old Dostal Phil, who was pulled up in the early stages by Aidan Coleman after an apparent dislocation of his right hind leg. Few horses attack Cheltenham’s chase course with as much relish as the frontrunning Coole Cody, who was still narrowly ahead of the eventual winner, Midnight Shadow, when he came down in the Paddy Power Gold Cup three weeks ago. Adam Wedge soon had Coole Cody in his favoured position at the head of the field, and Midnight Shadow too was again close at hand as they turned for home. This time around, however, there was a 5lb shift in the weights in Coole Cody’s favour, and having dismissed the final two fences as readily as he had the previous 15, the 12-1 chance stayed on strongly up the hill to beat the fast-finishing Zanza by two lengths, with Ryan Mania on Midnight Shadow a short head away in third. “With a lot of horses, you’re always nervous after a fall, but when this horse falls on the floor he thinks it’s a bit of fun,” Evan Williams, Coole Cody’s trainer, said. “He’s a very angry character who would go to war every day if he could. “He’s just one of those rare breed of horses that’s very tough and very genuine and faces the music every time he comes to a big gig. It’s hard to put into words how tough a horse he is.” Guard Your Dreams gave Nigel Twiston-Davies his fifth victory in the Grade Two International Hurdle, battling all the way to the line to hold off last year’s winner, Song For Someone. Blazing Khal was cut to 5-1 (from 8-1) by Betfair for the Albert Bartlett Novice Hurdle at Cheltenham next March after overcoming a mistake two out and a slow jump at the last to quicken four and a quarter lengths clear of Gelino Bello in the card’s Grade Two novice hurdle. Earlier in the afternoon, My Drogo got off the mark over fences at the second attempt after a late mishap here last month. There were occasional moments when punters who had backed My Drogo at 2-9 might have been having second thoughts, as Harry Skelton’s mount gave himself plenty to do to clear a couple of the early obstacles. His timing and confidence visibly improved as the race went on, however, and his jumps at the final two fences were the best of the round. “I know he has made a couple of brave errors,” Dan Skelton, the winner’s trainer, said, “but the two that he didn’t get perfectly as he was a long way off them, he stays committed. “He doesn’t go long then at the last minute, change his mind to go short. If he is long, he stays long and that is very important. If he changed his mind, it would be dangerous.” My Drogo is priced at about 7-1 for the Turners Novice Chase over two and a half miles at the Festival next March. “You couldn’t dare go three [miles],” Skelton said, “and I think over two, you would have to be super-aggressive.”Whatever doubts anyone might harbour about Arsenal’s standard, they continue to tick off the lesser assignments and will stay among the European spots if that trend is maintained. A sloppy start gave way to a comfortable afternoon’s work; even better, the goals were shared between a striker, a midfielder and a defender. In recent years Mikel Arteta would have revelled in a healthy haul that did not rely squarely on Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, so he could be doubly relieved to savour one here. While Alexandre Lacazette, Martin Ødegaard and Gabriel can be feted for their contributions, their names took a back seat in the post-match conversation. Arteta must have thought he had left Arsenal’s soap‑opera habits behind after a summer revamp but he now faces a huge decision on how to deal with his club captain, who was dropped from the match‑day squad after returning late from a trip abroad. Aubameyang has let Arteta down before and been forgiven. On the available evidence that is not a state of affairs that can continue infinitely and it is no example to set when you are an elder statesman in the Premier League’s youngest squad. The way in which Aubameyang’s peers went about their work may focus Arteta’s thinking when he considers who should lead his team. Their attitude was sound throughout, even if they are liable to perplex. There are no two ways about it: Arsenal are a strange side, rough around the edges, who can drift out of games for alarmingly long periods before illuminating them at a stroke. That is exactly what happened here, an error‑strewn first 20 minutes courting punishment before Southampton were put to the sword. “We started a little bit nervy, gave some difficult balls away and could not dominate,” Arteta said. Aaron Ramsdale was called into action three times early on, most notably parrying one-handed from Adam Armstrong, and Arsenal seemed cowed by their late disappointment at Everton on Monday. The uncertainty over Aubameyang may not have helped but it was alleviated, for one night at least, by the player who took his place in attack. Lacazette’s goal concluded a journey from the ridiculous to the sublime, which began when Ramsdale was almost robbed by Armando Broja. The goalkeeper improvised and set in train a sweeping move that broke the Southampton press. Eventually Takehiro Tomiyasu found Bukayo Saka in an inordinate amount of space on the right; Saka’s run was purposeful, his cutback precise, and Lacazette swept into the corner. Arsenal had almost rued loose passing from the back several times but when it works it pays off marvellously. Arteta praised Lacazette’s “energy and commitment and the way he leads”, saying he “really affected the team”. He also had warm words for Ødegaard, whose third goal in as many games came within six minutes. Kieran Tierney miscued one attempted cross and had a second bite blocked but, after the ball looped up, nodded his third attempt into Ødegaard’s path. The resulting header was emphatic and proved a point his manager has hammered home. “He is making the box much more and now he’s understanding why we encourage him to do that because he is a match‑winner, that is the difference between a very good player and a match-winner,” Arteta said. That was indeed game over, even if Southampton’s emergency goalkeeper, the 40-year-old Willy Caballero, had hitherto been untroubled. He saved from Saka before half-time but was beaten to a corner by Gabriel in the 62nd minute, adding gloss to Arsenal’s day. Gabriel had had a goal disallowed moments previously; he was also booked and had been behind much of Arsenal’s skittish early work, additionally flirting with disaster in a penalty-area coming together with Nathan Tella. His display was of a piece with the fare on show: far from polished, but effective and ultimately superior. Southampton, who lost Armstrong and Broja to injury, found Ramsdale an impenetrable barrier as they sought a consolation; Saka and Gabriel Martinelli both hit posts at the other end for Arsenal. “After the third goal the game is gone,” Ralph Hasenhüttl said. “You could feel the quality they had when they were in the flow.” Arteta must decide whether the reinsertion of his captain will add to that or not.I remember bumping into Jimmy Greaves in Romford in October 1965. I was out with my daughter Claire in her pushchair when I walked past a tobacco shop and there was Jimmy. I thought he was an incredible striker and so I had to wheel Claire into the tobacconist so that I could talk to him. I was only 22 months younger than him but, at 25, he was already the great Jimmy Greaves. There was a gulf between us then. Jimmy was big time and I was just this kid coming through. He had established himself years before I did. Jimmy made his debut for Chelsea in 1957 when he was 17, and he had played for Milan and since moved to Spurs. He had made his England debut in 1959 and I had yet to play international football when I saw him in that little tobacco shop. Jimmy was great, and so friendly, and while he was buying his cigars he kept chatting away to me. I was so engrossed in our conversation that after we said goodbye, as I walked down Romford High Street, I suddenly realised I was no longer pushing Claire. I had left her in the tobacconist! I raced back and found her safe and sound. That gives you an insight into the spell Jimmy cast back then. I took Jimmy’s place as England striker in the World Cup quarter-finals against Argentina eight months later. He had been injured in the final group game against France; I scored the only goal of a niggly match. In the semi-final against Portugal I set up the second of the two goals Bobby Charlton scored and Alf Ramsey then stuck with me for the final against West Germany; I scored a hat-trick and England won the World Cup. That twist of fate hurt Jimmy but everyone should know how special he was as a player. When we were both teenagers the legend of Jimmy Greaves in the Essex school leagues was secure. Martin Peters, my great friend and our England teammate in 1966, always marvelled over the day Jimmy played against his school. Jimmy scored 11 goals in a 13-0 hammering and Martin, who was on the touchline, told me it was the greatest individual display he ever saw. Jimmy, being the laconic comic, was like Muhammad Ali, who would always tell his opponents the exact round in which he would knock them out. Jimmy used to turn up at games and tell people how many he would score. People tend to talk about his time at Spurs as Jimmy being at the height of his career. He played 379 games for them and scored 266 goals. In internationals he scored 44 goals in 57 games – which is still the best ratio for an England striker. But he was actually at his best for Chelsea. In 1956-57, as a youth player, he scored 114 goals in that one season. His stats as a first-team striker at Chelsea were also stunning: 132 goals in 169 games. Soon after Jimmy and I met in the tobacconist in 1965 he caught hepatitis. He got himself razor-sharp fit again for the World Cup but his luck ran out. If he hadn’t been injured Alf would have kept Jimmy in – there is no way in the world he would have changed a winning team with Jimmy Greaves leading the line. Jimmy and I never discussed what happened, but as Jimmy said in his book, after the final he couldn’t wait to get away. He missed most of the celebrations and left the dinner straight away. You couldn’t blame him. I can only guess how much the disappointment scarred him. Many former footballers turn to alcohol, but I can’t be sure his life went down that path just because of 1966. So it was lovely to see him have a second life on television in the 1980s, when he was so loved on the Saint and Greavsie show. We didn’t spend a great deal of time together after football but I did appear on some of his theatre tours and it was enjoyable sharing a stage with him because he was such a funny guy. When I make appearances now I still use a couple of Jimmy’s stories. In one of his early games under Alf Ramsey, England weren’t playing very well. At half-time they were all expecting to get told off, but Alf came into the dressing room and got distracted when he saw Jimmy smoking. Instead of giving them all a rollicking he just said: “Jimmy, put your fag out.” That was Jimmy. When Jimmy passed away in September I was obviously sad. Crikey, we go back, Jimmy and I, from meeting as youngsters in Romford and then playing together for England and West Ham. To have two huge gifts – as a striker and an entertainer with a wonderful sense of humour – made him exceptional. He had his share of problems, like we all do, but Jimmy Greaves was a lovely guy and he lived a fantastic life.I have been puzzling over a dramatic question from a psychiatrist friend. He had been consulted about a patient who was behaving erratically, obsessed by the notion that his wife was having an affair. A colleague diagnosed “Othello syndrome”, which is apparently the recognised term for pathological erotic jealousy. My friend thinks this won’t do. Othello was not delusional: he was tricked, persuaded by Iago that a hanky was evidence of Desdemona’s infidelity. He wonders if Leontes from The Winter’s Tale, who, on a whim, accuses his wife and best friend of carrying on, might not more accurately lend his name to the condition? Or could I think of another candidate, in Shakespeare or elsewhere, to represent all-consuming but not suicidal jealousy? I consulted a trio of English graduates: they were stumped – and I am still looking. So far the best suggestion has come from a friend’s 13-year-old son. He thought Adrian Mole would fit the case nicely. Joke of thanks The London Review of Books has recently published a small volume of pieces by Penelope Fitzgerald, a terrific reminder of how far-reaching book reviews can be. The novelist’s unblinking brilliance spurred me to look for a small cache of postcards she sent when I was helping to edit her at the LRB (actually, she required no editing): one of them explained she was about to take part in a writing course in Yorkshire – “madness, as it’s only encouraging more writers and there are too many already”. The cache has temporarily disappeared and the only card I could lay my hands on was a thank-you message written after a party in 1981. She had arrived spectacularly early – the LRB staff were still slicing up strawberries and arranging pots of flowers at the back of the lawn, in imitation of a garden. The novelist sat for half an hour in an easy chair looking out of the window, chatting. Her card (a Maclise painting of The Eve of St Agnes) was characteristic: clearly written but mysterious – tactful? Feline? A joke? “It was a lovely party and obviously getting better and better… ” She had left before anyone else arrived. Shared square A small comfort for the Royal Court, from which last week two corporate sponsors withdrew their support following the row about antisemitic stereotyping in Al Smith’s play Rare Earth Mettle. At least Sloane Square itself is for the moment a jollier place. Usually the bleakest of traffic islands, surrounded by cabs and wealth, it will, until 23 December, feature a restaurant and bar run by the theatre, offering cocktails, currywurst – and hot-water bottles. This is the revival of an old dream. Just over 20 years ago, the architects Haworth Tompkins, commissioned to redesign the theatre, wanted to link the newly placed basement bar to the square via an underground connection next to a former ladies’ lavatory. The Cadogan Estate refused permission. Covid and the need for outside congregation have caused it to think again and now we can see what we have been denied these two decades. A vivid area rather than a desolate one, with audiences and passersby sharing a space, the theatre part of the flow of life. The Court is working on a new offer in the square for January. I hope it gets it. Boring a bore The Archers deserves congratulations on one of its meta-moments, I think scripted by the great Nick Warburton. The son of the recently deceased Bert Fry has turned up, talking animatedly about his obsessions – travel arrangements and stones. He is, Tony Archer complains, “the most boring man” ever. “Boring” is a startling new addition to the Ambridge lexicon. Is Tony, hardly the most vibrant villager, really the best first user? • Susannah Clapp is the theatre critic of the Observer1 I ate the most delicious and original dinner of 2021 at the Black Bull in Sedbergh, Cumbria: mackerel flavoured with sudachi; cod with smoked roe and seaweed; sticky toffee pudding (of course). Not that I was exactly surprised by any of it. I knew I’d died and gone to heaven when we were served hot guinea fowl croquettes with our preprandial sidecars. Miraculous. 2 Tricky, but I think the dish I loved most was the buttermilk fried chicken with caviar and brown butter at Skosh in York, where I managed to bag a table twice in 12 months. How I refrained from ordering a second helping – I may mean a third – I’ll never know. 3 The coldest dinner of the year was at Saint Jacques in St James’s, London, chosen for its terrace in those odd weeks when restaurants were still only allowed to serve outside. My fingers were as blue as the steak some red-trousered type was devouring on the next table. 4 In 2021, I cooked quite a few good things myself, weary though I frequently was at the sight – even the thought – of my kitchen. Take it from me, then, that Felicity Cloake’s recipe for fish pie is the absolute best, though I gild the lily and throw in mussels, too (keep a bag of frozen ones from Picard on standby for this emergency). 5 I was also cooked for, which is by far the lovelier thing. I still think of the pakoras my friend Arifa served up one evening in May, soon after we’d been released from captivity (again). These birds’ nests of deliciousness, grease and spice in perfect balance emerged from her kitchen in munificent and unceasing waves, which meant that I was also cunningly able to disguise my greed for them as politeness (possibly). 6 I told myself: no more new cookbooks. But then I clapped eyes on Crave by Ed Smith, which arranges recipes by mood, and it called to me, what with the pervasive longing, anxiety etc. It has taken me a while to accept that while I might aspire to moods that are “fresh and fragrant”, I’m actually a “cheesy and creamy” kind of person who self-medicates with unsalted butter. 7 In 2021, I bought no new swanky knives or any other kitchen kit. But I did take delivery of my mother’s Wedgwood Sterling stoneware in rich chocolate brown. It’s very 1970s; I love it almost as much as she has always hated it. So stylish is it, in fact, I’m prepared to tolerate the awful sound it makes whenever it comes into contact with a knife. Whether my friends will feel the same is yet to be seen. 8 My survivor of the year award goes to Maison Francois in Duke Street, London, which had barely opened when the first lockdown began. It gives me great pleasure – and yet it gives me no pleasure at all – to announce that, as I write, it’s impossible to bag a table. It will be 2022 before I can eat (more self-medication) those comte gougeres again. 9 This year was the one when I found out that tinned grapefruit is really not bad, a discovery resulting from a sudden lockdown-induced desire for a hotel breakfast buffet (not that I ordinarily eat the grapefruit at a hotel breakfast buffet, tinned or not). 10 The best edible present I received: chocolate decorated in suffragette colours and the words “courage calls to courage everywhere”, brought to me by a member of a certain WhatsApp group, all of whom were in my kitchen at the time. What fantastic women, I thought, as we ate it – and, yes, here comes the slushy bit. Nothing in this list would mean anything at all were it not for those we love (including the tinned grapefruit, with its suggestion of holidays, and strangers on unfamiliar landings). Food connects us. It’s a sacramental thing: every cook a priest, every table an altar. I’m not grateful to the pandemic for anything save for my ever-rising awareness of my great good fortune at having so many excellent (greedy, hungry, chocolate-loving) people in my life. Whatever happens next, it’s this (and a fish pie) that I’ll cling to.Screenshot (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Moving Pictures (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds The Unfiltered History Tour (Vice World News) | spotify.com The other day I appeared on a friend’s indie podcast (Lulu Le Vay’s Where Love Lives, if you want to know) to talk about non-romantic love. I spent most of my allotted chat time talking about loving the arts. And yes, I realise this puts me firmly in the category of perfumed ponce. But it’s a true love. Art – not just the visual arts, but music, books, audio, film, theatre, dance – has given me solace and inspiration and joy for as long as I can remember. So I’m making no apologies for reviewing a trio of arts-based shows this week. First up, Radio 4’s new series Screenshot, in which the film critic Mark Kermode, of this parish, is joined by freelance critic Ellen E Jones. The show is about film, did you guess? But it’s a bit different: it isn’t a review show. Neither is it a film news show, which the recently axed Film Programme was. Instead, it’s a sort of exploration of movies, kicked off by a film that’s relevant at the time of recording. For the first episode this was West Side Story. Neither Kermode nor Jones had seen the new Spielberg version at the time of recording, but this proved less of a problem than you might imagine. They discussed the Robbins and Wise 1961 classic, and Jones talked to Rita Moreno, who stars in both the original and Spielberg’s film, as well as Joivan “Mandem on the Wall” Wade about his YouTube hit Shiro’s Story, with its similar love-across-the-divide theme. Kermode examined Romeo and Juliet movies, interviewing the always-interesting directors Abel Ferrara and Baz Luhrmann about their versions. There were a couple of forgettable “what I’ve been watching” bits from Lin-Manuel Miranda and Miriam Margolyes, but these were the only missteps. I enjoyed the show immensely: the ripples spreading from the initial stone in the water, the details, the exploratory tone. Jones and Kermode are lovely presenters: warm, clear, uncompetitive, both with excellent interview technique. Also on Radio 4, Moving Pictures returned last week. This is not about film, but paintings, specifically old masters, and is produced and presented by Cathy FitzGerald, whose programmes are always worth checking out. On Tuesday, the subject was Rubens’s The Feast of Herod, depicting a dinner where Salome shows the head of John the Baptist to Herod, and if you go to the Moving Pictures website, you can look at the painting while the show is on. Argh: what a frightening picture! Its sumptuousness and dread were reflected in FitzGerald’s choice of discordant background sounds, and in the analysis from the experts. The final line, from art expert Leah Kharibian, made me gasp in horror. Vice World News has a new 10-part podcast, The Unfiltered History Tour, which brings a fresh eye to favourite museum pieces. Remember Radio 4’s The History of the World in 100 Objects, hosted by the former British Museum director Neil MacGregor? This is the flip side. The Unfiltered History Tour wants the British Museum to return certain artefacts (“stolen goods”) to the places they originally came from. The episode I heard, which discusses what the west calls “the Easter Island heads”, and what the Rapa Nui islanders call moai – it means living faces, was touching and exceptionally interesting. The British Museum has a prized moai called Hoa Hakananai’a, taken from Rapa Nui by British explorers in 1868. We heard from islanders Sergio Mata’u Rapu and Tarita Alarcón Rapu, who are working to get Hoa Hakananai’a back. “For us, it’s not just a well-carved rock,” said Tarita. “It’s a living ancestor. Living.” After listening to the show I went back to the relevant 100 Objects episode (it’s No 70). The contrast between MacGregor’s lofty, academic approach and the emotion of Sergio and Tarita was stark. Both programmes described an annual island race: a scramble down a cliff followed by a swim to another island to find a bird’s egg, then a return with the egg intact. MacGregor called this the birdman “cult”, Tarita the birdman “ceremony”. Hoa Hakananai’a was central to the ceremony, and on his back are special carvings. Tarita says these are the “complete alphabet of Rapa Nui history… our entire language on his back”. MacGregor called the carvings “feeble, fussy, diminished”. Ugh. The islanders have an entirely sensible scheme for returning Hoa Hakananai’a to Rapa Nui, and this programme makes an excellent case. Other episodes discuss the Benin bronzes, the Rosetta stone and, of course, the Parthenon marbles. There is much non-romantic true love for them all, and it’s hard to argue that these works should not be returned to where they resonate the most.It covers three quarters of the surface of the Earth and gives our planet its distinctive blue complexion when viewed from outer space. But the source of the liquid water that sustains our seas and which has nourished life on our world for eons is a subject of major scientific debate. Some researchers argue that water in some form has been present on our world ever since it coalesced out of swirling clouds of dust and gas 4.5 billion years ago. Earth has always been provided with a reservoir, in short. Other scientists take a different view, however. They say that in the beginning Earth was parched and waterless and our oceans only appeared much later – when ice and water rained down on our world from extraterrestrial sources. These were responsible for most of the 332,500,000 cubic miles of water that now cover our planet, it is argued. And now, a group of British scientists has provided key backing for the idea that the origins of our seas were out of this world. They have studied grains of material – found on an asteroid called 25143 Itokawa and brought back to Earth by a Japanese robot probe – and concluded these support the idea we got our oceans from outer space. “The dust we have studied provides good evidence that our oceans were created from water that came from other parts of the solar system,” said Luke Daly, of the University of Glasgow. “It suggests that at least half the water we have on Earth filtered down from interplanetary dust.” Daly and his colleagues used atom-probe tomography to study grains of dust that were returned from 25143 Itokawa. This remarkable technique allows scientists to count the atoms in a sample one by one. In this way, it was revealed that the grains brought back from the asteroid contained significant amounts of water, the scientists state in a paper published in the journal Nature Astronomy. This water was most likely created by the solar wind, a stream of particles that flows out from the Sun, added Daly. These particles would have interacted with oxygen atoms in the clouds of dust that float through the solar system to create water molecules which would have built up in the clouds over the history of the solar system. Then, as Earth orbited the Sun it would have swept through these clouds and mopped up the dust grains – and their water. In this way, water – “the driving force of all nature,” as Leonardo da Vinci once put it – would have filtered down from the skies on to our planet, it is argued. Crucially, other bodies orbiting the Sun would also have swept up these water-bearing grains. On Earth, these little fragments of silicate have long since disintegrated but on airless asteroid 25143 Itokawa, they will have lain undisturbed on its surface, probably for billions of years, until the Japanese probe Hayabusa swept up a sample and brought it back to Earth where its contents were revealed. The group, which also included Professor Martin Lee, of the University of Glasgow, stresses that they do not think all the water in our seas came from solar dust grains. An equally important supply would have been provided by ice in comets and asteroids that crashed on Earth. “In combination, solar dust and icy comets provided us with the oceans in which life evolved,” said Lee. This last point is supported by the fact that ice from comets and asteroids contain relatively high amounts of the hydrogen isotope deuterium compared with water on Earth while solar dust contains relatively low levels of deuterium. In combination, the two sources balanced each other out to provide an isotopic signature that matches that of water on Earth. And the discovery is important not just because it provides compelling evidence about the origin of water on Earth. It also suggests that other worlds in the solar system could have water, perhaps in the form of ice, on their surfaces with key implications for future space exploration and the search for life elsewhere in the galaxy. “Any sort of moon should be home to a renewable reservoir of water produced by the solar wind,” said Daly. “And that would be important for human space exploration. We need water to drink to keep our bodies going and we could also use it, by splitting water molecules into their hydrogen and oxygen components, to make rocket fuel. In the coming years, as we establish a base on the Moon, sources of water like these are likely to be invaluable. We won’t have to carry water with us when we travel across the solar system.” One deposit of ice is now believed to have formed in the Shackleton crater near the south pole of the Moon and this is the main target for Nasa’s forthcoming Artemis programme, which aims to set up a colony there and exploit its water resources. And the observation that interplanetary dust within our own solar system contains water also has implications for seeking life elsewhere in the galaxy, added Daly. “Across our galaxy, we can observe dust clouds in other star systems where planets are forming. That suggests these worlds will have a supply of water that will allow them to develop seas and oceans and then, possibly, life of some kind.”My family’s Nigerian, but I was born and raised in England and I was very much a British kid. So at school I had bangers and mash, toad in the hole and all the British sweets. Then I’d come home and we’d eat mainly traditional Nigerian food: jollof rice, pounded yam and okra stew. One of my favourites was cow foot, which is the cow leg cut into pieces and simmered and boiled in a stew with tomatoes and spices. I still think it’s delicious to this day, even though I don’t eat it nearly as often. As a teenager I slept with a can of Coke by the bed. I’d wake up and slurp every time I got up for a pee. I have fillings in absolutely every tooth. Including the front ones. On a TV set, there is all manner of evil: chocolate, snacks, biscuits, everything terrible. We could ask for healthy stuff, and I often do, and then when they put the seaweed right next to a KitKat Chunky, you know you’re going to go for the KitKat Chunky. It’s just a fact. Black people know how to cook meat better than anybody and I’ll tell you why. During slavery, when they were giving us the shittiest part of the meats, the offcuts after they’d eaten all the best parts of the animal, we turned that into deliciousness. The oxtail, the pig feet: we turned that into a culinary delight. I was diagnosed with [the immune-system condition] lupus in 2005 and I was put on a pile of medicine. I was on steroids and painkillers, and steroids make your appetite even bigger and you blow up. I put on maybe four stone. And I didn’t feel like I was getting any healthier. It got to a point where I was so ill, I had to have a raised toilet seat because my knees were so painful. I had all kinds of tools to open bottles with, because the joints in my hands were so swollen. Basically, I cut out sugar, meat, gluten, went hardcore raw vegan. I just came off: boom! And within a month, my joints started to heal and I could feel that I could move again. I stopped the medication and the doctors were like: “You’re crazy!” I wouldn’t recommend that for anybody, but that was back in 2009 and I’ve not been on medication for lupus since. I’ve sent it into remission. That’s a massive lesson that I learned: your body’s an engine, and if you keep putting rubbish in the engine, the engine is going to fail. I eat fish again now, I eat a bit of meat here and there, but I know when I go back to eating terribly for long periods of time, my joints start to hurt, I start to feel the old pains coming back. I immediately stop eating that way and switch back to a plant-based diet and get back on my smoothies and it goes away. Sugar is my drug. I don’t drink, I don’t smoke. I don’t do any drugs. Sugar is my big vice. I’ve only been drunk twice, just to experiment. And I was like: I don’t know why people do this to themselves. It’s a “no” from me. The last time, I was working on a lesbian cruise, I was one of the performers on the ship. And one of the girls, it was her birthday and I made the mistake of saying: “Oh, I don’t get drunk.” So they saw it as a challenge. And I tell you, after 15 tequila slammers, I was like, “Whoa!” Luckily, I was a happy drunk. I spent the whole night going around just complimenting people. My favourite things Food Chocolate! Always chocolate! I live in America now and I import Cadbury’s Fruit and Nut from England. You can’t beat it. I don’t eat American chocolate at all, it’s disgusting, it’s all chemicals and colouring. Drink Virgin piña colada. Or if I’m going to drink alcohol, which I do once a year on New Year’s Eve, I love a Baileys, because Baileys is an alcoholic ice-cream to me. Restaurant For Nigerian food, 805 on the Old Kent Road in south London. After a night of dancing in Brixton, I’ll go to Refill Eaterie and get some ackee and saltfish and some fried plantain. There’s always a line outside the block and good banter. Dish to make If I’m going to be hardcore Nigerian, I love oxtails. It will not be beaten! Cack-Handed: a Memoir is out now (HarperCollins, £16.99); Gina Yashere is performing at Leicester Square Theatre, London WC2H 7BX from 21-23 DecemberA missing children’s hospital worker is believed to have disappeared on her way home from work, police said on Saturday, as Labour MP Harriet Harman launched an appeal for information on her constituent. Petra Srncova, 32, a senior nurse assistant at Evelina London children’s hospital in Westminster, was reported missing on 3 December by a concerned colleague, and officers are intensifying their efforts to try to find her. Srncova is believed to have left the hospital at 19.45pm on 28 November. She is thought to have been wearing a green coat and carrying a red backpack at the time, the Metropolitan police said. It is believed that Srncova withdrew money from a cashpoint, before boarding a bus towards Elephant and Castle. She is then thought then to have changed to a bus travelling southbound towards her home address in Camberwell, where she was last sighted at 20.22pm. A man has been arrested in connection with her disappearance and remains in custody, the Met added. “Petra is missing, and we want people to help the police find her,” Harman said at a press conference she held on Saturday afternoon in her constituency of Camberwell. She added: “She’s been missing for quite a few days now, she’s only 32, she’s from the Czech Republic, her parents of course are desperately worried about her, and I feel we’ve all got a particular responsibility to try and find her because she was away from her home country, away from her family, here working for our national health service.” A Met spokesperson said police have approached her family in the Czech Republic and “they have not heard from her”. They added:“Officers are growing increasingly concerned for Petra’s welfare and are asking anyone who has seen her, or has information as to her whereabouts, to make contact immediately.” Det Supt Clair Kelland, from the Central South Command Unit which covers the area that Petra lives in, said: “We continue to grow increasingly worried about Petra and we are doing everything we can to try to find her. “Her disappearance is out of character and, of course, her loved ones are extremely concerned and want to know where she is. “Please think about if you’ve seen her, or maybe come into contact with her. If you have any information whatsoever, please get in touch and help us with our inquiries.” The Evelina hospital said on Twitter: “We are extremely concerned about our valued colleague Petra who is missing. We want to encourage anyone who may have any information that could help to find her to contact the police.” Anyone with information is asked to call 101 or tweet @MetCC referencing 21MIS037753.An emotional day for one Liverpool legend was settled by the cold, calculating precision of another. Mohamed Salah spoiled Steven Gerrard’s Anfield return with a nerveless penalty to keep Jürgen Klopp’s team within a point of the Premier League summit and leave the Aston Villa manager with plenty to regret. Gerrard, heralded by the Kop during and after the second defeat of his brief Villa reign, bemoaned Stuart Attwell’s decision to award the decisive spot-kick and to refuse one to the visitors following Alisson’s rush of blood four minutes from time. But, with typical honesty, there was recognition of his former club’s superiority for much of an absorbing battle and of how things might have altered with earlier ambition on his part. “There was certainly contact from Alisson on Danny Ings and, if you follow it, there is a two-hand shove on Ollie Watkins [from Trent Alexander-Arnold],” said the Villa manager. “We thought that deserved the referee and VAR taking another look but it looked like they wanted to move on quickly. Ultimately we have lost the game to the other pen which we felt was a foul first on Tyrone [Mings]. It feels harsh but penalty box to penalty box Liverpool were better than us. The plan was to try to take it to the latter stages and then get more of our attacking players on. We’ll analyse and I’ll look at myself and whether I should have done it earlier. We didn’t want to get too gung ho.” Gerrard’s appraisal was fair, although there was no denying the merit of Liverpool’s victory or the quality of their response to losing to West Ham on 7 November. All seven matches since have been won, Liverpool have equalled a club record of scoring in 31 games in succession and Salah’s latest strike took his tally for the season to 21. They were the dominant attacking force but repeatedly frustrated, too, as Gerrard’s side absorbed pressure, worked tirelessly and kept their shape. Klopp spent most of the game haranguing the fourth official, Graham Scott, over what he perceived as Attwell’s leniency but the lack of cutting edge from his title chasers was another cause of irritation. “We had conversations, not arguments,” was the Liverpool manager’s interpretation. With Divock Origi joining Roberto Firmino on the injury list and Diogo Jota nursing a knock on the bench, the Liverpool manager deployed Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain as a false nine. The absence of a recognised striker told in the first half, despite the impressive efforts of Sadio Mané, with Salah on the margins and several inviting crosses going unpunished in front of Emiliano Martínez’s goal. Three rejected penalty appeals before half-time did little for Klopp’s mood, although none of the claims from Mané or Robertson was wholly convincing. Though disciplined in organisation and faultless in industry, Villa’s midfield three of John McGinn, Marvelous Nakamba and Douglas Luiz were sloppy in possession, albeit in the face of a relentless Liverpool press, while Watkins was often too isolated from Ashley Young and Jacob Ramsey to threaten. Traffic flowed mainly in the direction of Martínez’s goal. Salah almost scored when Fabinho’s lofted ball presented him with a first chance to attack Mings. Liverpool’s leading goalscorer cut inside the Villa captain and forced the keeper to save well at his near post. Martínez denied Liverpool again early in the second half when Virgil van Dijk rose highest to a Robertson corner and sent a thumping header towards the roof of the net. The Argentina international tipped over from close range. Liverpool pressure and penalty appeals finally told when Salah took on Mings again from the right. The Egypt international slipped into the area past the England defender, who stumbled as he tried to recover ground and clipped Salah’s left leg. Stumbled as a consequence of being fouled himself, Gerrard argued. Salah drilled the spot-kick so accurately that Martínez, despite diving the correct way, did not get close to the ball as it cannoned in off the inside of his left-hand post. Villa responded well with the introductions of Emiliano Buendia, Morgan Sanson and Ings injecting greater menace and energy into the attack. Alisson, uncertain throughout, was fortunate to escape when he smashed a clearance into Joel Matip as the defender held off Ings and made contact with the ball and the former Liverpool striker in a desperate attempt to clear the loose ball. But Liverpool, and Salah, roll on. Klopp said: “We were the better team for 75 minutes for sure and they opened up the game in the last 15 minutes because we lost rhythm a bit. We could have been better with the last pass and our decision-making could have been better but for 75 minutes we were outstanding.”Chelsea have forgotten how to defend, but they still know how to fight. Their title challenge was in danger of unravelling when Joe Gelhardt equalised for Leeds United with seven minutes left and while Thomas Tuchel will be concerned about another careless performance, he can take satisfaction from the defiance his team produced when it seemed that another win had slipped from their grasp. This victory owed more to character than quality. Unlike Marcelo Bielsa’s bold but naive side, Chelsea had a streetwise edge. The European champions kept going and their reward arrived when Antonio Rüdiger, a dynamic presence who is never far away from controversy, tumbled in the area when the Leeds substitute, Mateusz Klich, tried to take the ball away from the Chelsea centre-back in added time. There was no need for Klich to be so rash. Rüdiger, who had already won one penalty, had his back to goal when the Leeds defender kicked through him and although there was a brief delay as VAR checked Chris Kavanagh’s decision to point to the spot, there would be no reprieve for Bielsa’s side and Jorginho stepped up to seal a lucky win by tucking away his second penalty of the afternoon. “He did not accept to lose,” Tuchel said of Rüdiger, who was later involved in a mass brawl after the final whistle. For Leeds, who lie 15th, there was merely a sense of burning injustice. They had contributed so much, although there were times when both sides allowed emotion to get the better of them. Marcos Alonso and Mason Mount both had spiky exchanges with the Leeds fans, while the Football Association could investigate after Chelsea’s captain, César Azpilicueta, appeared to direct an obscene gesture at a raucous away end. “I didn’t see any of this,” Tuchel said. “I was fully focused on the match.” In Tuchel’s defence, it was hard to take your eyes off the pitch. Chelsea, their confidence low after uneven displays against Zenit St Petersburg and West Ham, were vulnerable throughout. Once again their sheen of defensive invincibility was nowhere to be seen. They never looked comfortable and have let a lead slip five times in their last three games, conceding eight goals in the process. All the same this could be a crucial win for Chelsea, who are still in touch with Manchester City and Liverpool at the top of the Premier League. “I was confident that we can turn things around,” Tuchel said. “We played a little bit with the fear that we had something to lose. It always is a bit of luck. Maybe it is our turn. We needed this win desperately for the mood, for the belief, for the atmosphere.” Chelsea would not have it all their own way. Typically adventurous, Leeds did not hesitate to attack. There were openings for Jack Harrison and Raphinha, who saw a free-kick pushed away by Édouard Mendy, and Tuchel must have been concerned at how easily the visitors played through his midfield, where the absence of N’Golo Kanté and Mateo Kovacic left Chelsea short of balance. Ruben Loftus-Cheek was a ponderous presence and Jorginho, who was playing through hip and back pain, found the pace difficult. Leeds had too much room and it did not come as a surprise when they went ahead in the 28th minute, Raphinha planting a penalty past Mendy after a skittish challenge from Alonso on Daniel James, who was deputising for Patrick Bamford. Those two had previous: Alonso, who has struggled at left wing-back in Ben Chilwell’s absence, gave away a penalty by fouling James when the winger was playing for Manchester United in October 2019. Chelsea grew nervy after falling behind. The moves felt forced, with Timo Werner a blunt instrument on the left, and it was hard to see where a goal was coming from as half-time approached. With tempers rising, however, Chelsea profited by increasing the intensity of their press. After 42 minutes Alonso made amends by robbing Stuart Dallas. An exchange of passes with Werner took Alonso to the byline and when the Spaniard cut the ball back, Mount clipped a low finish past Illan Meslier. Now the momentum belonged to Chelsea. The disappointing Kai Havertz was denied by Meslier. Leeds, who were without Liam Cooper and Kalvin Phillips, fell back and the pressure told when Rüdiger, such a driving force for Chelsea with his runs from the back, was fouled by Raphinha, whose scissor challenge was penalised by VAR. Up stepped Jorginho, coolly beating Meslier, but Chelsea could not relax. Leeds levelled brilliantly, Klich releasing Tyler Roberts to cross for Gelhardt to score with his first touch. At that stage Chelsea, who responded by throwing on Romelu Lukaku, looked directionless. Somehow they found a second wind. Thankfully for Tuchel, there was not enough time left for Chelsea to throw another lead away once Jorginho had made it 3-2.Premier League: Ralf Rangnick gets to sample the delights of Autumnal East Anglia as he takes his Manchester United side to face the Premier League’s basement-dwellers. Follow the action with Rob Smyth ... Premier League: A contentious late penalty won the points for Chelsea at the end of a tetchy but entertaining ding-dong at Stamford Bridge. Jacob Steinberg reports ... Premier League: “Steven Gerrard’s new team gave his old club no quarter only to fall to the second defeat of his reign courtesy of Mo Salah’s second half penalty,” writes Andy Hunter from Anfield. Premier League: Obdurate Wolves played the entire second half with 10 men after Raul Jimenez foolishly got himself sent off, but were ultimately undone by Raheem Sterling’s 100th Premier League goal. Jamie Jackson was there ... Premier League: “This was a patchy performance, particularly early on, but Southampton’s backline was always liable to be breached and the hosts’ extra quality deservedly told,” writes Nick Ames from the Emirates. Dundee United 0-1 Livingston Ross County 3-2 Dundee St Johnstone 0-1 Aberdeen St Mirren 1-1 Hibernian View the Scottish Premiership table Huddersfield Town 1-1 Coventry City Bournemouth 0-2 Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City 2-2 Cardiff City Derby County 1-0 Blackpool Hull City 2-2 Bristol City Luton Town 1-1 Fulham Peterborough United 2-1 Millwall Preston 2-1 Barnsley Stoke City 0-0 Middlesbrough Swansea City 1-4 Nottingham Forest West Brom 1-0 Reading View the Championship table Manchester City 1-0 Wolves Chelsea 3-2 Leeds United Liverpool 1-0 Aston Villa Arsenal 3-0 Southampton Norwich City v Manchester United (5.30pm) View the Premier League table Premier League: Southampton roared out of the traps but couldn’t score and quickly threw in the towel once Arsenal scored their first of three goals. Premier League: The players of both teams mark the final whistle with group handbags in one corner of the pitch, with those from Leeds accusing Antonio Rudiger of cheating to win the penalty that earned all three points for Chelsea. Premier League: Steven Gerrard’s much hyped return to Anfield has ended in defeat for his Aston Villa side. Mo Salah settled the match from the spot after being fouled by Tyrone Mings. Championship: It’s Swansea City 1-4 Nottingham Forest, with Cafu (not that one) scoring for the visitors in the fourth minute of added time. Championship: Matty James equalises for Bristol City against Hull City in added time, while Mark McGuinness does the exact same thing for Cardiff City against Birmingham. It’s 2-2 in both games. Premier League: Jorginho sends Meslier the wrong way again, scoring into the other side of the goal from last time. Premier League: Klich kicks Antonio Rudiger from behind and Chelsea win a spot-kick. There’s a VAR check for an offside in the build-up ... and the penalty is given! Arsenal 3-0 Southampton: Arsenal remain completely in control against a Southampton side that has long since given up. Liveerpool 1-0 Aston Villa: Alisson appears to bring down Danny Ings while in a terrible dither just inside his own penalty area but there’s no penalty for Aston Villa. Championship Goals I completely missed earlier: (1) Blackburn’s second against Bournemouth at the Vitality Stadium, where the visitors lead 2-0 and (2) Derby County’s against Blackpool. It’s 1-0 to Wayne Rooney’s side. Premier League: Off the bench for Raphina, young Scouser Joe Gelhardt gets in front of Thiago Silva to equalise for Leeds. Championship: George Honeyman puts Hull City 2-1 up against Bristol City, while Preston lead Barnsley by the same scoreline after Daniel Johnson’s strike on 78 minutes. Liverpool 1-0 Aston Villa: Danny Ings is on for Aston Villa to face the club where he scored four goals in four years. To be fair, much of that time was spent in the treatment room as he had no luck with injuries. Championship: The goals are flying in! Jonson Clarke-Harris scores two in two minutes for Peterborough to give them a 2-1 lead against Millwall. At Deepdale, Cauley Woodroiw heads home for Barnsley to equalise in their game against Preston, where it’s a goal apiece. Kieffer Moore has scored for Cardiff City to halve their deficit against Birmingham City at St Andrews. And finally, at the Liberty Stadium, Swansea trail Nottingham Forest 3-1 after Brennan Johnson scored for the visitors. Premier League: Mo Salah scores from the penalty spot after being upended by Tyrone Mings as he cantered into the Villa penalty area from the right. Championship: Elijah Adebayo scores for Luton to make it 1-1 in their game against Fulham. Championship: Joel Piroe halves Swansea’s deficit against Nottingham Forest at the Liberty Stadium. Premier League: Gabriel scores Arsenal’s third, nipping in ahead of Big Willy Caballero to skim the ball past Southampton’s emergency signing. Championship: Callum Robinson scores his first goal for West Brom since August to put them one up against Reading. Liverpool 0-0 Aston Villa: It remains scoreless at Anfield, where Aston Villa are hanging in there but only by the skin of their teeth. Liverpool have had 66% per cent possession and eight shots in total, with four on target. Villa have yet to trouble Alisson in the Liverpool goal. Championship: Alan Browne scores for Preston to give them a 1-0 lead over Barnsley. Premier League: Jorginho sticks it in the top corner following his usual stuttered run-up. Chelsea 1-1 Leeds: Raphina fouls Antonio Rudiger in the Leeds penalty area and referee Chris Kavanagh awards a penalty after checking his pitchside monitor. Championship: It’s all square bwetween Hull City and Bristol City, with Antoine Semenyo scoring at the second time of asking on the follow-up afternodding against the cross-bar. Championship: Nottingham Forest double their lead, with Lewis Grabban finishing a counter-attack from the edge of the six-yard box. Chelsea 1-1 Leeds: Jack Harrison has just forced Edouard Mendy into action with a shot from just inside the Chelsea penalty area. Championship: Philip Zinckernagel has put Nottingham Forest one up at Swansea City on an afternoon when Forest manager Steve Cooper returns to his former club. Women’s Super League: Chelsea suffered a shock defeat at Reading as Deanne Rose’s early strike proved the only goal of the game at the Madejski Stadium. Premier League Manchester City 1-0 Wolves (result) Chelsea 1-1 Leeds United Liverpool 0-0 Aston Villa Arsenal 2-0 Southampton Norwich City v Manchester United (5.30pm) Championship Huddersfield Town 1-1 Coventry City (result) Bournemouth 0-1 Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City 2-0 Cardiff City Derby County 0-0 Blackpool Hull City 1-0 Bristol City Luton Town 0-1 Fulham Peterborough United 0-1 Millwall Preston 0-0 Barnsley Stoke City 0-0 Middlesbrough Swansea City 0-0 Nottingham Forest West Brom 0-0 Reading Scottish Premiership Dundee United 0-0 Livingston Ross County 1-2 Dundee St Johnstone 0-0 Aberdeen St Mirren 0-0 Hibernian Championship: Birmingham City double their lead against Cardiff City with Ivan Sunjic scoring in added time at the end of the first half. Liverpool 0-0 Aston Villa: The most hyped game of the day is the dullest so far but Liverpool are in the ascendency. Villa goalkeeper Emi Martinez saves well from Mo Salah after the Egyptian had cut inside from the right, beaten Tyrone Mings and unleashed a shot. Premier League: Mason Mount converts a cross from Marcos Alonso with Leeds goalkeeper Ilan Meslier weirdly out of position and giving him plenty of goal to aim at. An email: “Anything happening of note in League One today, Barry?” asks Jason Graff. It’s funny you should ask, Jason, as Sunderland are beating Plymouth Argyle by two goals to no score. Chelsea 0-1 Leeds: Timo Werner is incensed after being tackled from behind by Tyler Roberts out on the left touchline, deep inside the Leeds half. The Leeds player avoids a booking. It’s a seriously spicy encounter at Stamford Bridge. Arsenal 2-0 Southampton: A Tweet from our man at the Emirates ... Chelsea 0-1 Leeds United: Chelsea’s Reece James is perhaps a little lucky to only have a yellow card waved his way after clattering and upending his namesake Dan with a sliding tackle. He was out of control and would almost certainly have seen red had he connected higher up James’s leg. The Chelsea defender looks mightily relieved to only see yellow. Championship latest Huddersfield Town 1-1 Coventry City (result) Bournemouth 0-1 Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City 1-0 Cardiff City Derby County 0-0 Blackpool Hull City 1-0 Bristol City Luton Town 0-1 Fulham Peterborough United 0-1 Millwall Preston 0-0 Barnsley Stoke City 0-0 Middlesbrough Swansea City 0-0 Nottingham Forest West Brom 0-0 Reading Championship: Troy Deeney puts Birmingham City a goal up against Cardiff City to make it 1-0 at St Andrews. Premier League: Martin Odegaard doubles Arsenal’s lead at the Emirates, heading home a Kieran Tierney cross from close range. Premier League: Raphina beats Edouard Mendy from the spot after an ill-advised Marcos Alonso lunge in the penalty box. Arsenal 1-0 Southampton: Very much against the run of play, that was a good team goal from Arsenal, who played the ball out from the back, swept from one of the field to the other and went ahead when Saka picked out Lacazette, who shot from about 12 yards. Premier League: Arsenal go ahead through Alexandre Lacazette. Chelsea 0-0 Leeds United: Leeds win a free-kick wide on the right for a foul on Tyler Roberts by Jorginho. Raphina shapes to cross but shoots and almost catches Edouard Mendy out. Close but no cigar for the Brazilian. Arsenal 0-0 Southampton: Southampton are very much in the ascendency at the Emirates, where Gabriel and Bukayo Saka have both been booked in the opening 17 minutes and Aaron Ramsdale has been forced into three saves. Southampton win a free-kick in a dangerous position but James Ward-Prowse shoots narrowly wide. Liverpool 0-0 Aston Villa: Villa win a free-kick between the left side of the penalty area and the touchline. The ball’s whipped towards the near post and poked wide. Liverpool 0-0 Aston Villa: A splendid one-touch passing move from Liverpool ends with the ball being rolled across the edge of the Villa penalty area, where Mo Salah dummies. It fizzes into the path of Trent Alexander-Arnold, whose shot is deflected over the target by Targett. Liverpool 0-0 Aston Villa: Aston Villa are very much on the back foot. Sadio Mane goes down in their box after getting a tug on the shoulder from Matty Cash while trying to run on to a return pass from Mo Salah. No penalty is given but Cash could have had few complaints if the referee had pointed to the spot. It was a gentle tug, but a tug nonetheless. Championship: Ryan Longman fires Hull City ahead against Bristol City after just three minutes. Chelsea 0-0 Leeds: Playing on the left, Kai Havertz cuts inside and shoots but Ilan Meslier saves comfortably. Arsenal 0-0 Southampton: The striker many Arsenal fans once considered the Messiah has been a very naughty boy. Premier League: Raheem Sterling’s 100th Premier League goal came via the penalty spot and gave Manchester City a sixth consecutive win in the competition, writes Jamie Jackson from the Etihad Stadium. Championship: Matt Godden scored in the third minute of added time to cancel out Danny Ward’s opener and rescue a point for Coventry City. Premier League: Raheem Sterling scored the only goal of the game from the penalty spot as Manchester City stretched their lead at the top of the table with a win over a game Wolves side reduced to 10 men for the entire second half. Arsenal v Southampton: Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang was not at Arsenal training yesterday and is a conspicuous absentee from today’s match squad. Mikel Arteta has confirmed he has been left out of the squad for unspecified naughtiness. “Unfortunately, due to a disciplinary breach, and I think we’ve been very consistent,” said Arteta in an interview with Sky Sports, upon asked to explain his captain’s absence. “There are certain non-negotiables for the team that we have set ourselves at the club, and he’s not involved today. On the subjkect of the length of Aubameyang’s punishment, Arteta said: “It starts today. It’s not an easy situation, we don’t want to have our club captain in that situation.” Women’s football: There’s been quite the turn-up for the books at the Madejski Stadium, where reigning champions Chelsea have been beaten by Reading. Canada international Deanne Rose scored the only goal of the game in the fourth minute, to consign Emma Hayes’s side to their second defeat of the season. CHelsea stay second while Reading move to fifth in the table. View the WSL table Arsenal: Ramsdale, Tomiyasu, White, Gabriel, Tierney, Saka, Partey, Xhaka, Martinelli, Odegaard, Lacazette. Subs: Smith Rowe, Maitland-Niles, Holding, Cedric, Pepe, Tavares, Sambi Lokonga, Nketiah, Okonkwo. Southampton: Caballero, Livramento, Stephens, Bednarek, Walker-Peters, Redmond, Diallo, Ward-Prowse, Tella, Broja, Adam Armstrong. Subs: Lyanco, Long, Perraud, Djenepo, Smallbone, Elyounoussi, Walcott, Lewis, Valery. Referee: Jarred Gillett (Australia) Chelsea: Mendy, Azpilicueta, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, James, Loftus-Cheek, Jorginho, Alonso, Werner, Havertz, Mount. Subs: Arrizabalaga, Christensen, Lukaku, Pulisic, Saul, Barkley, Hudson-Odoi, Ziyech, Sarr. Leeds: Meslier, Shackleton, Ayling, Llorente, Firpo, Forshaw, Raphinha, Dallas, Roberts, Harrison, James. Subs: Klaesson, Gelhardt, Cresswell, Drameh, Summerville, McKinstry, Klich, McCarron, Jenkins. Referee: Chris Kavanagh (Lancashire) Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, van Dijk, Matip, Robertson, Henderson, Fabinho, Thiago, Salah, Mane, Oxlade-Chamberlain. Subs: Konate, Milner, Keita, Gomez, Minamino, Jota, Tsimikas, Kelleher, Williams. Aston Villa: Martinez, Cash, Konsa, Mings, Targett, McGinn, Nakamba, Douglas Luiz, Jacob Ramsey, Watkins, Young. Subs: Sanson, Buendia, Steer, Tuanzebe, Trezeguet, Ings, El Ghazi, Hause, Carney Chukwuemeka. Referee: Stuart Attwell (Warwickshire) Premier League: Joao Moutinho had his arm raised as he blocked a Jack Grealish cross with his armpit. The ball hit his inside upper arm and chest. Following a pitchside VAR check, Jon Moss awarded the penalty which Raheem Sterling calmly slotted home. Covid-19 postponements: Following the postponement of Tottenham’s scheduled match with Brighton tomorrow on the back of a Covid outbreak in the Spurs camp, Mikel Arteta has asked the Premier League to clarify the number of positive Covid-19 cases required for matches to be called off. The Arsenal manager says the current rules leave clubs in the dark. In related news, Uefa have announced they cannot reschedule the Europa Conference League match between Tottenham and Rennes that was called off on Thursday. The game will be referred to a disciplinary panel to decide the result. Historic precedent suggests that Rennes will be awarded a 3-0 win, a hypothetical outcome that would leave the French side top of the group ahead of Vitesse Arnhem, with Tottenham exiting the competition along with Mura. Premier League fixtures Manchester City v Wolves (12.30pm) Chelsea v Leeds United Liverpool v Aston Villa Arsenal v Southampton Norwich City v Manchester United (5.30pm) View the Premier League table Championship fixtures Huddersfield Town v Coventry City (12.30pm) Bournemouth v Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City v Cardiff City Derby County v Blackpool Hull City v Bristol City Luton Town v Fulham Peterborough United v Millwall Preston v Barnsley Stoke City v Middlesbrough Swansea City v Nottingham Forest West Brom v Reading View the Championship table Scottish Premiership Dundee United v Livingston Ross County v Dundee St Johnstone v Aberdeen St Mirren v Hibernian View the Scottish Premiership table Following last night’s win for Brentford over Watford, the weekend’s Premier League programme resumed this afternoon with league leaders Manchester City hosting Wolves at the Etihad Stadium. It’s scoreless at half-time in Manchester but the first half was notable for two major talking points: the dismissal of Raul Jimenez for a daft second yellow card that came 42 seconds after his first, plus a sickening clash of heads between Wolves players Ruben Neves and Max Kilman. Astonishingly, both players were allowed to continue playing, despite Neves in particular looking decidedly groggy. We have a trio of three o’clock kick-offs ahead of this evening’s set-to between Norwich City and Manchester United at Carrow Road, with Chelsea entertaining injury-blighted Leeds United, Steven Gerrard making his low key return to Liverpool with Aston Villa and Arsenal taking on Southampton at the Emirates. On an afternoon when all three major title contenders are in action, we’ll have news of all the goals as they go in, stay across all the major talking points and bring you post-match reaction once the final whistles have been blown.There was a time when we would not have been surprised by Leicester dominance, but so fresh is this second coming of the Tigers that each new height reattained seems of note. Here, in the lair of the French leaders, no less, they continued their unbeaten start to the season with a 13th consecutive win in their opener in Europe against Bordeaux. George Ford, fresh from the announcement of his imminent departure for Sale, was masterful in the first half, before subsiding into an error-strewn third quarter, but he rediscovered the best of himself when it mattered to land the winning penalty with less than five minutes remaining. “Since the day I walked in here,” said Steve Borthwick, “George Ford has been superb, every day. He has made a personal decision [to leave], but he has handled the whole process in a really respectful manner. I have no doubt, right up to the day he leaves, he will be giving everything.” Ford was marshalling kids around him, five of them in the starting pack under the age of 23. They had generally held the upper hand, particularly in the first half, but midway through the second they were in material danger of a first defeat. That they pulled themselves together to claim a win gives notice of the renewed confidence at Welford Road. This was not an epic, but the crunch of league leaders was more than satisfying, if not without error. Top of the Top 14 they may be, but Bordeaux, who lost their France prop and captain, Jefferson Poirot, early on, were all fingers and thumbs for most of the first half, perhaps disorientated by opposition playing in this inferno with such confidence. They may have seen fit to rest a host of key players – no Freddie Steward, Nemani Nadolo, Ben Youngs, Julian Montoya and Hanro Liebenberg, to name just a few – but the Tigers swung their hosts this way and that. Ford continues to look a million dollars at his level, now that his international career is seemingly on hold. He exchanged penalties with Maxime Lucu in the first quarter, before springing Bryce Hegarty through the Bordeaux defence with a typically sublime delayed pass. Guy Porter was on hand to finish. Leicester were well worth the lead they held to the brink of half-time, but they had scored their try with Bordeaux down to 14, following Kane Douglas’s yellow card for the latest failure to avoid the unavoidable, his arm making contact with the head of the dipping Ollie Chessum. Bordeaux replied with a try on the stroke of half-time, when Leicester were down to 14. A rare tactical error saw Leicester kick penalties to the corner twice. After the second lineout, Ford put in a cross-kick, which resulted in a yellow for the chasing Hosea Saumaki. Bordeaux capitalised a few minutes later. From a second attacking scrum, with Ford covering the blindside in the absence of Saumaki, Bordeaux worked Jean-Baptiste Dubie through to the posts from a simple midfield move. Leicester will be sick to have turned round level. Perhaps it niggled at them, because on the resumption it was they who started to make the mistakes – and Ford suddenly as many as anybody, missing a straightforward penalty a few minutes in. Lucu punished it by landing one to take Bordeaux clear four minutes later. It was a soft penalty, but there was no doubt that it came amid a fresh onslaught from the home side. Lucu had another chance on the hour, after Callum Green came through an advancing Bordeaux maul. This time, he missed, albeit from some distance on the angle. The turning point came deep into the final quarter. Ford kicked long, where replacement fly-half, UJ Seuteni, fumbled under no pressure. At the scrum, Thierry Paiva bored across, allowing Ford to redeem himself with a penalty to draw Leicester level. The game was poised now, Leicester having weathered the storm of the third quarter. A routine carry by Ellis Genge coaxed a penalty from Douglas, and Ford stepped up from more than 40 metres out to land the winning penalty. Bordeaux had one final tilt at the death. Lucu chose to kick a late penalty to the corner, but Louis Picamoles was adjudged to have gone off his feet as Bordeaux picked and drove. Leicester had their win – and the latest level attained in their search for former glories.From Ikea to meatballs, hygge to Nordic noir, Scandinavia’s influence on the UK has been rising steadily for decades. But this Christmas, amid the coronavirus pandemic and Brexit, enthusiasm for the region and its traditions is hitting new heights. Scandinavian goods distributor ScandiKitchen closed online Christmas orders early this year after unprecedented demand for festive products including meatballs, glögg (mulled wine), pepparkakor (ginger biscuits), chocolate, ham and cheese. And it’s not just food that’s popular. Britain is embracing the festival of St Lucia – a candlelit celebration held on 13 December in schools, workplaces and homes across Sweden. Community group LondonSwedes said tickets for their Lyric Hammersmith event, starring Swedish Eurovision winner Måns Zelmerlöw, sold out in two hours. Meanwhile, the Swedish Church said tickets for all of its Lucia celebrations in London and Brighton sold out weeks ago, earlier than ever. York Minster’s Lucia celebration is also fully booked. Decorations, too, are taking cues from Scandinavia this year. Ikea reports rising interest in handmade decorations, cooking and baking as people embrace home life nearly two years into the pandemic. It said shoppers had been buying decorations “sooner than usual”. The Scandinavian homeware store Nordic House said it had had a “huge rise” in demand for Christmas decorations, especially candles. Co-founder Sandie Wallman said the Scandinavian trend reflected the move towards sustainability, supporting artisans and the handmade. “Scandi style is the opposite of a throwaway society, which people are understandably looking for now,” said Wallman. “Beautiful Scandi decorations are a calming antidote to the hectic and uncertain year we’ve had.” Brontë Aurell, co-owner of ScandiKitchen, said: “We’re always busy at Christmas, and we always run out of capacity near the time, but never this early.” Fears among homesick Scandinavians over travel restrictions after the government’s “plan B” announcement in response to Omicron and Brexit-related importing complications had contributed to demand, she said, as well as the pandemic generally, which she thought had increased the attraction of Scandinavian traditions and values for non-Scandinavians. “We have a very strong Christmas culture that is endearing – and easily sits alongside British Christmas traditions,” she said. “We are all about baking, mulled wine, hygge, being outside but also cosying up inside. And, most importantly, taking time out to be with those we love – being present. If we have all learned one thing during these past two years, it is that being together completes us as humans.” Aurell said Britain’s relationship with Scandinavia had “moved on from Ikea meatballs and Nordic noir. The British people overall have a much better knowledge of what Nordic countries can offer and what our culture’s like. And I think a lot of people look to that.” Charlotte Ågren, founder of LondonSwedes, said last year’s Christmas lockdown had increased demand for their events this year, which, as well as marking Lucia, also included a midsummer celebration and a crayfish party. “It feels like the culture’s just getting more exciting and interesting,” she said. She believes the announcement of plans to open an Ikea on Oxford Street in 2023, Abba’s return and the growing presence of Scandinavian languages and culture on Netflix have all contributed. In another sign of the region’s growing influence, Vogue Scandinavia launched this year, published in English and with Greta Thunberg photographed stroking a horse on the cover of its first edition. Niklas Ekstedt, a Michelin-starred Swedish chef who opened Ekstedt at The Yard, his first restaurant outside Stockholm, in Westminster earlier this year, said he was pleased that Scandinavian influence was moving away from The Bridge and Ingmar Bergman. “People are seeing that there are other things in the culture than death and darkness,” he said, adding that Scandinavian Christmas festivities “travel really well to England”. He said the oldest food on the Swedish julbord (Christmas table) – which usually includes pickled herring, gravadlax, Christmas ham and rice pudding – is dopp i grytan, a broth to dip bread into. Scandinavia’s darker winters made Christmas extra important, he said. “When we come into this dark period of very short days and cold weather, the holiday season is so important for the family to keep the mood up. So a lot of things are really thought through to make sure that everyone is happy, the food is good, and we can survive another couple of months with the winter.” How to have a Scandi Christmas The fastest route to a Scandi-style Christmas is to light up your home and embrace hygge (roughly translated from Danish as “cosiness”), says ScandiKitchen founder Brontë Aurell. She also recommends making your own glögg (1 cinnamon stick, 10 cardamom pods, 20 cloves, 5-7g dried ginger, 5g dried orange peel, 80g sugar and a bottle of red wine that you heat, rest, strain and then reheat to serve with a spoonful of flaked almonds) and holding a glögg gathering with friends and neighbours on the Sundays of advent. Or try making ginger biscuits or a gingerbread house – either from scratch or using a pre-made flatpack base. Dates to celebrate include St Lucia, on 13 December, and 24 December, with a special meal, perhaps a smörgåsbord, and dancing around the Christmas tree.For two months, one of the women attending Anab Hoffmann’s weekly drop-in sessions was very vocal in her opposition to vaccines of all kinds. “She was one of the loudest,” Hoffmann said. “There’s always one. She was very loud. But we didn’t mind. That was her view. We don’t want to tell people they are wrong. We just want to give them the evidence.” Hoffmann is the founder of Heal Together, a community interest company that focuses on helping London’s Somali community understand and access mental health support. They run a “Shaah and Sheeko” [tea and chat] group on Thursdays at various places in east London where people can talk about anything they are concerned about. Hoffman and her colleagues show people how to get help. Since July, they have also been talking about vaccines – one of hundreds of “community champions” who are trying to persuade people to get the jab. People like the vocal anti-vaxxer at the Shaah and Sheeko. “Week in, week out, she was very reluctant, but we saw her soften her tone.” They showed her videos of Somali doctors talking about vaccines, and information about the different vaccines and what they do.“We’re a small community,” said Hoffmann, who gave up her job in human resources for a major bank to start up Heal Together. “But we have unexplained levels of autism and some people believe the MMR vaccinations are responsible, which is untrue. But it has been a problem. “Then a few weeks ago, we were doing outreach work outside a mosque and we saw her. She hugged all of us. I was perplexed, to say the least, because she had been so against it. But she said she had got the vaccine, and her sisters too.” Even though everyone over 18 has been eligible for a free vaccine for at least six months, more than 60,000 adults received their first dose in the week up to 5 December, according to NHS figures. In the London borough of Newham, where Heal Together is based, more than 220,000 first doses have been given out to over-18s, but there are between 268,000 and 350,000 adults in the area. The local authority has been funding 15 community groups including Heal Together and about 8,000 people have been vaccinated at pop-up clinics, like one Hoffmann ran in Stratford in June. Jason Strelitz, director of public health in Newham, said there had been an increase in unvaccinated people coming forward since the emergence of the new, more infectious the Omicron variant. “We’ve been working a lot with very small community and voluntary organisations who have deep roots into different communities,” he said. “Breaking down trust barriers is important.” Around 10% of people in their 40s are yet to have any vaccine against Covid-19, according to NHS figures, which leaves them vulnerable to serious illness if they become infected. More than a quarter of men aged between 18 and 24 are unvaccinated, nearly six months after they were first offered. Since the government’s strategy of avoiding Covid restrictions relies on a herd immunity approach, these unvaccinated people represent a significant problem. When Boris Johnson announced plan B measures last week, he hinted that mandatory vaccinations might be an option, saying a “national conversation” was needed. Vaccines are already mandatory for care home workers – although a grace period has been extended into next year – and frontline NHS workers will be obliged to be double jabbed by April. But the prospect of mandatory vaccines was “worrying”, according to Dr Pauline Paterson, co-director of the Vaccine Confidence Project at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM). “We might need boosters every six months,” she said. “How many doses will be mandatory?” LSHTM researchers conducted a study of 17,000 people in April and discovered that although people who had been vaccinated liked the idea of vaccine passports, those who were already hesitant became more reluctant. But confidence, or a lack of trust in the vaccines, or authorities, is only one reason why some people are unvaccinated, Paterson said. They may be complacent – particularly young people who believe they are not vulnerable to Covid, or there may be a lack of access. “Maybe some people tried to log into the system and it wasn’t working. Or they didn’t know their NHS number, or the centre is too far away,” Paterson said. “Usually, by the time you have systems in place to make vaccines mandatory, you don’t need to, because generally the problem is about access. “There’s an assumption we need to educate people, or tell them off, but actually we need to find out why people haven’t had a vaccine. The key is not to stigmatise and not to assume.” Access remains a problem for some, including immune-suppressed people who need a third primary dose of the vaccine but say there is no way to book a vaccine appointment. They also face resistance from volunteers who do not always understand that they are eligible for a jab. Even 15% of over-80s eligible for a booster dose have not yet had it, nearly three months after being invited. Changes to the way vaccines are now delivered may mean it is harder for some to access, according to Ruthe Isden, Age UK’s head of influence. “In January, people were furloughed so they were more able to drop everything and take relatives to vaccine centres. In older age groups, people do face practical barriers. And for housebound people we do need wraparound support.”Everyone has a plan until they get punched in the face. England started work on theirs two years ago. “Job No 1 is to help Joe to keep moving forward so that in two years’ time we can go to Australia and make a real impact,” said Chris Silverwood in his first press conference after he took over as England’s head coach. Usually it’s the players and coaches who say the press talk about the Ashes to the exclusion of everything else. This year it’s been the other way around: Silverwood has come back to his plans for this winter again, and again and again. He did it in March when explaining the team’s rotation policy during their 3-1 loss in India. “We talk about working our way towards the Ashes and I want the squad to arrive there fit and in form,” he said. “We want to make sure everyone arrives at that point in as good a place as possible.” He did it again in May, before they lost 1-0 at home to New Zealand. “We want to travel to Australia fitter, faster, leaner, more ready than ever before, so we get off the plane and it is ‘Right, we’re here, we mean business, and we’re full of confidence, and that will take us through.’ ” The BBC even turned out a six‑part podcast – “Project Ashes” – detailing all the backroom planning that has gone on, the selection and rotation, the hotels, the training venues, the diet, the strength and conditioning, the Lions squad (who are being battered by Australia A). In one episode their performance director, Mo Bobat, explained the approach for the first Test: “There’s no debating Australia have a formidable record at the Gabba, you can be intimidated by that or you can frame it as ‘they depend on winning at the Gabba to win their series’. Frame it as a challenge. Get something from that game and Australia are in difficult territory, territory they are not used to.” At the end of it all, England ended up leaving out their two senior pros, James Anderson and Stuart Broad, so they could open the attack with two men, Chris Woakes and Ollie Robinson, who have never taken the new ball together, and include a spinner, Jack Leach, who hasn’t bowled in Test cricket in nine months because they didn’t trust him to play all summer, and an all-rounder, Ben Stokes, who hasn’t batted since he faced seven balls in the Hundred in July. Then they got themselves in such a tangle over what to do after the toss that they ended up missing out on the best bowling conditions of the match and were rolled for 147 after winning it. There is a lot to unpick in all this. If the BBC needed six episodes for the run-up, they’ll take 12 for the debrief. There is Covid, of course, and the quarantine restrictions which meant they had to rest and rotate their players, the persistent rain in Australia, which spoiled their practice matches, injuries to Jofra Archer, Olly Stone, and Stokes, the calamitous drop-off in the form of Dom Sibley, Zak Crawley, and Dom Bess, who they had invested so much hope in over the last year. But at the bottom of it all there is a bigger problem. It feels like England have confused having a plan with being prepared. Because a lot of this, the weather, the injuries, the poor form, are exactly the sort of problems you ought to expect in sport, and which a well-run team should be able to work around. Plans change. If you’re well prepared, you cope. That doesn’t necessarily mean they would win, just that they wouldn’t lose by nine wickets in three days and three hours of play. England didn’t succeed in Australia in 2010-11 just because they had dotted every i on the schedule, but because over the year running up to the series they had developed a resilience, and a sense of resolve that meant they didn’t fold when they found themselves 221 runs behind after the first innings of the series. That strength comes from the character of the players, and the culture of the team. This England squad has plenty of matchwinners in it, but do they have the conviction, cohesion, and culture which marks India’s cricket at the moment, or which allows New Zealand to become the world’s No 1 Test team on such slender means? England may still find their way back into this series. It’s possible. But if they do, it will be because someone among them has become today’s hero. Usually it’s Joe Root. In the past 12 months, England have won four Tests. Root has top-scored (and been the only century-maker) in every one of them. But it could be Broad, or Anderson or Stokes, who have all done it before. The last time England turned in a genuine team performance was their victory against Pakistan at Old Trafford in August 2020, when three batsmen made fifties and six bowlers took at least two wickets each. The trouble with this way of doing things is you’ve nowhere to go if the hero doesn’t show. And you certainly can’t make a plan around it.Marcus Rashford, 24, plays football for England and Manchester United and is the author of this year’s bestselling children’s nonfiction book, You Are a Champion, written with the journalist Carl Anka to inspire young people to reach their full potential. One of five siblings raised by a single mother on minimum wage in Manchester, Rashford has become one of Britain’s leading campaigners against child poverty. In June he launched the Marcus Rashford Book Club in conjunction with Magic Breakfast and Macmillan Children’s Books to encourage a lifelong love of reading and give free books to underprivileged children. Next year, Rashford will release his first children’s fiction book, The Breakfast Club Adventures, co-authored by Alex Falase-Koya. What effect has your book club had so far? I visited Button Lane a few weeks ago; it’s my old primary school and a recipient of my book club. It was brilliant to see the children’s faces light up when they talked about books, and each and every one of them had taken something slightly different away from their reading. They were engaged, and that is what we’re looking for – for children to use books as an escape when faced with daily challenges; to be inspired, motivated and ultimately dream about what they could be one day. The one thing that stood out for me, though, was how their aspirations had changed since the club first launched. Then, most of the children told me they wanted to be a footballer like me. Now, we have children dreaming of being artists, architects, vets. It’s just brilliant. That’s what I wanted. The belief that they can be anything they want to be. Tell us a bit about the books you chose for the club this year… For me, the books are actually secondary to the bigger picture when we go through the selection process. I’m looking for authors and illustrators to inspire the children – creatives who have come from similar backgrounds, are of the same race, religion… all of that is important. I want to put these writers on a pedestal and show children that although they came from a similar place, a similar background, they have made a great career for themselves doing what they love, and where they grew up has not stunted them. That said, the first two books we chose are brilliant – Pooja Puri’s A Dinosaur Ate My Sister, which is wonderfully illustrated by Allen Fatimaharan, and Tom Percival’s Silas and the Marvellous Misfits. They are both full of adventure and have been really well received by the children at Button Lane. In your book You Are a Champion, there’s a chapter called Never Stop Learning. Can you tell us three things, big or small, that you have learned this year? Oof, OK, let me think about this one. I learned basic skills in the kitchen thanks to [the chef] Tom Kerridge. I only really began cooking this year when I launched Full Time Meals with Tom. It’s designed to help children and adults find their confidence in the kitchen on limited budgets and with limited equipment. It was created to support the uptake of the Healthy Start scheme but is really an opportunity for families to spend some valuable time together in the kitchen when day trips or activities are limited by budget. I also learned and understood the power of my voice and my platform to support others, and to be more thankful for what I had, given how quickly it can be taken away through injury and pandemics. I try to learn something new every day, but I’d say these are three that stand out. What is the best/most memorable feedback you’ve had about your book? I was sat with a little boy the other day at Button Lane, and when I asked him what he had taken away from You Are a Champion he told me about the importance of being kind, and if he could be kind, how he could teach others to be the same. A dream of mine has always been to encourage more compassion in the next generation so that they champion their differences, instead of highlighting them to divide, so hearing that was just brilliant. I try to do regular insight sessions with the children so I can understand what they need in a book. You Are a Champion wasn’t written to win awards – it was created to help a child like me develop the tools to navigate through their daily challenges, but I’m really proud to see how it has been received by children of all backgrounds. Who or what got you into reading? I didn’t actually start reading until I was 17. We didn’t have books at home, nor did we have the environment to read books. My mum worked three jobs, so I found my freedom outside kicking a ball around. It was hard for me to engage with books at the time. Very few characters looked like me, and my life was far from a fairytale. That experience set the foundations for what we needed from the book club – representation, acceptance and acknowledgment. Every child should pick up these books and feel like they were written for them. The first book that really locked me in was Relentless by Tim Grover. It was a different type of book focused on mentality, and exactly what I needed when I was breaking in to the first team. I still read the book every couple of months and mark it to track my progress. In the book and in life you come across as somebody who faces each day full of positivity. What’s your morning routine – what things do you do to best set yourself up for the day? It would be wrong to say I’m always positive, especially given how my mood can be dictated by a football result, but I do always try to find the positives in whatever situation I’m facing. I’m living out my dream, and given where I came from there isn’t really a lot I can now complain about. I’m grateful for the position I’ve found myself in. One of the biggest lessons I took from Relentless was never to allow my mood to get too high, because it means the lows are that much lower, and that’s definitely the case in my job. If my mood was determined by the football result, I’d be up and down like a rollercoaster. Most players stick to a routine in the morning, which is the case for me. I like routine and it hasn’t changed much since I was young. I get up, I head to training, I have breakfast, I train. Very straightforward. On a day off I will wake up, have breakfast, do a bit of recovery and then maybe take the dogs for a walk. Breakfast features a few times in your book – Weetabix as a kid; your nana’s unbeatable corn porridge… What is your breakfast of champions today? It doesn’t really differ from when I was a child, to be honest. Weetabix, cornflakes, Coco Pops – or if I’m feeling a little adventurous I’ll have fried egg and toast, which I pick up at the training ground. Again, I love a routine. What are your books of the year? Well obviously, my book club choices. But additionally, I love what Lenny Henry has done with The Boy With Wings. It’s a fun superhero adventure story for children that’s representative of all children. It’s also illustrated by Keenon Ferrell, who is great. What are you reading at the moment? Carl Anka, who wrote You Are a Champion with me, actually got me Phil Jackson’s Eleven Rings for my birthday, so I’ve been enjoying reading that. How are you spending Christmas and what are your main memories of Christmas when you were a kid? While you’re playing football you don’t really have a “traditional” Christmas. We typically train or are in a hotel that day because there are so many fixtures, so we’ll get to see family for a couple of hours then it’s straight back to work. It’s not something I feel I’m missing out on, as we didn’t really have the traditional Christmas when I was young. We didn’t really have gifts. The important thing was that we were together. Mum used to queue around the block outside the food bank for a Christmas dinner, and we really made the best of what we had, which is a credit to her. We never wanted Mum to feel the pressure of Christmas, so we just enjoyed it for what it was. The togetherness and family are probably the things I miss on the day at the moment, but we have plenty of opportunities to make up for it. What are you looking forward to next year? It’s a big football year so I’m looking forward to everything that that brings. I have my first fiction book, The Breakfast Club Adventures, launching in May, which I’m really excited about. Breakfast club was a safe haven for me, and I wanted to capture the unity and togetherness of that space. A space where my lifelong friendships were formed. A space that started our day the right way, with energy and adventure. I’m working on that at the moment with my co-author, Alex Falase-Koya, and I’m looking forward to seeing how the children react to it. I’m also looking forward to seeing how You Are a Champion is received in the United States, as we launch it there on 7 June. How would you like to be remembered? As someone who never forgot where he came from. As someone who used the platform his career gave him to highlight inequalities and bring opportunity to those that truly needed it. Who are your heroes/heroines? My mum. You Are a Champion by Marcus Rashford and Carl Anka is published by Macmillan (£9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply • A Dinosaur Ate My Sister by Pooja Puri (illustrated by Allen Fatimaharan) is published by Pan Macmillan (£6.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply • Silas and the Marvellous Misfits by Tom Percival is published by Pan Macmillan (£6.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe past never stops informing the future and the greats never forget their past. With seven titles under his belt, history echoes long for Lewis Hamilton as he enters the finale of a Formula One world championship balanced on a knife edge. Hamilton has never forgotten how hard he had to work to come so far and how the character of the man who races in Abu Dhabi on Sunday was forged in the crucible of competition he experienced as a young karter. Back then there was no guarantee he would be the kid who made it but the traits that have brought him to such remarkable heights were unmistakable. Hamilton can take a record eighth championship if he wins at the Yas Marina circuit. He is tied with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen on points. The pressure is immense, and it is instructive that heading into this season’s decisive races the world champion has been watching videos of some of his old karting competitions. “Those have been my favourite races,” he said. He admits that memories of many of his F1 races are hazy, while many of his battles in karting are still vivid. Those years were hard but formative in both his long-term success and how he has faced down Verstappen’s challenge. Jonny Restrick was Hamilton’s mechanic in 1998 when the driver was 13 and even then saw a future champion in the personable but fiercely determined kid. “We had races where things had gone wrong and his performances were phenomenal. He would find the next level,” Restrick says. “Today you think he is doing the best he can and then his back is against the wall and he finds that other level. There is not a bone in his body that would know how to give up.” Colin Brown experienced the sharp end of this fearsome combination of talent and resolve. Brown was a gifted karter, headhunted to race in Europe. A title-winner who raced from the age of 12, he took the Italian championship at the first time of asking when he went there in 1994, making his mark in competitive fields including factory drivers. In 2000 he came up against Hamilton in the Formula A class and it was touted as the two best young British drivers going head to head. Brown immediately recognised his opponent’s spirit. “Sometimes you make a move on drivers, you mentally boss their minds, get in their heads so they become weak, they get nervous so they won’t overtake,” he says. “Lewis was the one kid I raced against who you could never do that to. I would pass him, look behind and he would come back at me. I thought: ‘I can’t get rid of this guy, no matter what I do he always comes back at me.’” This year Hamilton has shown the same steely strength of will. Verstappen tried to boss him but he was having none of it, ensuring the title fight has gone to the wire. At the final race of the year in 2000, the World Cup at the Motegi circuit in Japan, Brown came from 52nd in qualifying after an engine problem, worked his way through the heats and started in third for the final. He and Hamilton vied for the lead throughout and Brown thought he had it only to leave a slender opening on the last lap. Hamilton shot up the inside and took the win. It was hard but Brown only admires the way Hamilton drove, with the sportsmanship he has displayed throughout his career. “Considering I came from 52nd and led on the last lap, that is still really painful,” he says. “However, I am very proud to this day that I raced against Lewis. He was a very fair driver, not a dirty driver. If somebody pushed me about on track I would hit them up the arse, give them a little lesson. He never did that, he was never aggressive to the point that he would hit someone on the track, he was very, very fair.” Two years earlier Restrick remembers a fun but humble Hamilton, a natural athlete, skilled with a football and with a golf club when the mechanics took him for his first swing at a driving range. He was no engineer but was relentless in his focus on anything that would make him go faster. His team, usually all packed into the Vauxhall Cavalier of his father, Anthony, were the first to arrive at the track and the last to leave. Even then Hamilton inspired those around him. “He motivated everybody to want to win,” says Restrick. Restrick had considered putting on a bet that Hamilton would make it to F1, two years later win races and two years after that be champion. Yet Hamilton’s eventual rise occurred with even greater alacrity than he had foreseen. At the Fulbeck circuit in 1998 Restrick was watching him into turn one off the start. He expected the worst as he saw Hamilton lining up what appeared to be an impossible pass. “I was thinking: ‘There’s no way that’s going to work,’ but he had read the situation and sent it,” he remembers. “He made several places in turn one. The hairs on my arms still stand up thinking of that move. The big thing was his ability to overtake, that was immediately apparent. By the end of the year I was as convinced as he was that he was going to F1. He never talked about ‘if’, all the conversation about the future was ‘when I am in Formula One’.” Hamilton then began racing in Europe but Restrick could not follow due to university commitments. He went on to work in engineering and has now unpacked his tool box again to work with his son Jonty in karting. Still a fan, Restrick will be celebrating should Hamilton secure his eighth title. “It’s just great to see him do it and in my little way to have played a part in it,” he says. Brown endured harder times and could not have veered further from Hamilton’s path. His racing career ground to a halt when he was misled by a management company who failed to find him a drive, and by his own admission he went off the rails and suffered severe depression. Now 39, he turned his life around after the birth of his daughter and coaches young karters. He too feels only pleased to have played a small role in Hamilton’s rich past on the eve of what might be his old rival’s greatest triumph. “Some people could be bitter but I am the opposite,” he says. “When my daughter grows up I can tell her: ‘That’s the most famous race driver of all time and I raced him.’ I am just proud to have been on the track dicing with him, it’s nice to have been a part of that.”Further evidence alleging that the government seriously mishandled the withdrawal from Afghanistan has been handed to a parliamentary inquiry examining the operation, the Observer has been told. Details from several government departments and agencies are understood to back damning testimony from a Foreign Office whistleblower, who has claimed that bureaucratic chaos, ministerial intervention, and a lack of planning and resources led to “people being left to die at the hands of the Taliban”. The Observer revealed in August that thousands of emails of urgent cases of Afghans in danger were being left unread for days at the height of the crisis, with the messages of senior MPs among those not to be opened. Even government ministers had emails that had not been addressed. In an interview with the Observer, Tom Tugendhat, the Conservative chair of the foreign affairs select committee which is examining the claims, said others had been in touch to disclose concerns. He described evidence from three senior Foreign Office officials last Tuesday, in which its permanent secretary Sir Philip Barton admitted remaining on holiday for 11 days after Afghanistan fell to the Taliban, as “completely extraordinary”. He said he was now more convinced about the damning testimony his committee received from Raphael Marshall, a junior official who worked in the Afghan Special Cases team. “There’s nothing I’ve heard that leads me to believe he is mistaken,” Tugendhat said. “He and many like him deserve more than an apology. They have demonstrated quite clearly the integrity and the ethical standards we should expect from senior government employees, but are finding those standards in the junior ranks, not the senior ones.” Tugendhat said that his committee was now sifting through further evidence. “Since the hearing on Tuesday, I’ve been approached by individuals from other government departments and, indeed, other agencies offering their own perspectives on the events in the run-up to August and the aftermath,” he said. “We’re in discussion as to how their evidence may be presented. There is a very wide feeling that this goes to the heart of something that is simply not acceptable, and that Britain deserves better.” He said the committee would be speaking to defence secretary Ben Wallace over the military elements of the withdrawal. “We’re very keen to speak to the defence secretary who has agreed to come,” he said. “We want to hear the military perspective on this. We’re very keen to speak to others who may have been involved in different areas. And we need to sit down and go through a lot of evidence.” Tugendhat said that he wanted to wait for a final report on the crisis before concluding where the responsibility for any failings should fall. However, he said that it was a “whole government” failure, with the Foreign Office, Home Office and Ministry of Defence all involved in the operation. He said the failure had seen allies in Afghanistan abandoned. “There are many people on the ground in Afghanistan today who are guilty of nothing more than hoping and wishing for a better future,” he said. “Yet today, the Taliban victory means what we’re likely to see is a very serious degradation in the life chances of individuals. In many ways we’re already seeing it. We’re seeing girls denied education, we’re seeing women excluded from work. These are very serious attacks on civil liberties.” He said that questions remained over the evacuation of nearly 200 dogs and cats from Kabul. Pen Farthing, a former British Royal Marine who operated the Nowzad animal charity, flew with the animals in a chartered aircraft. However, Marshall said that finite resources on the ground had to be deployed to ensure the animals reached the plane. “The Foreign Office officials made it clear that there was absolutely no diversion of resources,” said Tugendhat. “They also made it clear that the military opened the gates and took time to get those animals in. How those two statements are compatible, I don’t understand.” A government spokesperson said: “UK government staff worked tirelessly to evacuate more than 15,000 people from Afghanistan within a fortnight. This was the biggest mission of its kind in generations and the second largest evacuation carried out by any country. We are still working to help others leave. “Over 1,000 FCDO staff worked to help British nationals and eligible Afghans leave during Operation Pitting. The scale of the evacuation and the challenging circumstances meant decisions on prioritisation had to be made quickly to ensure we could help as many people as possible. Regrettably we were not able to evacuate all those we wanted to, but our commitment to them is enduring and since the end of the operation we’ve helped more than 3,000 individuals leave Afghanistan.”Seven central and southern US states were searching for survivors and surveying the devastation Saturday after a series of powerful tornadoes intensified by severe storms ripped across the region, leaving an estimated 70 to 100 people dead. By early evening, officials had confirmed 29 deaths, including 22 in three Kentucky counties, many of those in a candle factory in Mayfield that had around 110 employees working the night shift when a tornado roared through. President Joe Biden declared a state of emergency in Kentucky, the state hardest hit when one of four tornadoes, including a massive storm, devastated Mayfield, a small town 134 miles (215 km) north-west of Nashville, Tennessee. A candle factory partially collapsed when the tornado struck on Friday evening. Multiple tornadoes pummeled a 200-mile plus area in what US President Joe Biden described as an “unimaginable tragedy”. “This has been the most devastating tornado event in our state’s history,” Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear said at a news conference. He said he thought “at least dozens” of workers at the candle factory were killed when the roof collapsed. “The level of devastation is unlike anything that I have ever seen,” Beshear said. “We were pretty sure that we would lose over 50 Kentuckians, I’m now certain that that number is north of 70. It may, in fact, end up exceeding 100 before the day is done.” Sarah Burgess, a trooper with the Kentucky state police, said that “the entire building is essentially leveled”. Trooper Burgess later added that she could not tabulate the number of fatalities as search and rescue teams were going through the rubble. There were around 110 workers in the factory – Mayfield Consumer Products – when the tornado struck. Mayfield mayor Kathy Stewart O’Nan said the candle factory “looks as if a bomb has dropped on it”. “We hope there are still rescues to be made. We fear that it is now just recovery,” O’Nan added. At a late afternoon news conference, Biden said the loss from the tornado strikes in Kentucky and neighboring states was “profound” and a “tragedy”, and the estimated 22 tornados that touched down “likely to be one of the largest tornado outbreaks in our history”. “We still don’t know how many lives were lost or the full extent of the damage,” he said. “I say to all the victims you’re in our prayers, and to the first responders and emergency personnel, this is the right thing to do at the right time. We’re going to get through this.” Biden said federal aid agencies, including Fema, “would focus on getting support to where it is needed”. Asked if he thought the intensity of the storms was related to climate crisis, Biden said: “All I know is that the intensity of the weather across the board has some impact as a consequence of the warming of the planet. The specific impact on these specific storms, I can’t say at this point.” Images posted on social media showed the deadly but erratic nature of tornadoes, with buildings, vehicles and trees torn apart on one street, then a neighboring street left relatively unscathed. “Absolutely catastrophic damage in Mayfield,” tweeted Whitney Westerfield, a state senator, where police announced at 7pm local time curfew for Saturday night. “Gentleman at the roadblock said that his house was fine, but his next-door neighbor’s house was completely gone.” Other structures that were badly damaged include an Amazon facility in Illinois, where six died, officials said, and a nursing home in Arkansas. About 30 people who were in the Amazon facility in Edwardsville, Illinois, were taken to the police station for evaluation. “This is a devastating tragedy for our Amazon family and our focus is on supporting our employees and partners,” Amazon spokesperson Richard Rocha said in a written statement. The weather system that passed over the region was intensified when cold air from the plains met unusually warm air from the south. Most of the devastation occurred on the “warm” side of the storm, and at least one of the four recorded tornadoes may have been on the ground for 100 miles (160 km). “To lose a loved one in a storm like this is an unimaginable tragedy,” Biden said in a statement, adding that the federal government was working with regional governors “to ensure they have what they need as the search for survivors and damage assessments continue”. Still, the scale of the damage from the system, coming after a series of recent climate-crisis intensified “weather events” across the US, caught many by surprise. Some 12 hours after the storm – named Atticus by the Weather Channel – struck, 500,000 homes and businesses across eight states were without power. “There were tons of vehicles just thrown like toys,” said channel meteorologist Chris Bruin, noting that tractor dealerships were destroyed and semis blown over along the highway. Among the missing at the candle factory are Denise Johnson Williams, a 50-year-old mother of four whose family members kept vigil at the site Saturday. “It’s Christmas time and she works at a place that’s making candles for gifts,” her brother, Darryl Williams, said. He said his sister had called her husband overnight to report the weather was getting bad but that was the last time anyone heard from her. “To give up the gift of life to make a gift,” her brother said. “We haven’t heard anything, and I’m not presuming anything. But I’m expecting for the worst.” Kyana Parsons-Perez, an employee at the candle factory, said she had been trapped under five feet of debris for at least two hours until she was freed by rescuers. Shortly before the tornado struck, she recalled, the building’s lights flickered. Her ears started “popping” and then, “Boom. Everything came down on us.” She told USA Today that it was “absolutely the most terrifying” event she had ever experienced. “I did not think I was going to make it at all.” The severity of the storm system forced workers at a National Weather Service office near St Louis to themselves seek shelter as a tornado passed nearby, killing at least one person in building collapses near the towns of Defiance and New Melle. “This was an incredible storm that lasted a long time and covered a lot of territory,” said Larry Vannozzi, meteorologist in charge of the National Weather Service office covering the Nashville area. In Arkansas, a tornado struck a nursing home in Monette, killing one person and trapping 20 people inside as the building collapsed. In addition, three storm-related deaths were confirmed in Tennessee. The storms also caused a CSX company freight train to derail in the city of Madisonville in western Kentucky, Reuters reported. Initial reports indicated no injuries. The National Weather Service is working to determine whether this was a single storm or a series of concurrent storms in the same area, CNN reported. More than 100 tornado warnings were issued across the region, the Weather Channel said. An “explosive, severe weather set-up” was how Kentucky meteorologist with WHAS11 First Alert StormTeam described it at 10.45pm local time on Friday night. “We need to be taking this very seriously.” In his comments, Biden was asked if the warnings that came ahead of the the storm were sufficient. “What warning was there, was it strong enough and was it heeded?” would be looked at, he said.The likelihood of users dying from drugs such as heroin has increased 55% since the Conservative party came to power in 2010, according to research that suggests the government’s new drug strategy will merely begin to restore some of the support it dismantled in the first place. A University College London (UCL) and University of Bristol study, published on Saturday, indicates that the high-profile strategy will start to repair some of the damage caused by Tory cuts to drug treatment services since 2010, a decade during which thousands died from an overdose. The 10-year strategy was unveiled last week by prime minister Boris Johnson, promising local authorities in England £780m for the drug treatment system. It follows an ongoing rise in drug deaths in England and Wales to their highest level since records began in 1993, with 4,561 people dying last year. In a study to be published in the Lancet Public Health medical journal, researchers attempted to definitively answer why drug deaths had risen over the last decade. Their findings dispel one of the most common explanations: that as the population of opioid users ages, the chances of them dying increases. Instead, the study argues that “disinvestment” in drug treatment services was a potential key factor, noting that a government-sponsored review last year concluded services were struggling to meet the basic needs of users. The report says: “The increasing number of fatal drug poisonings over the past 10 years in the population is not explained by population ageing. “Community drug treatment services are sometimes the only point of contact between people who use illicit opioids and health services, and cuts in funding have meant that these now provide a narrow range of services with little scope for holistic care.” Dan Lewer, research fellow at UCL’s department of epidemiology and public health, said a reduction in the availability of treatments such as methadone for drug addiction was a prime factor. He said: “I would argue that, based on the big protective benefit of those services like methadone, and the big increased risk of death when people leave that treatment, that it’s the prime candidate for that increased risk.” Lewer said the government’s 2012 Health Act, which transferred much public health work from the NHS to councils – whose budgets were cut by a third – meant crucial drug support and treatments were badly weakened. In 2012, there were 2,597 drug poisoning deaths registered, more than 40% fewer than the latest figures. Lewer added that while the potential to mend some of the harm inflicted over the last decade was “absolutely crucial”, some of the strategy’s language was unhelpful, such as its frequent references to “drug misuse”. He said: “The language is stigmatising and talks about addicts, criminals, and punishment. That’s not helpful and pushes people further to the margins of society. It’s in everyone’s interest to support this group and invest in needle exchanges, good quality treatment, and services that actually help.” The strategy has also drawn criticism for being presented by politicians, including the prime minister, as part of a crackdown on middle-class drug users. Experts and the police say the issue cannot be defined or targeted along class boundaries. The study also found that heroin users are much less likely to engage with health services, which meant they are twice as likely to die from chronic health problems such as cancer and heart disease than from an overdose. Compared with people of the same age in the general population, those who use heroin are three times more likely to die due to cancer, and four times more likely to die from heart disease, with homelessness, poverty and mental health problems being a factor. Lewer added that the study’s statistical analysis only went up to 2018 because data becomes less reliable after that year, although researchers said there was no indication the chances of dying from a drugs overdoses have since reduced. Promoting the strategy last Monday, the health secretary Sajid Javid said that more than half of people dependent on opiate and crack cocaine were not engaged in treatment and needed to be addressed. The Home Office has been contacted for comment.Eight refugees – held by Australia’s offshore immigration regime for more than eight years – have landed in Vancouver and Toronto, sponsored by community groups in Canada and Australia to begin new lives on the other side of the world. The eight flew out of the Papua New Guinea capital Port Moresby on Thursday, joining another former Manus detainee who arrived in Canada a week ago. Abdo had been medevaced from PNG to Australia before being accepted for resettlement in Canada. “I have mixed feelings about starting this new life in Canada,” Abdo says. “It was hard leaving my friends in Australia. I wish I could have stayed. “Thank you for all [the] people that made it possible for me to become a permanent resident of Canada, I am looking forward to a bright new future. To all my Aussie friends, come [for a] visit.” The nine have been accepted for resettlement under Canada’s Private Sponsorship of Refugees scheme, which allows community groups to privately sponsor refugees to resettle in Canada, in addition to the government’s own humanitarian resettlement quotas. The scheme, which has been running for more than 40 years, has allowed more than 300,000 refugees to restart their lives in Canada. Six of the eight refugees who landed in Canada on Saturday (Australian time) were resettled through Operation #NotForgotten, a community sponsorship partnership between the Refugee Council of Australia, the Vancouver-based migrant and refugee settlement service Mosaic, and volunteer network Ads Up Canada. The other two have been sponsored by community volunteers supported by Ads Up Canada. The eight left PNG just three weeks ahead of Australia formally ending its eight-year offshore immigration regime in PNG. More than 100 people remain held there by Australia. Abdo – the Guardian is choosing only to publish his first name – was incarcerated on Manus Island, medevaced to Australia suffering acute medical issues, and then granted a temporary visa to live in the Australian community while awaiting resettlement. He landed in Vancouver on 6 December. Those resettled are the first of an expected steady stream of Canadian resettlements from within Australia’s offshore immigration system. Another four refugees currently held by Australia will arrive in Canada over the next month. Travel arrangements for a further three newly approved applicants is currently being arranged. Australians and Canadians working together The Refugee Council chief executive, Paul Power, says the resettlement of refugees from within Australia’s onshore and offshore immigration detention systems is the result of “ordinary people in Australia and Canada working together to find a solution for refugees who needed the opportunity to get on with the rest of their lives after years of mistreatment by the Australian government”. “These eight people sought sanctuary in Australia after escaping oppression in their homelands, as was confirmed when their refugee status was assessed,” he says. “Instead of being helped by Australia, they were put into detention under appalling conditions and have spent years not knowing what the future held for them and their families.” Australians have donated more than $3.8m to Operation #NotForgotten through the Refugee Council. Mosaic and Ads Up Canada have lodged sponsorship applications with the Canadian government and organised volunteer groups to support refugees after arrival. Since November 2019, applications for 156 refugees – in PNG, Australia and Nauru – and 125 separated family members have been lodged through Operation #NotForgotten. “Australians concerned about the mistreatment of the refugees sent to PNG and Nauru are very grateful to the people and government of Canada for providing a welcome and a new home for people who need the opportunity to live in freedom and start again,” Power said. Iris Challoner, the manager of Mosaic’s private sponsorship program, says the private sponsorship program is transformative, both for refugees beginning lives in new countries and the communities they are welcomed into. “Our team is privileged and honoured to have gotten to know so many Australians that are a force for better and take a stand for human rights. Ordinary Australians have made this unique collaboration possible; they saw suffering and found solutions where they could. This is what makes Operation #NotForgotten unique: it is a true collaboration of civic society across continents.” ‘A team of people who become family’ The Australian government has, for several years, speculated about implementing a scheme based on Canada’s model, which has been resettling refugees since 1979. In Canada, private sponsors, which are often community, humanitarian or faith groups, commit to providing income support for refugees for the first year after arrival. Currently, it costs the equivalent of A$21,500 to sponsor a single refugee, or A$36,500 for a family of five. Other countries have adopted the model. In October, the US, after decades of only government-sponsored resettlement, announced a Sponsor Circle Program for Afghans, specifically to assist with the resettlement of more than 50,000 Afghans currently being housed in military bases across the US, some of those who made it onto flights out of Kabul as the country fell to the Taliban. Ireland, the UK and New Zealand have committed to or established similar schemes. Australia’s Community Support Program was launched in 2017 as a pilot program, set at 1,000 places to be drawn from within Australia’s humanitarian migration program. Crucially, it was not additional to the government’s resettlement programs – every place sponsored by a community group would subtract one from the government number. Australia’s pilot – as the government’s own reviews have conceded – is riven with systemic flaws. The Australian program is: small, limited to just 1,000 places a year; expensive, more than three times the cost of comparable schemes overseas, costing about $100,000 to sponsor a family of five, with an application fee alone of $19,000; restrictive – available only to refugees between 18 and 50 who have functional English and a job offer in Australia or skills that make them “job ready”, and critically, not additional: any refugee sponsored by the community subtracts by one from the government’s resettlement commitment. The Department of Home Affairs’ own review of its existing Community Support Program this year found it was structurally flawed, and ineffective in resettling significant numbers of refugees. The review, by the commonwealth coordinator-general for migrant services, Alison Larkins, said while the CSP was “well-intentioned” it was: prohibitively expensive; not additional to the existing government humanitarian program (which has been reduced to 13,750 and was less than half-filled last year); and consistently under-subscribed because it failed to “harness broader community goodwill and support”. The findings, presented to the government in May, said “community organisations generally report being unwilling to engage in (and bear high financial costs for) sponsorship without it generating places in addition to the current humanitarian intake”. In a speech last year, Larkins said international evidence demonstrated “governments alone can’t make the difference”. “In Canada, you can directly see the importance of community in creating economic participation for refugees through their community sponsorship model,” she said. “Seventy per cent of privately sponsored refugees in Canada declared employment earnings within their first year of arrival compared to 40% of government assisted refugees.” Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has previously said he was a “strong supporter of the community support program”. A spokesperson for the home affairs department said the government was “currently considering the findings of the review and anticipates being able to offer a further update soon”. “The government looks forward to ensuring Australia’s Community Support Program becomes a genuine, successful partnership between community, business and the government, to provide beneficial outcomes to our refugee and humanitarian arrivals in Australia.” Challoner says the nature of Canada’s private sponsorship program “sets people up for success”. “Sponsors commit to 12 months of sponsorship support. As a result, privately sponsored refugees arrive with a built-in social support system. They have a safe and clean place to live, and a team of people who become family, supporting all aspects of their settlement experience. “Done right, private refugee sponsorship can change attitudes across the world about refugees, re-unify families that are separated … It enables ordinary citizens to truly make a difference … to be the change they want to see.”It took Mariah* six months to find her first rental in western Sydney. An asylum seeker from a west African nation, she arrived in Australia in 2018 and has been living in the community on a bridging visa ever since. Initially boarding with a family, she got a job and struck out with a friend, only to discover that the rental market wanted nothing to do with her. “Every real estate agent we applied to said: ‘You are asylum seekers, you don’t have a permanent residency, you don’t have the documents that we are asking for,’” Mariah tells Guardian Australia. “And above all, we don’t have anyone to reference or stand as witness for us.” The pair were only able to secure a rental property by responding to an ad on Facebook Marketplace – a granny flat more than 25km west of the Sydney CBD, for $700 a fortnight. Even that was fraught. “Because it was between me and the family, it was difficult – they knew we were not permanent residents,” Mariah says. “So every three months they ask for documents like your visa – ‘is your visa expired?’ So we are under pressure.” Mariah’s experience is not unique. Asylum seekers routinely experience housing insecurity, homelessness, chronic financial insecurity and the constantly looming threat of eviction from formal and informal tenancies, according to a new report from Jesuit Refugee Services and the University of Western Sydney. The study, A Place to Call Home, involved conducting in-depth interviews with a small group of asylum seekers accessing support services in western Sydney, followed by a broader survey. There is very little data about asylum seekers’ experience of homelessness in Australia. Most of the existing research relates to those who have already had refugee status granted, says Elizabeth Conroy, senior research fellow at the Translational Health Research Institute and co-author of the report. “We knew it was an issue. Services were telling us that trying to find housing for people was problematic,” she says. “And it was certainly something that came up a lot among my clients when I was volunteering as a trauma counsellor at the Asylum Seekers Centre.” ‘It was very, very difficult for me’ The restrictive conditions of bridging visas mean many asylum seekers are not eligible to access public or community housing, or federally funded income support. The drawn out nature of the refugee status determination process means that even those who are in the “fast track” category routinely wait years for their claim to be settled. In the meantime, real estate agents invariably knock back their rental applications because they are not permanent residents, even when they have money in their bank account, are employed in ongoing work and otherwise make a good impression. Many have no choice but to seek off-the-books, informal or ad hoc subletting arrangements, in which permanent residents or Australian citizens agree to secure the lease in their own name, with the asylum seeker paying rent to the lessee. These situations are routinely disempowering, with asylum seekers compromising privacy and personal safety concerns for a roof over their heads, the report found. Women often find themselves in particularly coercive situations, with the threat of violence or their housing insecurity used as a lever to induce them into relationships they do not want. Mariah had to leave the granny flat in western Sydney when her flatmate moved states. She alone couldn’t keep up with the rent. She found another house via a subletting arrangement, but then Covid hit. Mariah’s visa gave her the right to work but not to access jobseeker or any other commonwealth income support schemes. Her landlord refused to reduce the rent, and she was forced to vacate again. What followed was three months of severe hardship and very little employment. “I was squatting with friends, sleeping wherever the night met me,” Mariah says. “It was very, very difficult for me at that time.” ‘They’re excluded from support’ Joseph* had a similar experience. When Covid came, he was working casually in the hospitality sector and living in an off-the-lease arrangement in an apartment with a housemate. His job evaporated with the lockdowns, and consequently so did his accommodation. A charity provided him a bed in some emergency accommodation – a small apartment that already housed five other men. Social distancing there was impossible. “People seeking asylum are going through two different pandemics,” Joseph says. “Housing and homelessness, and Covid-19 itself.” Mariah and Joseph are both concerned about coercive sexual relationships they have seen develop in the asylum seeker community as a consequence of people’s experience of housing insecurity. It is even harder for those with children, particularly single mothers, they say. Many asylum seekers are unable to access childcare support payments, but without childcare they are unable to work, which leaves them and their families extremely vulnerable. “Asylum seekers are constrained in their ability to generate an income and live independently, and at the same time, they’re excluded from support,” Conroy says. “You can’t take away rights without providing support. You can’t create dependency and then not even provide the support to respond to that.” The report calls for income support to be extended to asylum seekers who cannot work or who are unable to find work, as well as access to social housing and other government housing support services. In the meantime, the toll on the asylum seeker community is heavy. “Mental health is something that is buckling in the African community, especially people that are seeking asylum,” Joseph says. “Housing and homelessness is one of the underlying factors of that. “Asylum seekers have a valid visa to live and stay in Australia. Services that help them live a dignified life should be made applicable to them.” Pseudonyms have been used in this story for safety reasonsNo one admits to being a “neoliberal”. You cannot vote for the Neoliberal party or join a neoliberal club. Like 21st-century fascism and religious fundamentalism, neoliberalism is a movement without declared adherents. If you call opponents “fascist” or a “fundamentalist”, however, at least your audience knows you are condemning them. A “neoliberal” though? Most people won’t know what you are talking about, but will guess that it doesn’t sound such a bad thing to be. The exceptions will be the minority immersed in leftwing thought. They alone are primed to shudder at the sound of the word. Insults that only the initiated comprehend are closer to a secret code than an open argument. Like the changes in approved terms for disadvantage – don’t say “able-bodied”, say “non-disabled” – the effect, if not the intention, is to belittle ordinary people and make them feel they are gauche or worse for not keeping up with the latest linguistic fashions. Given that losing is the standard experience of the centre-left, throwing out language that excludes the majority of the population strikes me as an overdue necessity. The more so when a new collection of essays by modern historians suggests that supposed insiders may not understand what neoliberalism means either. The Neoliberal Age? Britain since the 1970s is well worth reading and not only because the generous publishers allow you to download it free. Although most of the contributors agree that the rise to power of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher represented a break with the past, they contest everything else. Were they really preceded by a social democratic golden age? (The movements to empower women, ethnic minorities and gays and lesbians did not think so.) Were changes we explain by looking at political decisions the result of shifts in ideology or the shift from manufacturing to service economies that affected every developed nation, regardless of who was in power? The doctrines of Milton Friedman and Friedrich Hayek are meant to be distinct from traditional apologetics for unrestrained capitalism. Nineteenth-century economic liberals wanted a minimal state. But the neoliberals of the 20th century wanted to empower the state to create and uphold markets and competition. As history, this is tediously sentimental. The British state presided over the world’s first capitalist economy. It used its empire as a captive market and went to war with China to allow the free trade in drugs to flourish. You can call it many things but it was not a minimal state. In the 1960s, during the supposed Trente Glorieuses of the social democratic age, the Bank of England and the Foreign Office enabled the creation of tax havens that allowed plutocrats, corporations and criminals to hoard their money with disastrous and enduring consequences for humanity. I could go on, but the cliquey language remains my main concern: not just for what it conceals, but for what it unwittingly reveals. Like so much insider jargon, neoliberal is a pathetically weak term. To take an everyday example: since Thatcher’s government privatised the water industry in 1989, managers and shareholders have exploited their monopoly power to take almost £60bn in profit. In 2020, the companies spent 3.1m hours dumping sewage into rivers. So great has been their failure to reinvest even a small portion of the money they take, south-east England may soon face water shortages. I accept that no mid-20th-century government would have contemplated handing over water companies to negligent profiteers. But to call today’s politicians and regulatory authorities, who sit back while monopolists cover the countryside in excrement, “neoliberals” is to let them off lightly. Russians would never use such a mild term of the men Vladimir Putin has let loose. They capture the banditry of crony capitalism by talking of robbers, looters and frauds. I can’t speak for academia, but in politics I know that the cry “neoliberal” is a certain sign that I am in the presence of the far left. It must maintain there is no difference between Tony Blair’s Labour government and any government Keir Starmer may lead, and the Tories. I once believed that, but the brutality of David Cameron’s actual Conservative government made me think again. So, too, did the arguments for apathy or despair behind apparently radical sloganising. Only moderate centre-left parties have won elections in western countries and their victories are rare enough. If you insist that they are as much a part of a neoliberal conspiracy as the right, then there is no point in fighting to remove the right from power. As seriously, a belief in neoliberal hegemony ducks the question whether it makes sense to think of today’s right as neoliberal. I can see the idea’s appeal. Boris Johnson and his wife are openly for sale. Whether they want new wallpaper or home-delivered dinners, their first instinct is to sponge off rich donors, who may well entertain the hope that their favours will be returned. None of his personal corruptions, however, can hide the truth that Johnson is a nationalist, who appeals to deep chauvinist sentiments rather than class interests. No economic liberal, neo or otherwise, would pull the UK out of the world’s richest single market. Conservatives fooled themselves that Brexit would bring a deregulated society. But we should pay more attention to the world as it is than to the fantasies of the delusional and see that, instead of a Singapore-on-Thames, they have undermined exporters and brought tax to its highest level since the 1960s, an era the Thatcher revolution supposedly finished off. Far from being a spur to entrepreneurial dynamism, the Conservative party is the party of the people who have stopped working, rather than the party of businesses and their workers. Johnson and ministers stroke the prejudices of his core pensioner vote and put their economic interests first. I cannot imagine the ghost of Friedman applauding a government that raises taxes on employers and employees to protect the property of wealthy retirees. You won’t beat them with obscurantist labels voters don’t understand and you may well not understand either. You won’t beat them until you understand them and when you do you will realise that whatever else they are they are not neoliberals. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistAndrew Yeo doesn’t know what’s happened to tens of millions of dollars worth of cryptocurrency belonging to hundreds of clients of the collapsed exchange ACX, but he aims to find out. In mid-October the veteran insolvency practitioner was appointed administrator of Blockchain Global, the company that used to run ACX, and since then he’s been getting a crash course in all things crypto from the tech experts at the firm where he’s a partner, Pitcher Partners. “There’s always stuff that’s different – you have that on every job,” he says. “Its always about finding out what’s different about this industry and how you can use it.” A cryptocurrency exchange is digital marketplace that enables customers to buy, sell and hold cryptocurrencies. It makes money through set fees or by taking a percentage of transactions. No mainstream banks in Australia allow customers to buy and sell cryptocurrencies, although the Commonwealth bank has a pilot in the works, so exchanges are currently the only means to do this. To get to the bottom of what has happened to the cash and coins held in the accounts of ACX customers, Yeo will need to cut through a jungle of claims and counter-claims that have been playing out in court since last year. “It’s clear that there’s a number of channels of investigation which we may have available and determining which ones are best to follow first is not a simple task,” he says. There’s plenty at stake. Since Yeo’s appointment, creditors, including ACX clients and Blockchain Global’s directors and management, have come forward with claims they are owed close to $50m. ACX is not the only Australian exchange to run into trouble in what is – for now – a completely unregulated industry. Last week, the smaller exchange Mycryptowallet also fell into administration, reportedly owing clients hundreds of thousands of dollars. Globally, exchanges have proven vulnerable to failure and theft; Japanese operation Mt Gox collapsed in 2014 after someone stole 850,000 bitcoins from it and in 2016 hackers stole almost 120,000 bitcoins from the British Virgin Islands group Bitfinex, which managed to survive and still exists today. It’s not suggested that ACX’s assets have been stolen. This week, the Morrison government announced plans to regulate exchanges – some time in the future. In a speech on Thursday to the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said the government would consult on establishing a licensing system for digital currency exchanges, together with regulation of businesses that hold custody of crypto on behalf of customers. The consultation process is due to be finished by the middle of next year, after an election that must be held by 21 May 2022. Experts say licensing exchanges is a good idea, but it needs to be backed up by enforcement. “With regulation comes a halo, businesses can say they’ve got a stamp of approval, and represent that people should have trust and confidence in them,” says the chief executive of the Consumer Action Law Centre, Gerard Brody. “The regulatory regime itself has got to be robust. It’s no good having a licence given to a business if the standards it’s got to meet under that licence result in consumer detriment.” Pamela Hanrahan, a professor of commercial law and regulation at the University of New South Wales, says licensing creates a “moral hazard”. “It does carry some kind of colour to it that people are properly regulated, but that’s true of every form of occupational licensing, from hairdressing to whatever,” she says. She points to failures such as the financial planning scandals that rocked the banking industry in the mid-2010s, and the 2009 Trio Capital failure, which deprived retirement savers of $176m and was the biggest superannuation collapse in Australian history, as examples of where licensing regimes have failed to safeguard consumers. “You do have to enforce it properly,” she says. Victims of ACX’s collapse certainly feel they’ve been neglected by regulators including the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. In a lawsuit filed in the Victorian supreme court, 94 of them claim Blockchain Global, as operator of the exchange, owes them $13m worth of tokens including bitcoin, ethereum and ripple, as well as cash held in their ACX accounts. “The biggest thing I’m angry about is that we’re not getting any help from Asic,” one ACX client says. “These companies are registered with Asic but … we have to sue the company.” Not all of ACX’s clients are participating in the lawsuit and all up there are estimated to be more than 200 who claim to have lost access to crypto and cash held at the exchange. On Thursday afternoon, judge Richard Attiwill stayed the proceeding against Blockchain Global due to Yeo’s appointment as administrator. However, he allowed it to continue against the other defendants in the case, including Blockchain Global chief executive, Allan Guo, and the company’s chief financial officer, Samuel Lee. Guo and Lee did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia and they are yet to file defences in the matter. Meanwhile, in another dispute also before the Victorian supreme court, Blockchain Global and Guo are fighting a former company employee, Jin Chen, over control of 117 bitcoins. Chen claims that he is owed the crypto for work developing software to run the ACX exchange, but the company and Guo say Chen has failed to comply with a deal that was supposed to end the stoush, because he did not make the source code of the software accessible. Chen denies this. On Thursday afternoon Attiwill also stayed Chen’s claim against the company in light of the appointment of the administrator, but allowed the contest between Chen and Guo to go ahead. The issues are less clear at the smaller Mycryptowallet, which is in the hands of liquidator Terry van der Velde of SV Partners. SV Partners says little information is available because the appointment is “at very early stages” but van der Velde aims to sell the business. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Hanrahan says the collapses make government regulation of exchanges an urgent need. “They need to act reasonably quickly,” she says – but not so quickly that the laws fail in the same way as ones covering financial services have. “It’s one thing to announce it, but you know, they’re going to have to deliver it and hopefully not make quite the mess of it that they’ve made of chapter seven of the Corporations Act [which regulates financial services],” she says. In the meantime, people who buy and sell crypto should realise that “they don’t have any inherent worth”. She believes cryptocurrencies are worse investments than the tulip bulbs that changed hands for fortunes during the tulipmania that gripped the Dutch in the 17th century, an episode in history that’s regarded as a classic example of a speculative bubble. “At least if you bought a tulip bulb you can plant it and grow a tulip,” she says. “These things don’t do anything.”I met Mike in a club called Club One in Baltimore. I’d heard about The Wire and I’d seen them shooting around the city but I’d never watched it. I didn’t know who he was. I told my homeboy: “This man keeps looking at me. He’s looking hard with a scar on his face. He’s looking mean.” My homeboy told me: “Nah, that’s Omar off The Wire. He’s not nobody to be worried about.” That’s when Mike comes over and starts asking me questions. He thought I was a boy at first. He was like: “Wow, your charisma, your swag, everything about you is so dynamic and crazy, I love that.” I don’t know how because I was drunk. He called me the next day and said: “Come see me.” I got myself together and went to the set and was just kicking it with him. Then the people from The Wire like Ed Burns and David Simon heard me talking and they came over and started asking me to pronounce words. I didn’t know what it was for. I was kinda nervous. These white people keep asking me questions. I ain’t used to that. White people ask me questions when I’m in trouble. But it turned out for the good. Mike’s work ethic was just crazy. He could read something three times and it would be right in his memory, then the fourth time he’s acting out how he’s going to do it. He’d say: “You like that? Did I do good?” I’d never seen anything like it. He worked like he didn’t even go out last night. That right there showed me that you can have fun but you have to work. His life was amazing. He’d been through so much. I was surprised by the hurdles he’d been through trying to make it in the industry, from a background dancer with Madonna to getting a scar on his face and [working with] Tupac. It was crazy. Everything that my brother did, I supported. I don’t care what it was. We’d see each other on set but it was off set that we had the most encounters. Mike would come to my grandmother’s house with Method Man, or we’d go out to eat, or I’d ride to New York with him. He was the first person that flew me to California. It was like we knew each other for years. That’s what type of chemistry we had: big brother, little sister. I don’t care how we met – he was my brother. I really loved the ground that he walked on. Mike was a sweetheart. He would give you the shirt off his back. The characters he portrayed that made him scary or a villain? He wasn’t like that at all. If you needed some words of encouragement, he was the guy to call. If you needed help with anything, he was the guy to call. He was so nice, so loving, so caring. He was amazing, man. Mike could walk around Baltimore by himself. They’d surround him but at the same time he was safe because they loved him. They thought he was from Baltimore. He was a caring king. He was a legend. I get emotional talking about him because I can’t believe that he’s gone. I can’t pick up my phone and call him. He’d say: “Fefe, how you doing?” My family call me Fefe. You could tell when he was upset with me because he’d be like: “Felicia! Now what you doing?” He was the only one who could check me and let me know what I’m doing wrong and I won’t get mad. He fell in love with me and I fell in love with him. I spoke to him two days before he died. I was supposed to be coming to our friend in Jersey’s block party but I couldn’t make it because I was doing something for the kids in Baltimore. We said we loved each other. I told him I’d be up there this week and then I got a phone call a couple of days later. Jamie Hector [Marlo Stanfield in The Wire] called me and said: “Did you talk to Mike?” And I said: “Yeah, what’s wrong? You looking for him?” And he said: “They’re saying something’s wrong with Mike.” And that’s how I found out. People ask if I’m OK. Nah, I’m not OK. It’s like losing my grandmother all over again. Death brings up other trauma that you probably ain’t even dealt with yet. I have been through a lot in my life but when you lose someone who actually really loves you, and you know they love you, it hurts. It hurts.Christopher Luxon’s shelves are empty. The solid frames that surround him are devoid of books, the broad expanse of his desk is largely uncluttered by papers, the old oak in and outboxes not yet packed with memos. The New Zealand opposition leader’s office still shouts of being recently and unceremoniously vacated, and its new occupant hasn’t yet made a mark. “I just literally moved into the office in the last three or four days,” Luxon says, circling to the window for a portrait. It’s been a rapid ascension for the MP, catapulted from the pokier reaches of the opposition floors – “the smallest office in the building,” he says – to the polished-wood expanses of leader’s office. “I’m going to get rid of all this horrible wooden furniture,” he says, glancing around. “I don’t like the stuffiness of it, to be brutally honest with you.” Luxon’s redecorating task extends far beyond these walls. He has promised to revamp the National party, which has spent 18 months troubled by bleak polling, internal strife and leadership woes. In his first speech as leader, he vowed to rescue the party from the doldrums. “We are the reset,” he announced from behind the podium. “National is back.” That comeback may be a tough one. Luxon was shunted into the top job ahead of schedule by the implosion of former leader Judith Collins – an iron-willed, experienced political player whose leadership collapsed very publicly last month, when she was dumped by the party after an ill-fated attempt to demote a political rival on the basis of what she alleged were inappropriate comments from 2017. Luxon, a former chief executive of Air New Zealand who has been in politics for just one year, was heralded as a promising hope for New Zealand’s centre right when he entered parliament. He now takes the helm much earlier than he or his supporters may have wished, transitioning in an unprecedentedly short timeframe from newly minted New Zealand MP to major party leader. As well as uniting a fractious caucus – including three ex-leaders with varying degrees of personal ambition – he’s tasked with going head to head with prime minister Jacinda Ardern, who won a majority victory at the last election, and has seen off four opposition leaders so far. In the face of this, Luxon is relentlessly chipper, and unfailingly on-message. “If you look at our history over the last four years, there’s been a lot of dysfunction, I guess, is the simplest way to describe it,” he says of the party. “What’s been exciting about this week is that we came together as a team, we had a seamless leadership transition, and we ended up going forward as one unified team.” He does not blink at the phrase “seamless leadership transition”. So far, commentators on the right have been cautiously pleased with his performance – no major flubs marking his early days, nothing to pull the rug from beneath hopes that he could prove a viable foil to Ardern. Luxon pitches his lack of experience in parliament as a strength. “That’s what this reset has been about,” he says. “To leave the baggage in the past, to turn the page and to go forward.” Instead, he is leaning heavily on his experience in the corporate world, which he says will help him achieve ‘results’ where other politicians bluster. ‘A worthy opponent for Ardern’ A lack of results is one of his primary lines of attack on Ardern whom he says leads a government of “spin and PR,” rather than action. “The prime minister is a very effective communicator, but actually the country needs a lot more than that right now,” he says. “ People actually want to see outcomes and results.” It’s a criticism that has been levelled at the Ardern administration from the left as well as the right – on some key, long-brewing issues, the government has struggled for traction. Declaration of a climate emergency has not resulted in a drop in New Zealand’s emissions; on the housing affordability crisis, a slew of reforms have not stopped Auckland prices increasing by an average $113,000 over the past three months; on mental health, a $1.9bn investment largely failed to flow through to essential services. The country’s Covid response has produced some of the best public health results in the world, but is now entering its most difficult and uncertain stages. “I think the New Zealand public are … looking for someone to speak up on some of the frustrations at the moment – so far, he’s been able to articulate that message quite well,” says Brigitte Morton, a ministerial adviser in the last National government. “I think he’s going to be quite a worthy opponent for Ardern.” What remains to be seen is whether Luxon has clear alternatives to offer. “He’s coming in with an optimistic, if unfilled-in, vision,” says Ben Thomas, a political commentator and former National government staffer and press secretary. “What there isn’t a lot of is detail,” Thomas says, “in particular, the things that will later become relevant – like his individual policy positions.” In these early interviews, Luxon’s style can sometimes resemble his office shelves. The essential architecture of a political leader is there – a backstory, a ready grin, vision statements, a fondness for the phrase “fundamentally” – but the shelves are sometimes unstocked, especially with particulars. On home territory, discussing New Zealand’s need to increase productivity and improve infrastructure – he is comfortable. Elsewhere, his statements can turn vague. On foreign policy, he will not be drawn on New Zealand’s standing in the Five Eyes security network; the specifics on whether New Zealand should risk angering China, its largest trade partner in joining the US-led diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Olympics. On the subject of his evangelical faith – a relatively unusual designation in New Zealand political leadership – and how it could inform his approach to conscience votes like abortion, euthanasia and legalisation of cannabis, he again deploys broader brushstrokes. “I want to be the prime minister of New Zealand, who just happens to have faith – not actually be the faith prime minister of New Zealand,” he says. “I have a personal faith, I haven’t been to a church for five years. It’s fundamentally something personal to me, it gives me purpose, it gives me meaning, it puts me in a context of something bigger than myself. And I think that’s a good thing.” He does note that he has no plans to relitigate abortion reform, which he says was “settled” by the last parliament. On housing, like his political peers, he is unwilling to say whether house prices should drop – although even a 30% drop in prices would only return Auckland to the heady days of March 2020. “It’s a difficult one to answer, that question, in terms of should house prices fall – we definitely want to see house prices become more affordable for everybody,” he says. “There may be a period of time where house prices do go backwards, frankly, but over the long run, we want to see slow, stable, steady growth, not strong double digit growth.” Luxon himself owns seven properties, one of the largest and most valuable property portfolios in parliament. He says that does not put him out of touch with the New Zealanders that don’t own a home. In the coming months, the new leader’s challenge will be to fill in the gaps in his vision. “People will expect big things from him quickly – so time is not on his side,” says Shane Te Pou, a political commentator and former Labour party activist. Then again, he says. “The National party needed a change. Certainly they’re much better off than they were two weeks ago.” ‘A galvanising effect’ Thomas says for now, the broad brush strokes are likely all Luxon needs: he has the quiet weeks of New Zealand’s summer to do the strategic work of fleshing out a policy vision for the party, and learning to articulate it. “The challenge for him will be being able to react instinctively and fleet-footedly in essentially a 24/7 media environment now, where politicians are expected to be across and have opinions on a great deal of subjects,” Thomas says. For someone shifting from relatively low-profile portfolios to spokesperson for the party, that could prove tricky. “His biggest challenge will be the unity of caucus,” Morton says. And Luxon says this will be his first focus. “I’ve seen lots of political parties have a very charismatic leader and a very poor team and they do very poorly,” he says. “[I’m] doing a lot of things for the first time, because I am new to politics. But it has underscored to me the value of teamwork and the belief fundamentally that politics is a team sport.” Among the party faithful, Thomas says, Luxon’s ascendance has had “a galvanizing effect” – even if it hasn’t reached the heights provoked by Ardern’s emergence from her struggling party ahead of the 2017 election. “Rather than pure excitement, the emotional response has been leavened with relief.”On 15 December 2014, inside a repurposed shipping container in the Atlanta Botanical Garden in the USA, Mark Mandica heard an unfamiliar animal call. It was a reddish-brown frog about the size of a peach, called Toughie. He had lived silently for nine years since arriving from Panama – where the highly infectious chytrid fungus disease had arrived, leaving swathes of dead frogs in its wake. He was believed to be the last Rabbs’ fringe-limbed tree frog in the world. “I was always extremely curious what the call sounded like … it was a loud call that sounded like a barking dog,” Mandica says. “Then it struck me that this frog was still vital and sounded very strong, and was singing out for a mate that would never come.” When Toughie’s heart stopped on 26 September 2016, the species died out. The next morning, across the country in San Diego, amphibian expert Natalie Calatayud was presented with Toughie’s testicles. This strange gift was part of a plan to use “biobanking” for conservation. The idea of freezing biological material is not new, having been used in medical research and livestock breeding programs for decades. But by using liquid nitrogen to lower animal tissues to -196C, where almost all processes of life within a cell halt, scientists hope to buy more time for assisted reproduction to help a captive colony, to investigate a devastating disease, or preserve DNA for cloning. Toughie now exists as 16 vials of precious mush, awaiting a time when technology – and potentially an unknown surviving mate – allows for the revival of the lost species. Unlike the Rabbs’ tree frog, most species disappear years before humans realise, along with any chance to preserve their genetic material. A group of scientists in Australia, in the grip of one of the world’s worst extinction crises, is hoping that some of our own endangered species can avoid this fate. They are calling for a national operation to freeze our native wildlife before that chance is lost. ‘Australia has lagged behind’ Australia was the first country to attempt a truly national biobank: the Animal Gene Storage and Resource Centre of Australia (now the Australian Frozen Zoo) was created in 1995. But funding and donations dried up, says its current director, reproductive expert Peter Temple-Smith. It could never fulfil its potential. The “zoo” exists as a two-metre-tall cryotank that’s been shuffled around Monash University, reliant on volunteer staff formally employed in other roles. Meanwhile, co-founder and former director Ian Gunn says biobanking for conservation has been gaining popularity overseas. “Other countries have moved ahead, and Australia has completely lagged behind.” Alongside the original, and languishing Frozen Zoo, there are now scattered facilities that cryo-preserve animal samples in pockets across the country at some zoos, universities, and museums. In March, five conservationists met with then threatened species commissioner Sally Box arguing that these must become a coordinated network – with standardised operating procedures for the technical work, dependable funding to ensure the facilities can be maintained, and one database to log every existing sample so they can be fully utilised in research. Even with their wish to create a national strategy for proactively “banking” priority species, it will be too late for some: the government itself predicts 280 animals and plants will be extinct by 2039. For these animals, their suspended cells may be the species’ last hope. Reproductive biologist Rebecca Hobbs, of the Taronga CryoDiversity Bank in New South Wales, did not attend the meeting with Box, but says national operating procedures for collecting, storing, and using samples would be crucial. Biobanking, she stresses, must work with, not replace, habitat protection and captive breeding. In captive breeding programs, variety is literally the spice of life: as the number of animals dwindles so does the genetic diversity of the group. Eventually, inbreeding leads to fertility and other health issues and the group is doomed – unless new genes are introduced. This is where advocates say biobanking is useful: in the US, researchers have reversed the black-footed ferret population out of an inbreeding spiral using frozen sperm from the “founding ferrets”, and even cloned a ferret from skin frozen in the 1980s. Banking species in the threatened-to-near-threatened categories may be most cost-effective, Hobbs says. “You may get more bang for your buck if you apply it to species that haven’t declined so much that the genetic variability has declined too dramatically for it to work.” Now back in Australia, Calatayud says current conservation strategies aren’t working, nor being done at the necessary scale. “The need for captive populations to maintain threatened species is growing at an alarming rate, disproportionate to the funding available and the logistical availability of space and staff. With biobanking, you could manage a smaller captive population by inserting new genetics whenever you needed to.” She says that biobanking domesticated species has been long accepted. Australia also has a national network to bank seeds of native plants. “Farmers everywhere bank their bull semen … and no one bats an eyelid. But in the context of wildlife, suddenly people think you’re selling some pipe dream.” Big decisions and a leap of faith Deciding which species get banked will be gruelling. Some won’t make it. “It’s a huge judgment call, it’s unfair, but it’s a case of, ‘who do I bank to save this ecosystem’? Who do we save for the greater good, because we can’t save everybody,” Calatayud says. Conservation biologist Simon Clulow, of the University of Canberra and Newcastle University, says that amphibians and reptiles are the “most imperiled vertebrate classes on Earth” but have had the least attention when it comes to biobanking. “It really wasn’t until the start of this century that we and one or two other labs around the world started to really look at developing sperm freezing and IVF techniques in frogs … for reptiles, we’re about 20 years behind that.” Despite not knowing how to successfully freeze – or bring back – every species, he’s confident the remaining hurdles will be solved given the pace at which the technologies are evolving. Some years ago Clulow and his father, John, helped produce live embryos of the extinct gastric brooding frog from tissue samples frozen decades ago. “We should absolutely be doing it, right now … You can’t go back in time once a species has disappeared.” John Clulow, who attended the Canberra meeting with Box, feels cautiously optimistic that momentum is building toward a national bank. An ecologist with expertise in reproductive technologies, he and colleagues at the University of Newcastle recently received federal funding to collect sperm from frogs in bushfire-affected areas, for use in captive breeding programs at Taronga. He says some conservationists worry that habitat protection will lag if the species in it have been preserved. “The other thing is, philosophically, conservationists are often about preserving animals within habitats, whereas this is a technological approach and that’s not as culturally embraced.” Reproductive biologist Steve Johnston says it’s too late to be hands-off. “With the koalas in south-east Queensland, we’re down to the point where if you just leave them alone, they’re just going to die,” says Johnston, of the University of Queensland. “Even with all the funding and publicity that they get, they’re still struggling.” Less charismatic species, like reptiles and amphibians, tend to attract less funding and interest. Johnston is a pioneer of the technique for successfully extracting sperm from the largest reptile alive. Lacking funding for specific facilities, he worked with Koorana Crocodile Farm. “If we could develop [the method] in the saltwater crocodile, we could apply it to other species.” His work involved enticing a 4.5m croc up to a fence with a dead chicken, putting a noose around its snout, sedating it, and hoisting the croc – a predator that has remained unchanged for 65 million years – into the air with a crane. Once it was laid across the back of two flat-tray utes, Johnston could crawl underneath to extract the penis from the slit at the junction of its legs and tail, and “milk” the sperm. The technique is now being used by different groups. “It’s somewhat invasive … but works well without causing any trauma to the animal.” Hope and silence The group has not heard from the commissioner’s office since their March meeting. Box left the role in October and a spokesperson for the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment did not answer whether acting commissioner Fiona Fraser was briefed about the proposal. They say the Threatened Species Strategy 2021-31, which includes one mention of biobanking, “recognises the importance of being prepared.” Mark Mandica is also preparing. He has mixed feelings about reviving extinct species; the need to remove them from the wild for their survival, he says, is “profoundly dark”. But to hear a Rabbs’ tree frog call again would fill his heart. “Sometimes, I think about how maybe there’s a remote population of them out there, gliding from tree to tree, that just haven’t been found yet.” Lydia Hales received support from the Science Journalists Association of Australia for this story.If anything can be guaranteed in the Western Australian seat of Pearce, it is that whoever replaces Christian Porter, it will not be a man. The urban fringe division that hugs the coast north of Perth has belonged to the Liberals for 33 years, with Porter holding Pearce for nearly a decade before his dramatic fall from grace. But Labor has hopes of overturning the 7.5% margin from the 2019 election, with the help of favourable boundary changes, and poll watchers say it can only be a woman to step into Porter’s shoes after this year’s revelations about the toxic culture in federal parliament. The Labor candidate is the Wanneroo mayor, Tracey Roberts. The likely Liberal candidates include a former navy officer, Miquela Riley – who lost the race for Fremantle in the state election – and Roberts’ fellow Wanneroo councillor Linda Aitken. Roberts, Riley and Aitken all declined to speak on the record about the campaign. But even though the odds are that a woman will win the race, there is one man who could have a crucial, albeit indirect, influence – Mark McGowan. Some observers predict that the popularity of the WA premier could tip the balance in Pearce, even though it is well outside Perth’s traditional Labor heartland. In March, McGowan led WA Labor to one of the biggest election landslides in the nation’s history. William Bowe, of the Poll Bludger blog, says his money is on Labor in Pearce, with the latest Newspoll showing a 9% swing to the opposition across the state. “Will McGowan play a role in the federal election? That’s the million-dollar question. He is certainly playing a role in the polls,” Bowe says. “McGowan has definitely improved Labor’s brand in WA, and also Labor is coming off a very low base there. They haven’t done well in a federal election here in a very long time. “Labour can pick up a lot of ground in WA off the back of an improved image for the party.” The tradies’ electorate The seat of Pearce covers a fast-growing belt of new coastal subdivisions on the northern outskirts of Perth, home to British and African migrants and young mortgaged-up families who have to commute for up to an hour to reach the city. Further to the east is a thriving agriculture region. A lack of rail connections, a shortage of healthcare facilities and the risk of bushfire will be key issues in the campaign. The general manager of the Wanneroo business association, Lauren Bell, says border restrictions and a lack of backpackers have left some businesses struggling to find workers. “There are a lot of businesses that are doing really well, but they cannot get tradies and services to fill jobs that they have ready to go,” she says. “Some people are just not getting a single applicant for jobs.” A significant boundary change in August deprived Pearce of all its territory outside the Perth metropolitan area. Once a mix of urban and rural, it has lost its Liberal-leaning regional component, leaving it as a “tradies’ electorate” with half of the voters new to the area. “It has the highest percentage of the workforce of any electorate in Australia employed in construction,” Bowe says. “The Liberal party would be worried that these new young families are going to flip en masse – and if they do, they are in big trouble in Pearce.” A two-horse race Porter won the seat with a 3.5% swing in 2019, but announced this month he would not stand again. Earlier this year he confirmed he was the subject of a historical rape allegation against an unnamed minister published by the ABC. Porter strenuously denied the allegation and settled a defamation case against the ABC after it published a statement indicating it did not intend to suggest Porter had committed the alleged offence. In September, Porter left the front bench after declaring he had received anonymous donations from a trust to help with his legal fees in the case, but insisted his declaration complied with the relevant rules. Before his decision to quit, internal party polling suggested Labor was ahead in the seat. Dr Yvonne Haigh, a public policy expert at Murdoch University, says it is crucial for the Liberals to preselect a woman, but that was no guarantee of winning. “There have been rallies in Perth with women demanding change and saying this is not good enough and [the Liberals] can’t ignore that. They know they have a problem around having enough female representatives to run for seats, even though they find it impossible to say ‘we need to adopt quotas’,” she says. Women make up 31% of the 151-member House of Representatives, and 53% of the 76-strong Senate, but the Liberals score worse than Labor for representation. On Sunday the federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, told the ABC’s Insiders program the Liberals needed to do more to recruit female candidates. Martin Drum, a senior lecturer in politics at the University of Notre Dame, says with no sitting member and the Liberals beginning the preselection process late, Roberts would start favourite. “There’s no third-party candidate that has a realistic chance of winning,” Drum says. Pearce is a “very different ball game” at this election thanks to McGowan’s popularity, he says. “We have seen at state level that northern metropolitan area swung fairly vigorously at different times, depending on the election. “Mark McGowan did extremely well in that area at the state election.” The Greens and One Nation will also stand, but any independent campaign is unlikely. “It’s not a politically engaged electorate,” Bowe says. “Independents can emerge in seats like Wentworth and Kooyong, but they don’t tend to emerge in seats like this. “This is a two-horse race.”There has been a lot of angst in recent years about housing affordability in Australian cities. That is because, while the meteoric rise in house prices is good for those who own a home, it is a diabolical problem for the economy and society in general. The same thing is happening to agricultural land prices, and it is also locking out new farmers. For some strange reason, the experts herald the huge increase in land values as an indicator of resilience in the sector rather than an indication of underlying structural problems. The 2021 Australian Farmland Values report by Rural Bank shows commodity prices haven’t kept up with the growth in farmland prices since 2017. This is a bit of a misdirect though because, in reality, commodity prices haven’t kept up with production cost rises, including land, for decades. In my view, the experts play down the problems of soaring farmland prices based on deeply flawed notions. For example, Regional Investment Corporation’s chief executive, Bruce King, says the (mortgage) risks are lower in agriculture, pointing to this year’s beef, canola and grain prices and the earning capacity of farmland. “I think that’s being reflected in the underlying land price, so perhaps that decoupling isn’t quite to the same extent or to the same consideration that you’re looking at in a housing market sector where you’re comparing wages which, while they’ll influence what people are able to buy, are not necessarily an outcome or a byproduct of the underlying asset,” King said. First of all, agricultural incomes are not regulated like wages. Using a short-term commodity price as a guide for debt serviceability is an egregious misrepresentation of the long-term profitability of a sector which is declining. Commodity prices are at best seasonal and debt on land is decadal. Australian farmers are exposed to some of the most volatile market conditions with some of the lowest levels of structural support in the OECD. On top of this, climate change is a real and permanent disruptor. It is delivering on its promise of increasing the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events. The floods impacting in the past month are just another example that reinforces the increasing risk facing the agricultural sector. Simply, agricultural incomes are much more volatile/risky than non-agricultural wage incomes. It is plainly absurd for the head of any rural finance organisation to suggest that agricultural mortgages are less risky than home mortgages or should even be compared in the same context. Land prices continue to soar, but this phenomenon is not an indication of improving profitability or resilience in the agricultural sector. It reflects a genuine decoupling of the agricultural real estate business from the agricultural production business. And it will precipitate a necessary structural adjustment that has the potential to be very destabilising to both businesses. Kodak was founded in the 1880s. In 1981, sales exceeded $10 billion. In 2012, Kodak filed for bankruptcy. Kodak’s story is a spectacular example of what happens when the people in charge don’t recognise the significance of changes to their operating environment and adapt early to the ensuing disruption. We should constantly assess what is happening around us and what it might mean for our future. After all, we don’t want to be used as a case study in management failure in the future. I am a farmer, but I am also a businessman. The biggest commercial investment I have – beyond my mind – is the land I farm. I am not a “big” farmer and now my desire to expand is heavily tempered by the outlook for the sector. My outlook differs significantly from those people who many traditionally look to for guidance or assurances about what lies ahead. It is a little bit terrifying that my industry seems to be charging ahead in Kodak-esque business-as-usual fashion. I appreciate not everyone is a farmer. You may ask why you should care. Indeed, my concerns might seem to be more whinging from, or about, a sector that lurches from boom to bust with lightning speed and generally has its hand out asking for assistance. It is increasingly apparent that geopolitical stability increasingly depends on food security, which relies on functional agricultural supply chains, pre- and post-farm gate. It is increasingly important that the commercial and policy structures around agriculture in this country are fit-for-purpose. A viable agricultural sector is a social imperative in an increasingly food-insecure world. Two weeks ago the grains industry was heading for record profits and this week huge proportions of the NSW crop is under water. This, on the back of years of drought. Despite all this, agricultural land prices continue to soar and farmers are apparently buying machinery in a frenzy. So is there a problem or isn’t there? Well, I think there is. I also think there are serious problems with how the experts talk about the current situation and what it means. Like it or not, further destabilisation in the ag sector is bad for everybody and a well informed and robust conversation is urgently needed to reassess commercial and public policy settings around agriculture in this country. Pete Mailler is a grain and cattle farmer from Boggabilla in New South Wales, a fellow of the Australian Rural Leadership Foundation and the former chairman of Grain Producers Australia Ltd.Salmon is consistently one of the most popular kinds of seafood in Australia, but the Tasmanian farmed salmon industry has attracted significant criticism for its continued expansion and alleged environmental impact. In the past, environmental experts on review panels that oversaw industry expansion have quit in protest, telling a Tasmanian parliamentary inquiry that the panels were not truly independent and were obligated to approve expansions. One of those experts also said the planned doubling of salmon production in the coming decade had no basis in sound science. In April, Richard Flanagan released Toxic, a book detailing the environmental devastation he says is occurring as a consequence of salmon aquaculture, and the state government’s role in allowing it. In late October, it was announced that Brazilian meat-processing giant JBS had received approval for a $500m takeover deal of Tasmanian farmer Huon. The announcement came after months of efforts from environmentalists opposing the bid. JBS in Brazil, which owns JBS Australia, has made headlines in the past for alleged links to illegal deforestation, while its major corporate shareholder J&amp;F has paid hefty fines for bribery in Brazil and the US. The owners of J&amp;F, Jose and Wesley Batista, have also served jail time in Brazil while awaiting trial on charges of alleged insider trading. The case is yet to be resolved. JBS Australia has not been implicated in any wrongdoing. The JBS Australia chief executive, Brent Eastwood, said: “JBS is committed to Huon, its employees, the local Tasmanian community and the broader principles of environmental sustainability, animal welfare, safety and social responsibility.” ‘Millions of fish deaths’ “The industry has been accused of being allowed to regulate itself, more or less,” says Adrian Meder, sustainable seafood program manager at the Australian Marine Conservation Society. “[It] has been allowed to push the environment too far and expand too fast to be able to cope with the impacts of farming.” According to Australia’s GoodFish guide to sustainable seafood, waste such as fish faeces and excess feed from open-sea cages washes into the surrounding water, introducing polluting nutrients. Low oxygen levels in the water – believed to be linked to salmon production – combined with higher water temperatures are also exacerbating the number of salmon dying from disease or asphyxiation. Salmon farming has been described as “the battery-hen farming of the sea”, Meder says. “They’ve very much chosen to maximise production at the expense of being careful environmentally. And that’s led to millions of fish deaths through disease, and dead zones created in world heritage areas.” Meder also warns that the industry and government’s planned salmon farming expansion in Tasmania’s Storm Bay, if fully realised, will mean putting the equivalent of all of Victoria and Tasmania’s ocean sewage outfalls into a single bay. The industry rejects such claims. The Tasmanian Salmon Growers Association told the Guardian in October that the industry “practises adaptive management practices, which in effect means that it can adapt to changing circumstances, such as water temperature and oxygen levels”. “It monitors pens on a 24/7 basis for fish health and water quality, and environmental monitoring is also undertaken by independent, third-party scientists and researchers.” A sustainable salmon swap For salmon lovers hoping to reduce the environmental impact of their food, there is some very good news: king salmon, farmed in New Zealand, is a perfect alternative. While king salmon is a different fish species, you wouldn’t know it; it can be used anywhere you would normally use Tasmanian-farmed salmon, including raw applications such as sashimi and ceviche. “We have a green-listed alternative that is actually a salmon, and also a very highly regarded product for its quality,” Meder says. “It’s the same sort of thing, simply farmed more responsibly.” According to Meder, the impact of salmon farming in New Zealand is kept under tighter government control. “That industry hasn’t been empowered and enabled by government to do whatever the hell it wants to, which is largely the situation in Tasmania,” he says. New Zealand’s seas are also colder and better suited to the physiology of salmon, meaning fish require less feed and grow more efficiently. Darren Robertson, chef and co-owner of Three Blue Ducks, says: “When sourcing salmon for the restaurant, we always use king salmon from New Zealand.” Robertson also endorses the Goodfish guide, calling it a “great resource”. His decision to source only New Zealand-farmed king salmon for Three Blue Ducks is based on its green-list status in the guide. Trying new fish Robertson and Meder are both also enthusiastic advocates for broadening one’s tastes and eating a variety of seafood. “This is the way we used to eat seafood,” Meder says. “Just like we’ve really narrowed our taste down to very few types of animal proteins ... we’re going the same way in seafood. It’s quite a recent thing and it means putting a lot of pressure on relatively fewer species.” The oiliness that is prized in salmon can be found in a number of other, more sustainable fish. Meder recommends sardines as a “super affordable” option that have grown in popularity in recent years, as well as bonito and mackerel. “There are so many amazing sustainable options to enjoy when it comes to seafood.,” Robertson says. “We’re big fans of barramundi, mussels, Murray cod, oysters, Spanish mackerel, freshwater crayfish, river trout, spanner crab – to be honest, the list is huge. “Cooking with a variety of seafood is a lot more exciting for us, our chefs and our customers, and is super achievable for the home cook too.” However, if you’re browsing the Goodfish guide and come across the Australian salmon, a wild-caught green-listed fish, don’t let the name fool you – it’s actually a kind of sea perch. Plant-based alternatives Shannon Martinez, owner and chef at Melbourne’s Smith &amp; Daughters and Smith &amp; Deli, says there are a few options when it comes to plant-based alternatives to salmon. At her deli, Martinez uses watermelon to create a vegan smoked salmon. “[It’s] a smoked salmon or lox for a bagel, and at Christmas time we serve it with blinis and vegan caviar. It’s compressed and it’s roasted really slowly for a really long time, which basically takes the liquid out of it, which firms up the texture; then we smoke it and then it’s marinated.” Of course, even after the roasting step, “watermelon tastes like watermelon”, so to build the meaty umami and “oceany” taste of smoked salmon, she uses both dried and liquid kombu – kelp rich in savoury flavour – as well as dried mushroom powders and liquid smoke. Finally, plant-based omega-3 oils are added to simulate the rich fattiness of salmon. For a more approachable at-home option, Martinez also speaks enthusiastically about products made from konjac, the root of a plant, which is already used to make “zero-calorie” noodle substitutes found in supermarkets. Seafood substitutes made from konjac include squid, prawns and sashimi, the latter of which manages to look strikingly close to real sashimi. “It’s the perfect vegan replacement for seafood because it has quite a rubbery, bouncy texture,” she says, adding that konjac-based seafood substitutes can usually be found in the frozen section of Asian grocers. “It has a really neutral taste so you do need to flavour them. It’s like using any sort of starch – it doesn’t really taste like anything.”Pre-Covid, when international travel was still common, many Kiwi travellers received a similar question wherever they happened to be around the globe: Jacinda Ardern, is she the real deal? The New Zealand prime minister’s devotion to a new breed of politics, one rooted in “kindness”, “compassion” and “cooperation” often seemed too saccharine to be true, especially at a time when a series of notorious bullies were voted into positions of power around the globe. I usually answered this question brusquely, with a combination of facts and personal anecdotes from my interviews with the PM. I was interested, but not that interested, more enthralled by the dramatic twists and turns of foreign lands, where politics seemed Shakespearean compared with the warm, cosy bath of New Zealand’s Labour coalition government, now in its second term and astoundingly popular. A record number of babies in the house, cradled by the speaker as their mothers and fathers delivered important speeches? Cute, nice, a sweet Friday news story. Freezes on politicians’ pay during Covid? Feel-good, sure. An indication of a truly new breed of politician, and a truly new way of governing? I wasn’t convinced. Earlier this year, I shifted back to my native land of Australia, and settled in the Kimberley, still the country of cowboys and red rocks I remembered from my childhood. Immediately, the absolute dysfunction of the state-federal relationship struck me, as did the absurdity of mini prime ministers individually vying for votes and cash and sway. I asked around and read around, but could find no one who could explain to me why the state system worked or should continue as a mode of governance. Instead of the national unity so desperately needed in the midst of a global pandemic, personal fiefdoms ruled. Even a national speed limit couldn’t be agreed upon. As the year wore on, punctuated by a bungled vaccine rollout and a prime minister who was tone-deaf to the mounting cries of millions of fed-up Australian women, the drama of Australian politics began to seem far less entertaining and far more concerning than when I had observed it from afar. While sledging is a national disgrace when it happens on the cricket pitch, in Canberra it’s par for the course, so bad now that even growling like a dog at your “opponent” can occur. And “opponent” is mostly how Australian politicians seem to view each other – shrill, power-hungry egos vying for domination, while transformative legislative change languishes, such as the recent climate change embarrassment at Cop26. Leaving the temperate bath that is New Zealand politics made me realise how conducive that bath was to getting things done. There is a genuine level of cooperation and – don’t be shocked here – politeness that courses through government house in Wellington and extends to how the governing party and the opposition treat each other. Sure, there is some sledging, but it is more of the quick-barb style, rather than the truly, disturbingly nasty. “I’ve never particularly done things differently depending on who the person is and that’s probably a good thing, given there’s been five,” said a cheeky Ardern last week, poking fun at the opposition’s five leaders during her time as prime minister. One, Todd Muller, experienced a mental breakdown during his tenure. Politicians on every side of the house expressed genuine empathy and concern for his welfare, and his painful experience became an opportunity, eventually, for further mental health awareness and discussion, rather than cannon fodder or public shaming. New Zealand is much too small for true divisiveness among its leaders, much as people in small towns are to some degree forced to get along, decade after decade, despite their often myriad differences. Much of the credit goes to Ardern, who has created a working environment that rewards focus and dedication. Indeed, despite her robust sense of humour, Ardern is a deeply serious politician, one who joined the Labour party aged 17, motivated by a desire to “end child poverty”. The politicians Ardern chooses to promote are so thoroughly earnest and scandal-free (think Grant Robertson and Nanaia Mahuta) that the culture has become one of genuine public service. She even makes her ministers carpool in a minivan to events, scrapping the isolation and pomp of ministerial cars. This is a small gesture but it communicates volumes about her values and style of governing. Politics is far from perfect in New Zealand, and like in Australia, there have been internal sex scandals, disappointing housing reforms and complaints from the media about fair access. But the general atmosphere is one of a sincere interest in improving the lives of New Zealanders. This makes sense, because politicians in New Zealand remain, well, New Zealanders. Most aren’t personally wealthy or drawn from the corporate ranks (the new leader of the opposition National party, Christopher Luxon, is an exception) and most remain strongly embedded within their communities and family life. There is a Wellington bubble, but it’s far more humble and down to earth than its Canberra equivalent. Last week, a Green party MP cycled herself to the hospital to give birth – for the second time. Last month the prime minister was interrupted doing a Facebook live event by her daughter Neve, sneaking out of bed while her mother was trying to address the nation. These glimpses of humanity aren’t orchestrated set pieces, they happen spontaneously and on a regular basis in the course of New Zealand’s politicians living ordinary human lives. I can’t be sure but I’d put some money on Ardern’s daughter being sent to her local state primary school when it’s time. Anything else would grate against her mum’s entrenched value system, and display a schism between personal and political beliefs that in four years of leadership has so far failed to emerge. In this climate, world-leading legislation has been enacted in New Zealand, including a new law to protect pill testing, legalised assisted dying, a record increase in funding to women’s refuge and domestic violence services, moves to tackle climate change and a world-leading tobacco reform (aiming to make the country smoke-free by 2025). In Australia power often seems a goal in and of itself. It is a goal that then stymies genuine legislative reform or collaboration, much to the detriment of all Australians, who can only be feeling confused and disappointed by the year that’s been, so marked by animosity and empty showmanship. In the New Zealand model there is something to learn. Sure, the beehive lacks the fireworks of Canberra and sometimes a bit of sparkle. The finance minister is mostly interested in surpluses (and rugby) and the foreign minister’s style of diplomacy is disarmingly gentle. The climate change minister is a greenie from way back. But in the hands of these – to quote the words of Ardern – “nerds” a backbone and steadiness to political life has developed, allowing nascent transformative change to begin. And oh so needed in the current global environment, a deep and reassuring sense of calm.It was January 2010 and three South Australians were traveling across the windy, jagged coastline on the Great Ocean Road, taking the long way to Melbourne. To break up the 13-hour trip, they stopped at James Erskine’s family farm, where Tom Shobbrook and Anton van Klopper – or “Wildman” as some called him – pulled their rifles and a speargun out of the back of the Land Rover. The next day, they headed out to Melbourne with the bounty they’d gathered at James’s farm: several wild rabbits and goats and a cooler full of spear-gunned octopus and abalone. It was all piled atop a puncheon of their experimental wine in the back of the car. A sizeable group awaited the oddball winemakers at Gertrude Street Enoteca, an Italian-focused Fitzroy wine bar and an institution for hospitality professionals and wine lovers – and, sadly, a casualty of the pandemic. It was summer, and Melbourne’s wine lovers were ready for a party. Word had been getting around about the blond, wispy-haired Wildman and the gentle-toned, glasses-wearing Tom and their strange wine projects. Tom had lived in Tuscany for several years and returned to produce wine from a family vineyard of mostly Shiraz out in the Barossa. Since 2007, Wildman was producing limited amounts of coveted wine, including Pinot and Chardonnay, from growers around the Adelaide Hills. Tom and Wildman met at a wedding and became fast friends, bonding over their unusual approach to wine, which back then they didn’t have a name for. The lanky, ever-smiling James was transitioning out of a career as an award-winning sommelier. He’d trained at the pedigreed Magill Estate, then made a name for himself while helming the list of fine-dining restaurant Auge in Adelaide. Around the country, it was a shock that a sommelier from little old Adelaide, whose dining scene was seen as laughable compared to that of Sydney or Melbourne, was winning awards. But James was intelligent, eloquent, and passionate about his work. As he was becoming increasingly known, he met Wildman. He visited Wildman’s newly purchased farm in Basket Range in the Adelaide Hills, where he was making wine using rudimentary machinery in a few ramshackle sheds, and James was smitten by the romance of it all. He enlisted Wildman to custom-make some wines for Auge. As word got around Australia of James’s affiliation with experimental winemakers, he received verbal insults from the older wine establishment. But he persisted, and not long before this journey to Melbourne, he started making his own wine. He was gaining experience at a winery in the Hills and planning his first vintage – Wildman had offered space in his shed. These three, along with another South Australian winemaker, Kerri Thompson, were in Melbourne to release wine they had made without any commercial yeasts or acids, and low amounts of sulfites. The wines were also unfiltered. It was all very novel and provocative. When they arrived at the venue, Tom had a goat carcass, wrapped in a bedsheet, over his shoulder, and James bore the cooler of fresh seafood. Chef Brigitte Hafner got to work breaking it all down. The South Australians went around the bar pouring their cloudy wines, made without any stabilisers or acidifiers and with zero filtration. Not everyone there was a fan. A few weeks later an article about the tasting came out in The Age, titled Natural Selection Theory in a cheeky nod to Darwin. It praised Kerri’s rieslings but decried Wildman and Tom’s wines as dirty and flawed. Kerri soon went her own way, but the other three continued forging their bond and pushing the limits of wine. And now they had a name for their experiments. After the event in Melbourne, the three men drove straight to Sydney, sleeping on the side of the road in rolled-out swags. There, they caught up with their friend, the charismatic musician and wine industry professional Sam Hughes. Tom and Wildman first met Sam two years earlier, on a sales trip to Sydney. Sam was the shop manager of a Vaucluse bottle shop, and upon trying the South Australians’ unconventional wines, he was enamoured. Wildman and Tom, who both had young children at home and zero outside investment in their fledging wineries, were traveling on a budget. When they told Sam they planned to sleep in a park that night, he invited them over for dinner and to stay the night, and a connection was cemented. The group often drank bottles together at Paddington wine bar 10 William St, another early supporter of Tom and Wildman’s vintages. The more they tasted, the more the quartet wanted to break the rules. Natural Selection Theory, as they began calling their group, was dismantling what many in the Australian wine industry aspired to: it was irreverent and playful, uninterested in Robert Parker scores or coveted awards. But soon, this scrappy and handmade approach began attracting plenty of press, and critical acclaim. In part, it was the charisma these three winemakers, along with Sam, radiated, each in different ways. Together, they drove around Australia with demijohns full of sulfite-free wine, which they called Voice of the People, and one-litre egg-shaped vessels filled with another experiment, which tested out the notion that wines respond to outside stimuli such as emotions and speech. They even recorded a Natural Selection Theory album, with each of them playing an instrument or doing vocals, and pressed a few hundred vinyl records. There was a “hot pants” tour, where the men donned – you guessed it – extremely short shorts while presenting their wines. The point wasn’t to make money; it was to show that wine didn’t have to be snobbish or conceited. It could be uncanny and unpredictable, and the life of the party. This is a work of memoir. Events and dialogue have been reconstructed to the best of the author’s ability, through memory and notes, as well as interviews and research This is an edited extract from You Had Me At Pét-Nat by Rachel Signer, published by HachetteIn early 2020, the academic, artist and artistic director Brook Andrew travelled to the small town of Collarenebri in north-west New South Wales to show the local Kamilaroi community some shocking footage he’d found that he wanted to feature as part of the 2020 Sydney Biennale. Shot in 1949, it showed wealthy Adelaide collector and businessman Harry Balfour supervising a team of timber workers as they felled dozens of trees. The trees – some possibly as old as 800 years – were covered in detailed carvings and sacred to the Kamilaroi First Nations people. Using circular saws to separate the large carved sections from the trunks, they were loaded on to trucks, transported by rail and stacked on to ships for distribution around the globe. The carved trees of the Banarway Bora had played a central role in Aboriginal knowledge systems for centuries yet only a handful remained on country in Collarenebri, 75km north-east of Walgett. More than 50 had been removed in the 1940s and are now housed in public museums and private collections around the world. Most of the town’s 650 residents gathered to watch the footage. “People were crying, others were shocked. Only a few people knew about the existence of these trees,” Andrew recalls. “There were a lot of people who were pretty upset.” Now, in a bid to bring the trees home, students at Collarenebri Central School have become global advocates, presenting a short but moving documentary called Gaaguuwiya Dhawunga (Bring Back Home), which premiered at an international conference at the Ethnography Museum of Geneva late last month and has since been posted on YouTube. Somewhat paradoxically, two Indigenous carved trees have been traced to the collection of the Geneva museum. While these are not not from the Banarway Bora ground, it is believed they were taken from either the Kamilaroi or Wiradjuri nations. Another tree has been located in the Pitt Rivers Museum at Oxford University, while the Melbourne Museum was already known to be in possession of two. The community wants them back. The bid to repatriate the trees is part of the Australian Research Council-funded More than a Guulany project, led by Andrew, a descendent of the Wiradjuri people of central NSW and fellow Monash University academic Brian Martin into artefacts made from south-eastern Australian trees. ‘There is a lot of healing still to be done’ Kamilaroi elder Ros McGregor has been bringing First Nations cultural knowledge to the students of Collarenebri for the past 15 years, including knowledge about the trees of the Banarway Bora that are still on country. Four years ago McGregor and Sydney artists Sam Newstead and Liz O’Reilly supervised the students in creating a mural celebrating the trees that was painted on the exterior of the school’s community hall. McGregor explains the return of the trees is vital to the healing and teaching of local Kamilaroi culture. “The carved trees have a spirit that is past, present and future,” she says. “The return of the others will give us connection to our own knowledge system and an opportunity to continue learning lessons from the very first Bora. “We can never go back to the times and way of life we had when the trees were carved, but the images and patterns on the trees speak directly to us as Kamilaroi people.” McGregor says the brutality of the footage Andrew showed was deeply disturbing. “The size of that saw … what they were doing to our living trees that our people took so long to create. There is a lot of healing still to be done.” The Kamilaroi people and Monash University are now in advanced negotiations with Museums Victoria to have the trees repatriated. A museum spokesperson said in a statement: “Museums Victoria’s First Peoples strategy is committed to bringing collections to Country, giving self-determination for material in our care to First Peoples and building ethical and reciprocal partnerships between Museums Victoria and communities. “Museums Victoria are committed to repatriating the carved trees to the traditional owners and working with the community which these trees are from.” Brian Martin, who is a descendant of the Muruwari, Bundjalung and Kamilaroi peoples from northern NSW and southern Queensland and the Monash University Art Design &amp; Architecture’s associate dean Indigenous, says the tone of the negotiations between the museum and the people of Collarenebri was what decolonising was all about. “It’s about this idea that taking them was a violent act but we don’t react in a violent way by just demanding them back,” he says. “Of course it’s very important to get them back. But we also want to do it through a healing process, and do it in a way that is beneficial for us, but beneficial for the institution as well.”“Aren’t we all having fun? What about you in the back row? Yes, we are all having fun. As much fun as a Downing Street Christmas party!” So runs a gag in the pantomime entertaining families in Greenwich, south London, this month. And if the government across the river in Westminster were hoping that seasonal festivities might distract from accusations of rule-breaking in No 10 last Christmas, then the nation’s pantomime performers look set to disappoint them. In fact, no sooner have the wounds inflicted by Ant and Dec, who made an on-air jibe about cheese and wine and secret Santas last week, stopped smarting, than panto dames such as Andrew Pollard, the man behind Greenwich Theatre’s show, take up the satirical theme. “It is just so ripe for it really,” Pollard told the Observer. “And it is the joy of pantomime that you can throw topical things into the script when you want to.” Pollard, a veteran of the scene, who is playing the eponymous Queen of Hearts in the production as well as directing his own script, added that, in line with pantomime tradition, his team usually steer away from being “overly political”. But he admits the line about the Downing Street party often wins one of the biggest audience reactions of the evening. At the Lyric Hammersmith, Boris Johnson himself appears to be taking to the boards. The character of the emperor in the theatre’s production of Aladdin is dressed in a blond shock-wig, an ill-fitting blue suit and clown shoes, and is also played by a woman. Yet is quite recognisably a representation of Britain’s current leader. Much of the action in the show takes place in what is clearly a version of the expensively constructed Downing Street media room. And many other pantomimes across the country are joining in. In Glasgow, where Elaine C Smith stars in Cinderella at the King’s Theatre, the script is stuffed with references to fictional festive gatherings and hypocrisy in high places. On Tuesday, Ant and Dec entertained viewers of ITV’s I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! by making fun of the idea of illicit celebrations. They continued in the next episode, chiding contestants for “trying to get away with things”. The presenting pair occasionally also explicitly address the prime minister, looking directly into the camera to say hello. Whether all this seasonal merry-making will really mark a change in voter attitudes is harder to predict. It may signal the moment when some of the controversies raging among parliamentary commentators and political analysts begin to bite. On the other hand, when Matt Lucas impersonated Johnson’s announcements on last year’s opening episode of The Great British Bake Off on Channel 4, it was initially heralded as a very bad day for the Conservative party. Fifteen months on, the same regime remains in power.There was confusion on Saturday about which age groups in England are now eligible to book a booster jab with the NHS, after an apparent glitch allowed younger people to book before they were expected to qualify. People aged 30 and over in England were expected to be able to book a Covid-19 booster from Monday as long as it has been three months since their second vaccine dose, but many 30-somethings reported on social media on Saturday that they had been able to book their appointments already. “NHS website will now let you book a booster jab if you’re over 30. Just booked mine!” one Twitter user wrote. Another user tweeted: “I’ve managed to book a booster jab for Monday 20th through NHS site! Seems they are accepting under-40 bookings even though the page says otherwise!” However, those under 30 appeared to still be unable to secure an appointment for a booster dose via the NHS website. Cristian, a 26-year-old from London, tried booking a slot on Saturday via the NHS website but was told he was “not currently able to book through this service”. However, on Thursday he had been invited by his GP practice to book his booster jab. “I felt really weird when I received the text because it came completely out of the blue, especially after hearing from the government that my age group was probably not going to be eligible for a booster jab until at least January,” Cristian said. “I’m happy that local authorities are moving quicker than I thought, but I did question whether the text was a scam because I did not hear anything about a speedier rollout, and I’m afraid some people might not book theirs if they believe the text not to be real.” Some GPs had started offering booster vaccines to patients under 40 against official NHS guidance. Health secretary Sajid Javid urged people on Twitter on Saturday afternoon to “come forward and get boosted”. “We are turbocharging our booster programme,” Javid wrote. One Twitter user responded to air his frustration and apparent confusion: “We have a [23-year-old], over 5 months since 2nd jab, living at home with CEV [clinically extremely vulnerable] parent. NHS website says eligible for booster. Tried booking and told not eligible. Rang 119, same answer. So much for your turbocharging of the booster programme.” The NHS website still said on Saturday evening that “the NHS is working on plans to offer a booster dose to everyone aged 18 to 39 years old”, and that people should note that this service is not yet available to book via their portal. “Please wait to be contacted by the NHS,” a disclaimer on the website added.Thank heavens for Cristiano Ronaldo, right Ralf? Not pretty, only just effective but nevertheless a hard-earned three points on the road. Manchester United fans belted out their take on jingle bells come the final whistle, but they were celebrating a victory scarcely deserved. There was some concern for United over Victor Lindelöf, who had to be replaced with 16 minutes left after he received treatment for what appeared to be problems with his chest. Ralf Rangnick said the player was OK, but added: “Victor can’t even remember himself how it happened. I think he had a collision with another player and had problems to breathe. For more than 10 minutes his heart rate was higher than normal and he was a little shocked by this, so we had to replace him.” Shortly after Lindelöf was substituted, Ronaldo – who else – won and emphatically dispatched the second-half penalty that did for Norwich, the 120th club side he has netted against. And in that moment, the direction of a sodden evening was altered. For the other 89 minutes, little in red clicked. When Ronaldo scooped over a late chance to make the final few minutes comfortable, it was more indicative of his side’s performance. A performance that posed more questions than it answered. And they were indebted to David de Gea too, whose second half-acrobatics ensured a clean sheet. “It was a completely different game compared to last Sunday,” Rangnick said. “We didn’t play with the same kind of intensity level.” Effusive in his praise of Norwich, the interim manager knows there is much to work on. “It’s a question of how do we deal with this kind of football? I would have wished we had more intensity, more physicality, more willingness to win the one-on-one duels.” And he was right. For all the fawning over United’s gegenpressing, Norwich under Dean Smith have improved immeasurably on that front. And they were at it again, Lukas Rupp and Billy Gilmour full of zip and energy. Their makeshift defence was virtually flawless. Unfortunately, the one exception came when Max Aarons placed his arms on Ronaldo with 15 minutes left; no further invitation required. “Soft as soft can be,” said Smith. He will rightly take great pride in his depleted side’s performance. But in Norwich’s perilous position, there are no free-hits. This was an opportunity lost. “I can’t question the performance, I can’t question the players, the spirit they are showing at the moment but unfortunately you don’t always get what you deserve. I don’t want to be a glorious loser; I want to win football games.” If United’s start against Crystal Palace last week was Oxford Circus at rush hour, their Carrow Road opening was more mid-morning at Cromer. And that suited Norwich, who had lost Brandon Williams (ineligible), Ben Gibson (injured) and Andrew Omobamidele (illness) from last week’s back five. That brought a shift to a four. Despite the tepid tempo, United almost took an early lead through Alex Telles’s free-kick. The full-back kissed the ball (it supposedly energises the leather), the ball kissed Josh Sargent and then struck the bar. Tim Krul may have got the faintest of touches but not more than the asteroid that supposedly brushed the earth earlier in the afternoon. The first half’s biggest roar came when Ronaldo attempted an audacious left-foot volley, only to completely miss his kick. That noise was matched when he subsequently fouled Grant Hanley in a failed attempt to save face. But it came at a cost. Hanley, a man mountain of a defender, lay crumpled. His attempts to run it off proved futile and on came Jacob Sørensen, veteran of 10 previous Premier League minutes. Not that the Dane was fazed; faced with a series of circa-2005 stepovers from Ronaldo, he simply watched, waited and nipped the ball away. United’s other chance of note came on the stroke of the interval; Harry Maguire stooped, the header looped and Krul tipped over. McFred, for all the plaudits that have rightly gone their way in recent weeks, were largely bypassed, with Rupp the standout midfielder. Had he not mistimed his jump, Norwich may have gone ahead before the break. But East Anglian belief was rising. And by osmosis that transferred to those in yellow after the interval. The decibel levels cranked up. Every home tackle, every interception was greeted as if a goal. Those are rare in these parts this season but a rasping left-foot effort from Teemu Pukki almost brought one. At full-stretch, De Gea pulled off a magnificent one-handed stop. Then came the heartbreak. Scott McTominay’s clipped cross ended with Ronaldo on the ground. The penalty winner turned penalty scorer. Norwich continued to press, De Gea twice denying Ozan Kabak, first immediately after the goal and then again in injury time. That’s 10 blanks they’ve drawn in the top-flight now. Not quite good enough or just not meant to be?Sam Dalling’s match report has landed, so I’ll leave you with that. Thanks for your company and emails - goodnight. Maguire says that Victor Lindelof, who came off with what looked like chest pains, “felt a little bit of discomfort” and that he’s fine in the dressing-room. The thoughts of Harry Maguire “We didn’t play as well as we’d have liked, but sometimes you have to dig in away from home. It was a good atmosphere and tough conditions to play in. The most important thing was the three points. For sure we need to play better than that if we’re going to achieve what we want to achieve. Our intensity wasn’t the same as it was against Crystal Palace. We stuck together and kept another clean sheet, and if we do that we’ll have a great chance of winning football matches.” Still want more? Sure you do. The win moves United back to fifth, behind West Ham on goal difference. West Ham have a game in hand, away to Burnley tomorrow. Another 1-0 win for Ralf Rangnick, though it was nowhere near as impressive as the victory over Crystal Palace. Norwich deserved at least a draw, and would have got one but for some fine saves by David de Gea. The game was settled by Cristiano Ronaldo’s emphatic 75th-minute penalty, awarded when he was dragged over by Max Aarons. Peep peep! 90+5 min He does indeed, and it hits the wall. 90+4 min The free-kick is close to the left corner of the area, just a couple of yards forward. The angle is tight but I think Rashford fancies a shot... 90+4 min The indefatigable Fred charges forward and is fouled just outside the area by Lees-Melou. He’s booked. 90+2 min: Excellent save from de Gea! The resulting free-kick brushed the head of Ronaldo and reached Kabak, whose header was pawed away at the near post by de Gea. I think Kabak was subsequently given offside, though de Gea wouldn’t have known that at the time. 90+1 min Cantwell is fouled by van de Beek, 22 yards from goal and almost in line with the left edge of the area. I don’t think it was a foul, on reflection. 90 min Five minutes of added time. 89 min “Hi Rob,” says Peter Oh. “As an American fan of football (but not of United) who recently watched the Beatles documentary, I would like to see Sargent pepper De Gea’s goal a couple of times before the final whistle. Don’t Let Me Down!” What have the Wonderstuff got to do with it? 88 min Fernandes bobbles a shot wide from the edge of the area after turning smartly onto Fred’s pass. That’s his last touch: he is replaced by Donny van de Beek. 86 min: Chance for Ronaldo! Telles wins the ball off Aarons and gives it to Rashford. He runs 60 yards, beating Sorensen with ease on the edge of the area, and screws the ball across the area with his left foot. It’s slightly behind Ronaldo, who lifts it over the bar from six yards with his left foot. It was still a good chance, though Rashford’s pass wasn’t the best. Shame as it was a lovely run. 84 min Whatever the result, this has been a really encouraging performance from Norwich, especially when you consider all the players they are missing. If this is their level, tey have every chance of staying up. 82 min: So close from Gilmour! Sargent’s cross from the right deflects to Gilmour on the edge of the area. He whacks a first-time drive with his right foot that is blocked by Dalot. The ball rebounds to Gilmour, who hits another first-time shot, this time with his left foot. It takes a big deflection off Bailly, wrongfoots de Gea and goes just wide. 81 min Pukki’s layoff is just behind McLean, unmarked 10 yards from goal. 81 min I doubt even Fred the Red would begrudge Norwich a draw in this game. They’ve played very well, especially in the second half, while United have been nowhere near their best. 80 min “The penalty wasn’t dodgy,” says Adam Roberts. “That was definitely a foul.” 79 min The substitute Bailly adds a bit of levity to proceedings by making two mistakes in the same Norwich attack. First he runs straight past the ball, allowing Sargent to move dangerously towards the United area. Then, after winning the ball back, Bailly gives it straight to Lees-Melou. He has a shot that is blocked. 78 min “Penalty my a***,” says Ben Heywood. 77 min: Great save by de Gea! Dalot is booked for a foul on Sargent, who has had a fine game on the left wing. The resulting free-kick is dumped into the area, where Kabak towers over Maguire and plants a downward header back across goal. De Gea dives to his right and pushes it away, an outstanding save. 77 min Pierre Lees-Melou replaces Lukas Rupp, who has played well in midfield for Norwich. 76 min Dean Smith is giving the fourth official a mouthful about the aweasrd of the penalty. Ronaldo probably made the most of it, but it was daft defending from Aarons and a clear penalty. You can’t put your arm round someone’s neck like that. Ronaldo runs round the ball and then smashes it into the left-hand corner. Krul, who tried his best to unsettle Ronaldo beforehand, went the wrong way. McTominay flipped a cross towards Ronaldo, who fell over under pressure from Aarons. Norwich are fuming but Aarons put his arm around Ronaldo’s neck, and in many cultures that’s deemed a foul. 73 min: PENALTY TO UNITED! 72 min Lindelof is walking down the tunnel. He wanted to continue, I think, but the physios dissuaded him. Eric Bailly, who wasn’t exactly in a hurry to get ready, will replace him. 71 min Victor Lindelof is receiving treatment. He’s motioning towards his chest, which is a worry, and he is going to leave the field. He seems okay but you could tell something wasn’t right from the expression on the faces of the other United players. 70 min And now a change for Norwich: Todd Cantwell replace Przemyslaw Placheta on the right wing. 69 min Norwich break dangerously through Pukki, who plays a nice one-two with Rupp but then overhits an admittedly difficult crossfield pass to Placheta. 67 min Man Utd make their first change: Mason Greenwood replaces Jadon Sancho. That’s slightly surprising as the front two have been poor, but Rangnick made the same change last week. That suggests it might be a fitness issue. 67 min Rashford turns Sorensen neatly, 25 yards from goal, and pokes a pass towards Ronaldo in the area. He is smothered by two or three Norwich defenders. 65 min Before the game I’m sure Dean Smith would have been thrilled with a 0-0, given all the players Norwich are missing, but now he’ll see this as a great opportunity for a famous victory. Norwich have been the better team, certainly in the second half. 64 min “Not even sorry” is the subject of Matt Dony’s email, and you’ll soon realise why. “Giannoulis? He came from Greece, he had a thirst for Norwich. He’s studying defence in Cristiano’s college.” 63 min United make a mess of a promising position. Rashford moves into the area but then plays a pass slightly behind Ronaldo, who in turn fails to find Bruno Fernandes. 62 min “I’m here for the second half!” writes Liz in Canada. “It’s a stormy afternoon here, so best to stay home and watch football. I’m hoping it won’t be decided by a penalty like a couple of the earlier games. Takes the excitement out, unless it’s truly an egregious foul.” 62 min At the other end, Sargent cuts inside from the left and has a shot blocked by McTominay. 61 min Sancho cuts inside from the left and pokes a good pass to Rashford on the edge of the area. His low drive hits the side netting at the near post, though Krul had it covered. 59 min Placheta’s corner is nodded on at the near post and headed onto the roof of the net by either Sargent or Maguire, wrestling for the ball at the far post. The ball brushed de Gea’s fingers as well, though I don’t think it was dropping into the net. 59 min Pukki’s cross is put behind for a corner by Maguire. This is Norwich’s best spell of the match... 57 min: Fine save from de Gea! Gilmour’s cross from the right is half cleared to Rupp, 30 yards from goal. He pings a first-time pass into Pukki, who turns on the edge of the area and whistles a rising drive that is fingertipped over the bar by the leaping de Gea. That’s an excellent save. 54 min Fernandes improvises a through pass to Rashford, who looks offside but is allowed to continue. The last man Kabak makes a good challenge in the area, and then the flag does go up for offside. 54 min He’s fine. 53 min Giannoulis is in a bit of pain after being shoved into McTominay by Rashford. There’s a break in play while he receives treatment. 52 min Fernandes’s inswinging corner is punched away by Krul. 52 min Fred’s stinging long-range shot - left foot this time - hits Sorensen and spins behind for a corner. 51 min Rashford picks up a loose ball 35 yards from goal but then makes a mess of a simple pass to Ronaldo. United have been really sloppy in possession. 50 min “I’m having a bizarre experience this year,” says Pete Flood. “After years of general disinterest I’ve become completely obsessed with football. I follow every single Guardian liveblog and then scour the socials for videos of the goals as they go in. I wonder - is this a more-common-than-usual experience this season? The absolute drama has me completely hooked - is it always like this or is 21/22 a vintage? My football following friends think it’s hilarious that I’m offering opinions on Dean Smith’s tactics and how UEFA should determine the outcome of the Spurs/Rennes match. I don’t know what’s wrong with me.” I don’t know what to tell you, except that I promise everything is going to be okay. (I don’t think 2021-22 is any more dramatic than previous seasons, by the way.) 47 min Placheta cuts infield from the right, chops past Maguire and pokes a shot straight at de Gea from a tightish angle. That wasn’t a bad opportunity. Magurie also took a risk by putting his hands on Placheta when he realised he’d been turned. 47 min Dalot’s dangerous cross is headed away by Sorensen as far as McTominay on the edge of the D. His shot is blocked. 47 min “I’m here too,” says Malcolm Shuttleworth, “drinking glühwein and watching an Abba cover band in Leverkusen on a Christmas market. Which sounds like infinitely more fun than what you’re doing.” 46 min Peep peep! United begin the second half. Half-time reading Peep peep! A frustrating half for Manchester United, who were not as dynamic or penetrative as most people expected. Tim Krul made two good saves but Norwich, smart and resourceful on the break, had a few half-chances of their own. The scoreline is a fair one. 45 min: Fine save by Krul! A United corner was partially cleared, with Sancho receiving the ball 30 yards from goal from the left. He swung a flat, inswinging cross towards Maguire, who stooped to apply his appreciable noggin to the ball. It looped over Krul, who backpedalled smartly and leapt to tip it over the bar. 44 min Rashford twists Sorensen inside out on the left, moves into the area but then gives the ball straight to Rupp. 42 min Sargent pokes an outside-of-the-foot pass around Lindelof towards Pukki, forcing the last man Maguire to come across and intercept. 41 min “I’m here, Rob,” apologises Matt Dony. “(Let’s face it, I’m pretty much always here. What that says about my ‘social’ life is probably not worth exploring.) Impressed to see you helming two MBMs today. I’d have imagined you’d be fairly tired after a late, late shouting/drinking/crying/fatalistic ennui session (delete as appropriate). Ralf Rangnick comes across as a hard man to dislike, doesn’t he? As a Liverpool fan, that’s troublesome.” Give it time. 40 min All of a sudden, things are happening. The lively Rupp slips Lindelof in the area and squares the ball to Pukki, whose first-time shot is crucially blocked by Dalot. Norwich keep the ball alive and Giannoulis’s deep cross is headed straight at de Gea by Rupp. The first chance was the best one. 39 min Telles’s cross is headed high and wide by Rashford. 37 min: Good save from Krul! That’s United’s best move so far. After they won the ball back, Fred and McTominay combined to put Ronaldo through on goal. Ronaldo’s first touch was fractionally heavy, forcing him slightly wider than he wanted. He could still have shot with his right foot but instead decided to cut back on his left. He beat a couple of defenders in the process and swept a shot that was pushed away to his right by Krul. That’s a pretty good save. 36 min Rashford moves dangerously into the Norwich area from the left. But he can’t decide whether to shoot or pass, so he does neither and is dispossessed. 33 min Fernandes flips a cross straight out of play for a goalkick. This hasn’t been an odd performance from United, with little of the intensity we saw last weekend. 31 min Ronaldo loses the ball on the edge of the Norwich area, then chases back to retrieve possession. PEOPLE, HE’S DONE A GEGENPRESS. United keep the ball until Sancho feeds it infield to Dalot, whose left-footed shot on the turn is comfortably saved by Krul. 30 min “I’m here!” says Rachel Clifton. “Watching from a bar in NYC on the most feared of days - Santa Con. Literally just got a phone alert to warn me there are 100 Santas (read 100 drunk twentysomethings) nearby. Football a welcome distraction.” Santa Con though. 29 min Norwich work the ball nicely to find Rupp in the area. He hammers a cross on the turn that Pukki, unmarked eight yards out, can’t control. Had he done so he’d have had a simple chance, though it was a very difficult ball to take because Rupp really belted it at him. 26 min “Hello from this side of the world (1.54am local time),” says James. 1.54am! The things we do for love and cricket. 25 min Fernandes slides a first-time pass behind Kabak towards Rashford. Kabak has a quick tug of Rashford’s shirt, just outside the area, and then lets go, with Rashford unable to reach the ball before the keeper Krul. He appealed for a foul (and, presumably, a red card) but the referee wasn’t interested. 23 min Anyone out there? 22 min United are having lots of the ball, though they are yet to create anything in open play. The Hanley injury aside, Dean Smith will be well pleased with how the game has gone. 20 min Hanley is replaced by the young Dane Jacob Sorensen. He normally plays in midfield but Norwich are so short in the centre of defence. 19 min Grant Hanley is really struggling. This is bad news for Norwich, who are already without Ben Gibson and Andrew Omobamidele. 18 min Hanley is on his feet and looks set to continue, though he’s still holding his left arm close to his body. 16 min To the delight of the Norwich fans, Ronaldo fresh-airs a very difficult volley from 20 yards. He tries to win the ball back and fouls Hanley, who lands awkwardly and has a problem with his left shoulder. This is a big worry for Norwich. 15 min: Telles hits the bar! Telles clips a free-kick that hits the back of Sargent, changes direction and clatters off the crossbar. Krul may have got a touch as he leapt to his left, though if he did it was a very slight one. I think the ball was going to hit the bar anyway. 13 min Hanley is penalised for a challenge on Rashford just outside the Norwich area. It looked pretty soft, to be honest, although he may have been tripped from the side by Gilmour. Either way, it’s an excellent opportunity for United - 20 yards out, to the right of centre. 11 min A rushed clearance goes straight to McTominay on the edge of the D. He has a touch and whistles a shot that is well blocked by Rupp (I think). 11 min Norwich are switching play regularly and to good effect, trying to take advantage of United’s narrow formation. The full-backs, Giannoulis and especially Aarons, have had a lot of the ball. 10 min Placheta takes a short corner, gets it back and swings in a cross that is headed clear. 10 min Telles plays a poor ball, straight to Pukki. He rumbles down the right and drills a cross that is put behind by the stretching McTominay. It’s been a sloppy start from United. 7 min Some lovely one-touch passing from Norwich on the edge of the area. Eventually Fred makes an important lunging tackle on Sargent just inside the area. 6 min Dalot is a bit fortunate to avoid a yellow card for a foul on Sargent, who intercepted Maguire’s pass and was away on a counter-attack. 4 min Someone (nope, not a scooby) plays a clever lofted pass to release Aarons on the right. He beats Fred a bit too easily and slings in a cross that is headed away by Fernandes. 4 min A quiet start to the game. There’s been a bit of pressing from United but nothing worth saving for the post-match analysis on Match of the Day. 1 min Peep peep! Norwich kick off from right to left. It’s a grim night in Norwich: cold, wet and not especially conducive to the production of vitamin D. Dean Smith’s pre-match thoughts “We were always going to change to a back four. Gibbo [Ben Gibson] had to pull out yesterday with injury, and a couple of the other lads are ill. I’m still okay with what we’ve got. “We can’t be overly reliant on Teemu, and I think the pace of Przemy and Sarge will give us an out ball. We don’t want to be defending in our own half for long periods.” These are the Premier League scores so far. It’s been a good day for the top three, and for those who loathe VAR. Arsenal 3-0 Southampton Chelsea 3-2 Leeds Liverpool 1-0 Aston Villa Manchester City 1-0 Wolves Ralf Rangnick’s pre-match thoughts “The major thing is that we build on the performance without the ball against Palace. That’s about keeping another clean sheet, working as a team, trying to be proactive and at the same time playing forward whenever possible. “They did well last Sunday so there was no reason to change the team. I was very pleased with both of the full-backs [Telles and Dalot] against Crystal Palace.” “It’s not very often that my beloved Nodge get on the MBM, so I’m just going to enjoy it, even if we appear to be fielding an understrength side against a team who spent more on one defender than we did on our stadium,” weeps Ben Heywood. “Dean Smith has tightened us up since his arrival but there’s a real gulf in quality on show this evening, and I expect us to go down by a good two or three. “What I do want to see is some fight and to make Utd work for it. Although it’d be lovely to land a few punches, I suspect we will have to throw a few first, and that’s been our issue since Emi Buendia went to Villa. I shall watch on from drizzly Montenegro, watching through my fingers. May the worse team win!” There’s a proud tradition of Norwich turning United over, particularly at Carrow Road: 2012, 2005, not to mention the five in a row from 1988-90. I’,m pretty sure they had the highest win percentage of any team that played at least 10 games against Alex Ferguson’s United. “I’ve been quite impressed by Rangnick so far,” says Rob Hisnay. “What I find baffling is why wasn’t he hired years ago? He seems a perfect fit for Man. United even at age 63.” Timing is everything. English football didn’t really discover German managers until 2015, and there hasn’t been a vacancy since then. Rightly or wrongly, Jose Mourinho was always going to follow Louis van Gaal, and then Ole Gunnar Solskjaer rather inconveniently won 10 of his first 11 games. Norwich make five changes, most enforced, from the side that lost at Spurs last weekend. Ozan Kabak, Dimitris Giannoulis, Lukas Rupp, Przemyslaw Placheta and Josh Sargent replace Ben Gibson, Brandon Williams, Pierre Lees-Melou, Adam Idah and Andrew Omombamidele. Hysterical tinkerman Ralf Rangnick makes 11 changes for the second game in a row, reverting to the team that beat Crystal Palace last weekend. Norwich City (4-1-4-1) Krul; Aarons, Hanley, Kabak, Giannoulis; Gilmour; Placheta, Rupp, McLean, Sargent; Pukki. Substitutes: Gunn, Byram, Mumba, Tomkinson, Dowell, Cantwell, Sorensen, Lees-Melou, Idah. Manchester United (4-2-2-2) de Gea; Dalot, Lindelof, Maguire, Telles; McTominay, Fred; Sancho, Fernandes; Rashford, Ronaldo. Substitutes: Heaton, Henderson, Bailly, Jones, Shaw, Lingard, van de Beek, Elanga, Greenwood. Referee Darren England. There’s a corner of the Premier League that is forever a bouncy castle. Managers get sacked all year round, with clubs desperate for the endorphin hit of a new regime. Six teams have enjoyed a new-manager bounce in the last couple of months, and two of them meet at Carrow Road tonight. Norwich took five points from their first three games under Dean Smith before losing heavily at Spurs last weekend. Manchester United beat Crystal Palace in Ralf Rangnick’s only Premier League game to date, playing with impressive intensity until they shot their collective bolt early in the second half. Rangnick looks and sounds the part, though in the end it always comes down to results. A win for United would move them level on points with fourth-placed West Ham; a win for Norwich would put them level with 17th-placed Watford. We’ll have team news shortly, though we already know that Norwich’s Greek winger Christos Tzolis has tested positive for Covid. They will also be without Brandon Williams, who can’t play against his parent club. Kick off 5.30pm.Some at Anfield rose to their feet to applaud a returning figure from their past. Danny Ings was back and he was coming off the bench. Meanwhile, Steven Gerrard grimaced in his distinctly damp vigil in the technical area. He has scripted some of the more improbable tales in 21st century football through sheer willpower but a man whose Liverpool career ended amid the humiliation and farce of a 6-1 thrashing at Stoke knows special occasions do not always go as planned. This didn’t. Not for Gerrard, though his Aston Villa side proved awkward opponents in defeat. Nor, perhaps, for the Liverpool public. Had Villa been vanquished, they could have devoted more time to serenading Gerrard. Instead, Villa’s obduracy afforded little time for sentimentality. When some in the Kop started to revive an old chorus saluting Gerrard in the opening minutes, they were drowned out by a rendition of “Liverpool”. They have still spent longer singing “Ole’s at the wheel” than Gerrard’s name this season. And so he lingered, seen but not celebrated, until the Villa supporters chanted his name, finding proof in a committed display that his first return to Liverpool had not been clouded by sentimentality. It was only with the release of the final whistle that his name echoed around Anfield again; for a decade and a half, it was a song that carried the threat that, whatever the other 21 players on the pitch did, Steven Gerrard would win the game for Liverpool. His reputation has been maintained. Now that talismanic status has been passed on, to the matchwinner Mohamed Salah and to the catalytic Jürgen Klopp. Liverpool’s fondness for nostalgia has not stopped them from savouring the present and Gerrard had gone down the tunnel before a fist-pumping Klopp played to the gallery in the Kop. “I did not feel under pressure today,” grinned Klopp. “There is one person it was not easy for and that is Stevie.” Gerrard lost a game but passed a test. He avoided the trap Gérard Houllier fell into. Gerrard’s mentor erred on his Anfield comeback by acknowledging the Kop, but not the Villa fans, in a telling indication of where his affections still lay. Houllier perhaps never regained his standing with the Villa supporters. The man he made captain at 23 showed more pragmatism and less mawkishness, applauding the travelling hordes from the Midlands before waving to those who idolised him and hugging Klopp, who has tipped Gerrard to succeed him. Gerrard projected a purposeful air. So did his team. Think of Gerrard the player and the adventurer or the escapologist spring to mind. Perhaps a dozen years under Houllier and Rafa Benítez have made him a defensive strategist as a manager. He completed a Scottish Premiership season with Rangers conceding a mere 13 goals. The finest Liverpool team he played in, the class of 2008-09, were denied the title in part because of Anfield stalemates and, for an hour, this threatened to be another as Villa resisted. Gerrard’s side have got his combative instincts. Their streetwise streak irritated Klopp. “Nothing will come between him and me but we are both focused,” he said. “You can be best friends with someone and want to beat them. It is the same with me and David Wagner.” He spent much of the first half in constant communication with the fourth official, seemingly about Emi Martínez’s serial timewasting. Presumably the goalkeeper was only following his manager’s orders, but it brought the Argentinian unpopularity at Anfield. Ings, scorer of four Liverpool goals in an injury-hit spell, some 182 fewer than Gerrard, was saluted. Then, eventually, so was Gerrard. “There is a lot of emotion for me and my family,” he said. “I had to try and deal with it the best I could. I am respectful and thankful for the reception I got. I gave many years to this club.” He gave them when he could have joined Real Madrid instead. In the process, perhaps he cemented his legend. For Gerrard, staring over towards the Sir Kenny Dalglish Stand, Liverpool’s past remains the constant reference point. There were banners on the Kop celebrating one of Liverpool’s highest scorers and a European Cup winner, the late Roger Hunt and Ray Kennedy respectively. In years to come, they will almost certainly be joined by images of Gerrard. But for now perhaps their finest ever player will have to wait a little longer to get one over his former club. There is a Villa manager who has beaten Liverpool 7-2 in the recent past, but it is Dean Smith. Gerrard nevertheless gave the sense he is a coach of some stature, without denting Liverpool’s title push. The hero of Istanbul was a Villan but not a villain. He played 710 games for Liverpool and has now managed one against them. For him, this was Anfield.After his Roma side had lost 1-0 at Bologna, José Mourinho pursued the referee Luca Pairetto down the tunnel, enraged at the bookings that meant Tammy Abraham and Rick Karsdorp would be suspended for last weekend’s game against Internazionale. “I’ll have to invent the lineup on Saturday,” he later told the media. “Luckily, I replaced Gianluca Mancini. Otherwise, he may have been booked too.” With his captain Lorenzo Pellegrini out with a muscular problem and Stephan El Shaarawy suffering a calf problem, Mourinho had to field a weakened lineup against Inter – and nobody could be in any doubt that that was not Mourinho’s fault. Although it was his decision to leave last season’s top scorer, Borja Mayoral, on the bench. Roma were 3-0 down by half-time, the first time that has ever happened to Mourinho. That was the final score, only his second home defeat in Serie A, prompting a classic Mourinho press conference. First he refused to take questions, telling journalists: “Your job is a lot easier than ours which is why we earn a lot more than you.” Then he delivered a brief but characteristic monologue, making clear that a) the task was essentially impossible – “Inter are objectively better than us. This became an extremely difficult match tonight because of absentees”; and b) they had nearly won anyway and would have done if only the players had done their jobs better – “We had three big chances, two of which came at 0-0.” It was not, to repeat, his fault. Roma sat seventh in the league before this weekend’s fixtures, nine points off Champions League qualification and eight points worse off than at the equivalent stage last season, a situation, in the space of four days, Mourinho had blamed on a referee, injuries, the media, fate and his own players. At which point the temptation is to check the calendar. But no, it is still 2021: Mourinho has been at Roma for only six months. It’s just that the doom cycle comes round quicker and quicker these days. Once, back near the beginning of his reign, these things took three years. A season to build, a season of fulfilment, a season of recrimination and acrimony. But the friction started to get earlier and earlier until at Tottenham it happened after 18 months. At Roma, it has taken barely 18 weeks. Phase one, early promise, concluded on 19 September as a run of six straight wins in all competitions ended with defeat at Verona. Phase two, the wobble that in the old days would have led to investment and improvement, came to a spectacular end with the 6-1 Europa League defeat to Bodø/Glimt on 21 October and Mourinho’s condemnation of his second string. Since when there has been only stagnation and increasing frustration. There has even been talk of him taking over at Everton: the fly cast to see what fish might still be willing to bite. This ends only one way: the only questions are how long the decoupling takes and how toxic it becomes. In part this is Roma. They finished eighth last season and while bringing in Abraham, Marash Kumbulla, Eldor Shomurodov, Matías Viña and Rui Patrício for Edin Dzeko, Pedro and Pau López at a net cost of £100m may have improved the age profile of the squad, it hasn’t necessarily made it much stronger in the short term. But mainly it is Mourinho, who increasingly resembles the Wizard of Oz begging the world to pay no attention to the man behind the curtain. The Porto players he led to the Champions League in 2004 may still sound like members of a cult, in thrall to a manager who took them to implausible heights (they remain the only Champions League winners from outside the big four leagues since 1995), but fresh devotees are increasingly rare. Back then his control was such it seemed he could foresee the future, issuing instructions, for instance, for how to respond when a player was sent off against Benfica, as he subsequently was. Mourinho’s Chelsea players spoke of his planning, the preparation for various eventualities. He was, perhaps, the last of the personality coaches, somebody whose greatest gift was his capacity to inspire by charismatic authority. As that has waned, partly through familiarity and partly perhaps because younger players do not respond to him in the way that, say, Costinha, John Terry and Marco Materazzi did, so Mourinho’s powers have weakened. If he still prepares with the same meticulousness, it is apparent only in his post-match catalogues of his players’ failings. What makes it worse is that there is no grand philosophy to fall back on, no processes to instil. Certainly from 2008 onwards, Mourinho’s approach has been a negative: he was what Barcelona and Pep Guardiola were not. The school of attritional Portuguese football that moulded him is in retreat. Mourinho, Fernando Santos and Nuno Espírito Santo all feel outmoded, their reluctance to press anachronistic in the modern game. That has left Mourinho exposed. All managers are to an extent dependent on their capacity to persuade players to buy in to their projects, but those who have a coherent process are less vulnerable to the fickleness of interpersonal relationships. Mourinho, though, does not believe in practising preset moves; rather he prefers to use guided discovery to establish in the players the mentality to make the right decisions. The problem is, if the players do not believe in him, they are far less susceptible to his conditioning. Which makes Roma’s decision to appoint him baffling. This was not like Tottenham, where the belief seems to have been that there was a squad almost ready for a trophy and all it needed was the final push of a messianic winner. That might at least have suited Mourinho once. But Roma, by Mourinho’s own account, “don’t want success today. They want a sustainable project for the future.” Mourinho has never offered that. So all that remains is the toxic endgame, as he looks to evade responsibility for declining form. It begins earlier and earlier with every passing job. Soon, there may be nothing else.Hello again. The day that Carlo Ancelotti returned to Real Madrid, a chance conversation about something completely different unexpectedly bringing him back to Spain six years later, he looked around Valdebebas and saw familiar faces everywhere, comfort in the lack of change. “The same physios, the same kit men, the same journalists, the same vision, the same demands of greatness,” as he put it. “Everything is immutable: the only thing that changes is the coach.” It is there, anyway. Since he left, Madrid have been through five of them: Rafa Benítez, Zinedine Zidane, Julen Lopetegui, Santi Solari and Zidane again. Barcelona have been through six. By contrast, Sunday’s opponents from across the capital – rivals who have proven as big as Barcelona, at least for Ancelotti – have not been through any. Atlético Madrid have changed homes, moving out of the Vicente Calderón and heading to the Metropolitano 22km north-east, but not their coach. And so a familiar face awaits Ancelotti at the Santiago Bernabéu. Diego Simeone was in charge at Atlético when Ancelotti came the first time and was in charge when he left. He was still in charge when Ancelotti came the second time and it is no great leap to suggest he still will be when the Italian goes again. It will be a decade this month, not 14 years as Ancelotti said, but Simeone is different, an outlier now. Not just in Spain but anywhere. And not just different, a “dream” to use Ancelotti’s admiring words on the eve of the first derby of his second spell. “God willing, I’d be here 14 years like he has been at Atlético,” he said, the smile showing that he knows that isn’t going to happen. But then Ancelotti didn’t think this would happen, either. A phone call in the summer about possible player signings ended up with his. “A fantastic surprise,” as he put it in Corriere dello Sport. “There is no better place in the world to live or work.” No better place for a derby either. An unexpected second opportunity, a return to a place he missed and thought left behind was a chance for the Italian to enjoy it for as long as it lasts, every day a bonus. While Ancelotti says that defeats hurt him physically, leaving him unable to sleep, he is a man at ease, beyond all the nonsense and the noise now. “I’m in a phase of my life when I just want to be at peace with the world,” he said. “I have been in football since 1977, almost 46 years, 30 of them coaching. I don’t have the time or the desire to fight. When Florentino [Pérez] wants to sack me, I won’t get angry.” There has been comfort in the familiarity, but maybe not this time as he looks to his right, towards the visitor’s technical area. “What Simeone has done at Atlético – build something important, put the club among the best in Europe, fighting every year, winning titles, and still doing so in an impeccable manner – is something that all coaches want,” Ancelotti said. “To be at a club a long time, leave your mark, your signature on it, that is the dream of all coaches.” He speaks from experience. Simeone left his mark on Ancelotti, too; he is witness to how the revolution at Atlético revived the rivalry, taking it to peaks it may never have reached. As managers they could not be more different, especially not now – at least on the surface. The Argentinian leaps, paces and shouts, waving frantically, conducting the crowd, never still on the touchline right up to the moment when he turns and sprints down the tunnel. The Italian rarely does more than tip chewing gum down his throat and raise an eye brow. Between them, though, they have raised hell, engaging in the biggest battles. Ancelotti was only at Madrid for two seasons but he faced Simeone in 13 derbies, including a Copa del Rey semi-final and the first European Cup final between two teams from the same city, 70,000 fans heading west down the Badajoz road to Lisbon. No game was played more often, nor mattered as much. None felt so momentous, not even the clásicos. The derby had probably never been this competitive and they were not always nice, either. “What a horrible team they are,” one member of Madrid’s backroom staff said as he departed the Calderón defeated one night. They knew they were in a proper fight. Ancelotti saw Atlético win the league – their first in 14 years, only second in 38 – perhaps the most unlikely there has ever been, a genuine overturning of the status quo, and maybe Atlético’s greatest success. If only because exactly seven days later, a Sergio Ramos goal on 92.48, denied them the European Cup and gave Madrid their 10th, an obsession. Without it, Ancelotti might have been dismissed; instead, he will always be the coach that won the décima. In his time there, he suffered a 4-0 defeat, and didn’t win in the league. Victory here would not only be his first derby success in La Liga; it would also take a huge step towards taking this season’s title. And that would be Ancelotti’s first in Spain to go with those won in England, France, Italy and Germany. The position could hardly be better, far more so than anyone anticipated when he arrived as a popular, steady and comfortable if improvised choice of coach, a man with a calm class about everything he does and says. Including refusing to say it’s over, the respect for his rival too great, for the familiar face leading them. Madrid have everyone available, Karim Benzema back after injury, they have gone nine without defeat. But Ancelotti insisted: “What I can say is what has happened – we have done better than the other teams – but that’s talking about the past. If the league ends today, it is over. Sadly, it doesn’t end today: we have to play six more months and I don’t know what can happen next.” He added: “Half a league title? I don’t know. We would have three more points over a rival that will be fighting for the league they won last season. But I don’t want to put more pressure on this game because it the pressure is already there – and that’s a good thing. They have many players I like. Griezmann, Suárez is a fantastic striker. Rodrigo de Paul has played very well. At the back they have ‘pessimistic’ players, and I like that in defenders. They have a great goalkeeper. “They’re a complete team. It will be a game that’s naturally competitive, with duels, against a team fighting for the same objective as us.”Labour surged into a commanding nine-point lead over the Tories this weekend as controversies over rule-breaking Christmas parties at Downing Street and Tory sleaze plunged Boris Johnson into a battle to save his premiership. The latest Opinium poll for the Observer also shows 57% of voters think Johnson should now resign, up nine points from a fortnight ago, as the prime minister appears to be haemorrhaging public support. Johnson’s personal ratings have fallen to -35%, down 14 points from what was already a record low of -21% two weeks ago. Asked which of three Covid-19 related scandals had shocked them more – the No 10 staff Christmas party last year, the Dominic Cummings trip to Barnard Castle or the Matt Hancock/Gina Coladangelo affair, the Downing Street party comfortably topped the list. Fifty-one percent of people polled said they found that event most shocking, following by 28% for the Cummings trip and 21% for the Hancock controversy. Adam Drummond of Opinium said the fall was “devastating” and noted that high numbers of Conservatives had moved to the undecided column. While he said Johnson was known for comebacks and Labour was by no means free of problems of its own, Drummond added that “unless the Conservatives can turn these numbers around quickly, backbenchers might start asking if the party is over for the prime minister”. The poll puts Labour on 41%, with its nine-point lead being the biggest Opinium has recorded since 2014. The Tories are now on 32%, their lowest score since 2019, while the Liberal Democrats are on 9% (+1), the SNP 5% (unchanged) and the Greens 5% (-1). The findings are likely to increase anger within the Conservative party over last week’s revelations about parties at No 10, which followed weeks of denials by Downing Street, and also follow suggestions that Johnson misled his own standards adviser, Lord Geidt, over the arrangements for the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat. Opinium found that 60% of people now believe the UK will go into another lockdown in the next three months. The controversies reached new heights in an extraordinary week for the prime minister, during which his wife, Carrie, gave birth to their second child, and he was confronted by intense anger from his backbenchers over new Covid restrictions aimed at holding back the spread of the Omicron variant. Johnson is facing a potentially damaging rebellion by his own MPs on Tuesday, when the measures will be voted on in parliament. Then on Thursday he is facing the prospect of possible defeat at the hands of the Liberal Democrats in the normally rock-solid Tory seat of North Shropshire in a byelection caused by the resignation of Owen Paterson, who was found to have broken parliamentary lobbying rules. A memo to staff from the Liberal Democrat high command on Friday revealed that according to responses it had reviewed from voters who intend to cast a ballot on Thursday, the Tories – who enjoyed a 23,000 majority at the last election – now have a lead of just one point. The Lib Dem projection puts the Tories on 40%, the Lib Dems on 39% and Labour on 12%, with Reform UK and the Greens on 4% each. Defeat in the seat would trigger something close to panic among Tory MPs, who only six months ago were mostly willing to stand by Johnson despite the controversies that follow him, because they saw him as a winner with the public. For much of October, and following the conference season, Johnson’s party enjoyed a lead of four or five points in Opinium’s survey. Since then the collapse has caused serious alarm at all levels of the party. Asked about the prospect of a Tory rebellion on Tuesday, communities secretary Michael Gove said he was confident MPs would examine proposals for new restrictions “seriously, soberly and thoughtfully” in light of the way Omicron had been spreading across the UK. Johnson’s critics on the backbenches say they expect several disgruntled MPs to send letters of no confidence to the backbench 1922 committee chairman, Sir Graham Brady, in the coming days, unless the prime minister can rapidly steady the ship.After a year and a half of pouring blood, sweat and tears, Demi Skipper has successfully taken one single hair pin and traded it up all the way to a house. In May this year, the Guardian spoke to her after she’d traded three tractors for one of only a few Chipotle celebrity cards in the world, worth about $20,000. She had been inspired by Kyle MacDonald, who in 2006 traded a red paperclip all the way to a house, and hoped to reach her goal by summer’s end. Only a few months later than hoped, Skipper, who is 29, has been handed the keys to a little house near Nashville, Tennessee. No mortgage. No fees. And not a penny spent (except on shipping). The modest ‘fixer upper’ house, complete with a big garden, is her 28th trade since she embarked on her project in May 2020. Skipper, who also has a full time job as a product lead at Cash App, set out on her journey during lockdown and documented it to her (then) zero TikTok followers. “There were just so many negative people saying it wasn’t possible. I was willing to do this for five years if that’s what it took to get to the house.” She beams: “I wake up and I’m like ‘is this real?’ I have the house. I traded this from a bobby pin!” When Skipper revealed one of her last trades – a Chipotle celebrity card – to her almost five million TikTok followers, she was met with an unexpected backlash of criticism. The card gives the owner unlimited free food from Chipotle for a year, plus a catered dinner for 50 people, and is worth about $20,000. Many said she had made the worst decision of her journey yet, and that she would never find someone who would trade it for an item of the same value. Determined to prove them wrong, Skipper planned out her strategy to find her next trade. She began looking at celebrities who were big fans of the fast food chain. If a celebrity was so much as pictured eating Chipotle, they were probably on Skipper’s radar. A couple of NFL players were close to trading, but they fell through. After months of searching, she got an email from “Chipotle’s biggest fan”, a woman called Alyssa who runs a flower company in Canada. Alyssa agreed to trade an off-the-grid trailer with a Tesla powerwall and solar panels worth $40,000 for the card. After the trade was made official, Skipper got Alyssa on a call with representatives of Chipotle, which almost brought her to tears as she is such a big fan of their food. Skipper said: “That was a really cool moment. I found the one person who cares about this card. I found her in the world.” (Alyssa works at a women’s shelter and plans to donate some of the free Chipotle food to the shelter.) But Skipper quickly fell from cloud nine as one of the most complicated battles of her trading journey was about to begin. After figuring out a way to get the trailer from Canada to the US with closed borders due to Covid, she was told that the wheels on the trailer were illegal in the US and couldn’t be replaced. The company that makes the trailers hadn’t “paid their dues” to the US Department of Transportation and until they did, Skipper’s trailer was stuck in Canada. After calling transportation department every day for weeks and offering to file the paperwork herself, she had to wait three months to be able to bring the trailer home. Finally one of her followers volunteered to pick up the trailer and hold it on her drive near the US border, so Skipper and her husband decided to make the 15-hour road trip to Canada to see, photograph, and decorate the trailer. It turned out to be one of the most life-changing car journeys of Skipper’s life. As they drove it home, Skipper immediately started looking for her next trade. She messaged a woman who showed some interest, and the two started chatting on the phone while Skipper’s husband drove. The woman on the phone asked Skipper, “Are you sitting down?” before explaining that she was a house flipper who owned about 15 different houses at any given time. She had been following Skipper’s journey from the beginning and was waiting for the right trade – and this trailer was it. Skipper was being offered a house in Tennessee. The day after Thanksgiving she was on a flight to Nashville, and after a meal with the woman she had saved in her phone as “Final House Lady”, she had the keys in her hand. She ran up to the house and started crying in the huge front garden. The house – which has two small bedrooms, a kitchen, living room and a bathroom – was “perfect”. Skipper and her husband are leaving their rental home in San Francisco and are moving to Tennessee to renovate and live in their house. There’s a plan in the works to trade the original bobby pin back for something and frame it in their new home. The Trade Me project may look like a smooth journey – it was anything but. From broken cars to diamond necklaces worth less than expected, as the disappointments mounted, many people would have cut their losses. But Skipper never gave up: “I think I’ve gotten much better at seeing the negative and flipping it to a positive,” she explains. “Had someone said that someone was going to trade something that’s worth not even a single penny for a house that’s worth millions of times more, I feel like people would say it’s impossible. But this makes me feel like anything is possible now.” Remembering her grainy first TikTok video, in which she shakily filmed her hand holding the bobby pin and then her computer screen showing her posting it to Craigslist, because she didn’t understand how the app worked, Skipper says: “It makes no sense. I was not supposed to be the person that did this. But I became that person and now I have an entire house. I don’t think you have to be that person who’s supposed to do it.” After such a back-breaking challenge, Skipper’s going to do it all over again – and is hoping to donate the next house to someone who needs it. “I was the second person to do it once. But I want to be the first person to do it twice,” she smiles.Saudi Arabia has opened its first international film festival amid accusations that the government is using culture to whitewash its poor human rights record, just days after similar controversy shadowed its first time hosting a Formula One race. The Red Sea festival attracted international stars including Hilary Swank, Clive Owen and Vincent Cassel. Saudi Arabia presented it as a moment of change for a country that only lifted a ban on cinemas four years ago, a position embraced by some of those walking the red carpet. But the gala has for months been the target of boycott calls from critics who warn that the glamour of show-business is being deployed by Saudi authorities to distract international attention from rights abuses within the country and beyond. Under crown prince and de facto ruler Mohammed bin Salman, Saudi officials have crushed political dissent at home and pursued critics beyond the country’s borders, most notoriously murdering journalist Jamal Khashoggi at a consulate in Turkey. The prince has also been widely condemned for directing Saudi Arabia’s intervention in the brutal civil war in Yemen, which is now enduring one of the worst humanitarian crises in the world. “A film festival without freedom of expression quickly descends into propaganda,” said Madawi Al-Rasheed, a professor at LSE and prominent critic of the Saudi government. “Sport and art will never be a substitute for real reform that includes civil and political rights. International films are used as a cover for a sinister scenario of detentions, beheadings and murder by a regime that is desperate to break its isolation after it committed crimes in Yemen and against its own citizens.” When the festival was announced earlier this year, Oscar-nominated film director Sami Khan was among voices calling for artists to stay away, in protest against Saudi Arabia’s disturbing record on human rights. “The international film community should not allow itself to be bought and used by Saudi Arabia to whitewash horrific atrocities,” he said in a public statement. He said he expected to suffer financial implications and attacks on his reputation for the public stance, but cited others who had also condemned the festival. “I probably will pay a price for this … but I’m increasingly disturbed by the way repressive governments are using the global film industry to launder their reputations.” Other critics include Orwa Nyrabia, a Syrian filmmaker and artistic director of International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam, who spoke out against the festival in 2019, when plans were first unveiled before the coronavirus pandemic. Human Rights Watch called for celebrities planning appearances in Saudi Arabia linked to the Formula One race held earlier this month to either use their platforms to raise concerns about human rights, or stay away. “On the surface, the festivities are meant to show race attendees having an amazing time. But a look beneath the hood makes clear that the Saudi government’s intent is to use these celebrities to whitewash its abysmal human rights record,” the campaign group said. “Saudi Arabia has a history of using celebrities and major international events to deflect scrutiny from its pervasive abuses.” Khashoggi’s fiancee had also made an open appeal to Canadian singer Justin Bieber to cancel a performance there, warning that his celebrity would “be used to restore the reputation of a regime that kills its critics.” He went ahead with the 5 December performance. Ahead of the race, F1 world champion Lewis Hamilton said he is not comfortable competing in Saudi Arabia given its “terrifying” laws regarding the LGBTQ+ community. He once more called on Formula One to do more to address human rights issues in the countries it visits.Chile’s presidential race is hurtling towards its conclusion with the two remaining candidates battling to secure moderate votes in a deeply divided political landscape. Far-right candidate José Antonio Kast secured a two-point victory in November’s first round, but polls show that Gabriel Boric – the leftwing former student leader he will face in the 19 December runoff – now holds a narrow lead. Since the first round, Kast has undertaken a whistlestop tour of the US – where he met conservative politicians including Marco Rubio – while back in Chile he has concentrated on attracting other right-leaning candidates’ vote share. Boric, meanwhile, has taken his campaign into the communities where his message failed to resonate. “Boric’s vote is urban, progressive, and largely concentrated in Santiago,” said María Cristina Escudero, a political scientist at the University of Chile. “But both candidates have had to physically take their message to the rural and marginalised areas they weren’t able to reach via social media.” Boric’s campaign has split into four simultaneous tours of Chile, hoping to spread his message that “hope” would triumph over “fear”. In Chile’s extreme north, he has been represented by Dr Izkia Siches, the former head of Chile’s medical union, a hugely popular figure whose measured, pragmatic leadership over the course of the pandemic won her widespread plaudits. Down in the south of the country – where Kast won a large majority of the vote – Karol Cariola, a Communist party congresswoman from Boric’s student leader generation, has been knocking on doors alongside a team of mayors and supporters. “We want to open a million doors in every district and neighbourhood of our country,” she told the Guardian. “We need to look people in the eye and explain to them what Gabriel Boric’s campaign is all about, and how it differs from [Kast’s],” she said. “That’s why it is so important that we are doing these tours.” Boric himself is visiting key battleground areas, and in Rancagua and Curicó, two cities south of the capital, Santiago, the fourth tour has been led by an enthusiastic set of artists, actors, musicians and cultural figures. At each stop they are parking a container truck which has been converted into a stage to give free concerts and rousing speeches. “The reception has been beautiful – people are joyful and engaged with our campaign,” said Francisca Gavilán, the actor who portrayed revered folklorist Violeta Parra in the 2011 biopic Violeta Went to Heaven. She has been performing covers of Parra’s songs to the crowds. “It’s vital that the cultural scene in Chile has a president that sees and respects us,” says Gavilán, “Without culture, a nation dies: it’s constricted and it shrinks – like a country without education.” And while both Kast and Boric scrap for the votes, the political class has also realigned itself after the bombshell first round. Centrist candidate Yasna Provoste and former Socialist party lawmaker Marco Enríquez-Ominami – who took 19% of the first-round vote between them – have backed Boric. Kast has won support from across the right, speaking at length on a YouTube channel run by businessman Franco Parisi, who surprised many by taking 13% of the vote in the first round despite never setting foot in Chile during the campaigns. He also belatedly accepted an ultimatum from Sebastián Sichel, a centre-right former minister who himself won 13% of the votes, demanding that he moderate elements of his programme in exchange for his support. Eduardo Artés, a 70-year-old communist who won less than 1% of the vote, has refused to back either candidate. The first round of the election was characterised by historically low participation – even for Chile, where more than half of the electorate typically abstain. Only 47% of registered voters turned out in November. “If people turn out to vote, that favours Boric,” said Escudero. “But that’s a big ‘if’ – and it makes the whole election very uncertain.”Young people not currently eligible for the Covid-19 booster jab have been receiving vaccinations from walk-in centres, clinics and pharmacies across the country that have chosen to ignore official government guidance. On online forums, under-40s have been suggesting to each other the places offering boosters to all over-18s. On Reddit, nearly 25,000 people are a member of the UK community GetJabbed, where they are sharing locations of clinics in cities including London, Manchester and Liverpool offering boosters to younger people. One poster linking to a vaccination clinic in Essex said they were offered the jab within five minutes of arriving, “no questions about age or living in the area”. Another reported getting a jab in Smethwick, near Birmingham, while other under-40s said they had been vaccinated yesterday in Woking, Basildon, Hounslow and Bristol. Many say they want the booster to protect older relatives or because they expect to be away or busy when the rollout to younger people officially happens next year. Despite the fact they were flouting official guidance, many walk-in clinics offering boosters to anyone over the age of 18 appeared to be keen to advertise that they have jabs available. At Yorkshire Event Centre at Harrogate showground, 28-year-old Jessica Jones said her father heard on the local news that there were vaccines available for younger people. Jones, who runs a set-building company for fashion shoots in Manchester, is one of a small percentage of under-40s without pre-existing conditions to have now had a booster. She said: “The main reason I’ve come here really is that my dad is quite old and that I still want to go places and do stuff – it’s the obvious choice. No one wants to get ill.” Dr Cath Dixon, who runs the vaccine centre here and delivered Jones’s booster, said the aim is to vaccinate as many people as possible, regardless of age. She said: “Most of the older and vulnerable people are now up to date with their vaccines so we are seeing more younger people coming in. “It’s been fantastic. People are so appreciative and some have come from quite far away,” she added. The pop-up clinic delivered 1,444 vaccines on Friday with a team of six vaccinators and, by 3pm on Saturday, the team had already surpassed that. As of Saturday afternoon, they had done 6,613 jabs in five days, most of them boosters. But NHS England has not officially rolled out vaccine boosters for under 40s, with a spokesperson saying NHS vaccination sites are expected to focus only on the most vulnerable “which at present is people aged 40 and over as well as those with health conditions and healthcare workers”. From Monday, this will be extended to over-30s, the NHS said, advising anyone eligible to get the jab. For Louie Swain, 27, who heard about getting a booster vaccine near his home in Harrogate from a friend, it is wanting to spend time with vulnerable family members over Christmas that brought him to the vaccination centre yesterday. “I was trying to look it up but I didn’t know they were doing boosters for people my age. I thought it was quite important because have family members who are vulnerable and I want to spend time with them over Christmas, so that’s why I’m here.” Booster shots are becoming increasingly vital in the fight against the new Omicron variant, which is predicted to become the dominant variant in the UK within days. Early analysis by the UK Health Security Agency found a third dose of the vaccine prevents three quarters of people from getting any Covid symptoms. Prof Neil Ferguson, who helped shape Britain’s coronavirus lockdown strategy, said the Omicron variant has the potential to “very substantially overwhelm the NHS” and cause up to 10,000 hospitalisations a day if it is as virulent as Delta. The mathematical epidemiologist from Imperial College London said the UK was already experiencing a “very explosive wave of infection” from the new variant. This could lead to “quite an explosive wave of hospitalisations.” In addition, leaked documents showed Sajid Javid, the health secretary, received a presentation from the UK Health and Security Agency on Tuesday warning that even if the Omicron variant leads to less serious disease than Delta, it risks overwhelming the NHS with 5,000 people admitted to hospital a day. In Harrogate, Dr Dixon is especially keen to encourage those who have still not had a single vaccination yet to get the vaccine. This includes pregnant women, who are being advised to ensure they are vaccinated, in line with government guidance. She said: “There are still people we need to reach. The message really is that Covid kills, it’s still killing but it’s mostly killing vulnerable people and those who haven’t had the vaccine.”Tornadoes have caused widespread damage in central and southern US states, with dozens of people feared dead. Witnesses and survivors have been describing their terrifying experiences of the storm. The damage included building collapses of a candle factory in Mayfield, Kentucky, where officials believe more than 70 people may have died, an Amazon warehouse in Illinois, and a nursing home in Arkansas. The other states that have been most affected are Missouri, Mississippi and Tennessee. Kentucky: tragedy at candle factory Kyanna Parsons-Perez felt the building was making them “rock from one side to the other” right before it collapsed on her and her co-workers at a candle factory in Mayfield, Kentucky, on Friday after it was hit by the tornado. Parsons-Perez, an employee at the candle factory in this city of less than 10,000, was stuck for three hours in the rubble, and documented part of it in a livestream on Facebook in which her co-workers can be heard crying in fear. On Saturday, sitting in the emergency room, she told the Guardian how all of a sudden, there was a gust of wind that changed everything. “All of us, we felt a gust of wind, and everybody started getting closer, my ears started popping and I felt my body swaying,” she said of the moments right before the building collapsed. She said she decided to go live on the social channel because after calling 911, when she was told authorities were sending in people, she realized a lot more help was needed. She said she also wanted them to understand more about their situation and to let rescue workers be aware they were deep in debris. In her specific location, Parsons-Perez was stuck with about six other workers. Many of them are heard crying in fear in the livestream while Parsons-Perez tries to calm them down and encourage them to be hopeful about getting out of there. She told the Guardian that even though she wasn’t scared for her life at the time of the collapse, she became scared upon learning what she was buried under. “When I found out it was an air conditioner on me and five people on the debris on top of me is when I got scared,” she said. She still managed to remain hopeful throughout the livestream, laughing and making her friends sing happy birthday for her as it was her birthday eve. On Saturday, she appeared tired during her video call with the Guardian, as she waited in the ER to be treated. She said she was unaware of the injuries she’d sustained but her whole body was sore. She said the factory authorities have not yet reached out to her, but the temp agency she worked through did check up on her. Some of the rescue workers included inmates from the Graves County Jail. “I felt that it was so wonderful that they did it,” she said. Some of the inmates are now feared dead in the destruction. Kentucky’s governor Andy Beshear warned the fatalities could pass 100. He said about 110 people were in the Mayfield factory when the tornado roared through; officials in the state have confirmed 18 deaths so far. Beshear said the tornado spanned over 200 miles in the states and that it was “something we have never seen before”. The missing at the candle factory includes Denise Johnson Williams, a 50-year-old mother of four whose family members kept vigil at the site Saturday, the Associated Press reported. “It’s Christmastime and she works at a place that’s making candles for gifts,” her brother, Darryl Williams, said. “To give up the gift of life to make a gift. We haven’t heard anything, and I’m not presuming anything. But I’m expecting for the worst.” He said Johnson Williams called her husband overnight to report the weather was getting bad, the last time anyone heard from her. Journalist Brandon Clement shared video of mass devastation in Mayfield of scores of flattened houses, and “homes with only slabs remaining”. This is “the most intense damage” he tweeted on Saturday morning. Mayfield had its main fire station and emergency hubs hit by the tornado which further complicated the rescue efforts, Jeremy Creason, the city’s fire chief and emergency medical services director has said, according to the Associated Press. “We have been working tirelessly through the night,” Creason said. Illinois: Amazon building collapse On Saturday afternoon, tributes were pouring in for 29-year-old Clayton Cope who reportedly died in an Amazon warehouse collapse in Edwardsville, Illinois. Cope was a maintenance worker at the warehouse. At least six people at the warehouse have been confirmed dead; although Cope’s name was not made public by authorities, his mother reportedly confirmed his death to FOX2 news. “R.I.P. clayton cope I’ll miss your smiling face coming into Casey’s in Hartford,” a Casey’s general store employee shared in a Facebook post. At least 45 Amazon employees made it out of the rubble of the facility, fire chief James Whiteford said. Authorities had given up hope of finding more survivors as they shifted from rescue to recovery efforts, which were expected to last days. The Amazon facility was hit about 8.38pm central time, Whiteford said. The force of the winds was so severe the roof was ripped off and the building collapsed on itself. Witnesses said workers were caught by surprise and forced to take shelter anywhere they could find. “I had a coworker that was sending me pictures when they were taking shelter in the bathroom, basically anywhere they could hide,” said Alexander Bird, who works at a warehouse across the street. “People had to think on their feet quick.” Late on Saturday afternoon Amazon truck driver Emily Epperson, 23, was anxiously waiting for information on the whereabouts of workmate Austin McEwan to relay to his girlfriend and parents. “We’re so worried because we believe that, you know, he would have been found by now,” she told Reuters. Amazon CEO Andy Jassy posted on Twitter that the company was “heartbroken over the loss” of its staff members and would continue to work closely with local authorities on the rescue efforts. Amazon founder Jeff Bezos echoed Jassy in a statement shared on Twitter later on Saturday, in which he pledged the company’s support to the community. “All of Edwardsville should know that the Amazon team is committed to supporting them and will be by their side through this crisis,” Bezos wrote. Arkansas: Nursing home hit One person died at a nursing home in Monette, Arkansas and five others were injured, FOX13 reported. Storm chaser and photographer Brian Emfinger shared photos from the scene that looked eerily similar to the sites in Mayfield and Edwardsville. All others at the Monette nursing home had been accounted for at the time of this reporting.Boris Johnson is facing further questions over whether he breached Covid laws after pictures emerged of him hosting a Christmas quiz in Downing Street while London was under tier 2 restrictions. The prime minister was pictured on a screen reading out questions while staff sat behind computers and conferred on the answers, the Mirror reported. London was then under restrictions banning any social mixing between households. Official guidance also stated: “You must not have a work Christmas lunch or party, where that is a primarily social activity and is not otherwise permitted by the rules in your tier.” A source told the newspaper that in one office there were four teams, each comprising six people. Dozens of staff are understood to have signed up to participate in the quiz online but at 6.30pm that day many decided to take part from No 10 instead. Teams from the prime minister’s private office, the policy unit and press office are understood to have been among those taking part. The quiz took place on 15 December, three days before an alleged Christmas party at Downing Street which is currently being investigated by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case. In response to the latest allegations, a No 10 spokesperson said: “This was a virtual quiz. Downing Street staff were often required to be in the office to work on the pandemic response so those who were in the office for work may have attended virtually from their desks. “The prime minister briefly took part virtually in a quiz to thank staff for their hard work throughout the year.” Case is also investigating an alleged leaving do for an aide, Cleo Watson, on 27 November at No 10 and “thank you” drinks for staff working in the then education secretary Gavin Williamson’s department on 10 December. It comes after the prime minister’s former adviser, Dominic Cummings, claimed on Friday that photos could come to light proving such gatherings were held. On the day that Cummings dramatically left his job in Downing Street in November last year, blaring music and aides chatting were heard in the No 11 residence where Johnson lives with his wife, Carrie, sources have said. Separately, the Guardian was told a “wine and pizza” party attended by Tory advisers was held in Downing Street after a Covid press conference during the first lockdown, in spring 2020. No 10 said the prime minister was in his flat “solely with his family” on the evening in question and the spokesperson denied knowledge of any gathering.The Father, Florian Zeller’s disorientating and poignant dementia drama starring Anthony Hopkins, won best actor and best screenplay at this year’s European film awards – but was ultimately pipped to best film by Quo Vadis, Aida?, a shattering depiction of the calamitous 1995 UN attempt to prevent the Srebrenica massacre. Bosnian film-maker Jasmila Žbanić also won best director for the film – a pan-European endeavour involving 12 production companies from nine countries – while Jasna Đuričić won best actress for her performance as the beleaguered UN interpreter trying to save her family from being ethnically cleansed with other Muslims by Bosnian-Serb paramilitaries. Žbanić dedicated the film’s award to the country’s women and their peacebuilding efforts following the Bosnian war: “Women always have to fix the mess made by men. They taught us how to turn destruction into love.” More cinema and stories from female perspectives would be needed in the future, she warned. “We need more complex stories in order to make our audience ready for very complex times ahead of us.” Hopkins was not present to pick up his best actor award, which follows his Oscar and Bafta for the film. It was accepted remotely by first-time film director Zeller. For the second year in succession, the awards took place as a virtual ceremony streamed live from Berlin – where only the host, German actor Annabelle Mandeng, and a smattering of presenters, award-winners and nominees were present in the studio for this 34th edition. It was a brisk and pragmatic occasion, low on the socio-political fire and state-of-Europe addresses seen in pre-Covid European film awards. But Mandeng did salute the continent’s film-makers for “moving mountains” to make productions happen during the pandemic “Making films in a time of Covid is an even bigger challenge. Making films in a time when going to the cinema remains subject to restrictions is a big act of faith,” she said. British director Steve McQueen won the prize for European innovative storytelling – only the second time the European film academy has given the award – for his five-film anthology about the UK African-Caribbean experience, Small Axe. The prize was presented to him by rapper Tricky and German musician Joy Denalane, who made an impassioned case for its wider relevance. “The films are set in London, yet I saw my own German childhood experience in them,” she said. “Structural racism and unconscious and conscious bias continue in the here and now in so many European countries.” Ninety-year-old Hungarian director Márta Mészáros, whose six-decade career encompasses pioneering gender-focused documentaries and bold New Wave-style features, won a lifetime achievement award for her “original feminist progressivism”. Denmark’s Susanne Bier – who has graduated from 2002’s Open Hearts, part of the minimalist Dogme movement, to 2018’s Netflix hit Bird Box, via serial collaborations with Mads Mikkelsen – was recognised for European achievement in world cinema. Cannes Palme d’Or winner Titane – Julie Ducournau’s divisive, gender-fluid, ultra-violent love fable featuring a woman who is impregnated by a muscle car – was the night’s big loser, going home with a sole award for hair and makeup. Emerald Fennell’s #MeToo black comedy Promising Young Woman, a British-American co-production, took the critics’ Fipresci award. The decision to switch to a stripped-back virtual format with a minimal on-site audience was taken on 1 December, with cases rising rapidly across Germany and five days after the WHO announced Omicron as a variant of concern. In a nice demotic touch, film clubs and theatre groups around the continent – from Lisbon to the Finnish Arctic Circle – were asked to present the nominees for many of the awards. Only on one occasion did the dreaded virtual gremlins creep in: when best documentary director Jonas Poher Rasmussen’s sound failed and he was forced to convey his thanks in makeshift sign language. Full list of awards Best film Quo Vadis, Aida? Best comedy Ninja Baby European Discovery (Prix Fipresci) Promising Young Woman Best documentary Flee Best animated feature Flee Best short film My Uncle Tudor Best director Jasmila Žbanić, Quo Vadis, Aida? Best actress Jasna Đuričić, Quo Vadis, Aida? Best actor Anthony Hopkins, The Father Best screenwriter Florian Zeller, Christopher Hampton, The Father Best cinematography Great Freedom Best editing Unclenching the Fists Best production design Natural Light Best costume design Ammonite Best hair &amp; makeup Titane Best original score Great Freedom Best sound The Innocents Best visual effects Lamb EFA lifetime achievement award Márta Mészáros European achievement in world cinema Susanne Bier European innovative storytelling Steve McQueen European co-production award (Prix Eurimages) Maria Ekerhovd European young audience award The Crossing European university film award Flee • This article was amended on 12 December 2021. The events depicted in the film Quo Vadis, Aida? took place in 1995, not 1992 as an earlier version saidWe’re closing this blog for today but will continue to have the latest news on the aftermath of the devastating tornadoes on the Guardian. Here’s a summary of the major developments today: At least 70 people died in the central and southern US states as an estimated 22 tornadoes caused chaos across a swathe of the country greater than 200 miles There is huge damage to the small city of Mayfield, Kentucky, where a candle factory collapsed with more than 100 people inside ‘My ears started popping’: survivors recall terrifying tornado experiences President Biden approves emergency declaration for Kentucky Fire chief: six killed at Amazon facility At least Amazon workers were killed at a warehouse near St Louis on Friday night when a series of tornadoes roared through the area, ripping off the roof and reducing a wall longer than a football field to rubble. Several workers remained unaccounted for as rescuers searched for anyone who might still be trapped at the Edwardsville, Illinois facility, authorities said. Fire chief James Whiteford said 45 people had made it out safely as of Saturday afternoon. He said six people were confirmed killed so far, and he expected recovery efforts to last for at least three more days. Scientists wary of linking tornados to climate change Edward Helmore writes: President Biden gave a careful response when asked on Saturday about whether he believed tornados that have caused such damage in the US overnight were linked to climate change. Scientists have been wary of attributing the frequency and intensity of convective storms that can produce tornadoes to climate change, in part because historical and observational data around tornadoes is relatively limited. In simple terms, that’s due to fact that tornadoes are relatively small and can easily go unreported, says Michael Tippett, a professor of applied mathematics at Columbia University and co-author of a study published last month by the American Geophysical Union. “In linking climate change to extreme weather like hurricanes or extreme rainfall and flooding some connections are easier to make than others,” Tippett told The Guardian on Saturday. “Making the connection to tornadoes is the hardest of all.” Studies have found that severe thunderstorms accompanied by tornadoes, hail, and damaging winds cause an average of $5.4bn of damage each year across the US, and $10bn events are no longer uncommon. In the recent paper, Future Global Convective Environments, the authors looked at the atmospheric ingredients necessary to produce extreme weather that could in turn produce tornadoes. The authors projected that for each degree of global temperature increase, conditions favorable to severe weather increased by 5%–20%. “We have circumstantial evidence, yes, but the key caveat is that favorable conditions do not guarantee that a storm occurs,” Tippett said. While climate change may or may not have contributed to Fridays storms, Jennifer Francis, senior scientist at Woodwell Climate Research Center, says it is “making some of the ingredients needed to create an outbreak like this more likely.” “The atmosphere has more fuel in it now, both in terms of heat and moisture. The large dip in the jet-stream that created the clash between warm, tropical air and cold Arctic air -- another necessary ingredient -- is also more likely to occur in our changed climate.” “It all makes sense, but the rarity of these events makes it difficult to detect any definite signal of change in tornado behavior,” Francis adds. Some scientists have been able to establish that the number of tornadoes in large tornado outbreaks is on the rise and the weather environments that produce severe storms are occurring more often. Each year, tornadoes are starting about a week earlier in “Tornado Alley” from Nebraska to Texas, while summer tornado frequency is declining. Perhaps relevant to the deadly toll in the Kentucky event, tornado frequency is increasing in winter months, and at night, when they are 2.5 times as likely to cause fatalities, are occurring in an area known as “Dixie Alley,” including Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Tennessee. Another circumstantial piece to the puzzle is that the five largest US winter tornado outbreaks have all hit since 1999. “Scientists say this is the toughest nut to crack when it comes to connecting climate change and its impact on weather extremes,” says Tippett. “Circumstantial evidence points to an increase in frequency, but it’s not a direct line of evidence. Intensity is a whole other can of worms.” Biden says he will ask EPA to look at any climate change links Asked if he thought the intensity of the storms was related to climate change, Biden said: “All I know is that the intensity of the weather across the board has some impact as a consequence of the warming of the planet.” “The specific impact on these specific storms, I can’t say at this point. I’m going to ask the EPA to take a look. But we all know that everything is more intense when the climate is warming. Everything.” But first, he said, “we have to find if anyone is still alive”. Asked if the warnings that came ahead of the the storm were sufficient, Biden said “what warning was there, was it strong enough and was it heeded?” would all be looked at. The US president Joe Biden has confirmed that he has approved Kentucky governor Andy Beshear’s request for an emergency declaration. The president said he stood “ready to do the same for the governors of other states” and that he will ask Congress to approve whatever funding is needed. In a mid afternoon news conference, Biden said the loss from the tornado strikes in Kentucky and neighboring states was “profound” and a “tragedy,” and “likely to be one of the largest tornado outbreaks in our history”. He said: “We still don’t know how many lives were lost or the full extent of the damage. I says to all the victims you’re in our prayers, and to the first responders and emergency personnel, this is the right thing to do at the right time. We’re going to get through this.” Biden said federal aid agencies, including FEMA, “would focus on getting support to where it is needed.” “I want folks in all these states to know that we’re going to get through this, and we’re going to get through this together. It’s one of those times when we aren’t Democrats or Republicans. That sounds like hyperbole, but it’s real. We stand together as the United States of America.” As recovery efforts continue following the deadly tornadoes and severe weather that struck six midwestern and southern states overnight, more information about victims is emerging. One of the victims is a Kentucky judge, according to the Louisville Courier-Journal. The judge, Brian Crick, served two counties, according to John Minton, a Kentucky state supreme court justice. Minton reportedly said that Crick “lost his life during the storm”, and called his death a “shocking loss for his family, his community and the court system”. “I have asked our justices, judges, circuit court clerks and AOC managers to try to determine the safety of any court staff in Western Kentucky, and what we can do to help any who need shelter, food or clothing,” Minton said in his statement. President Biden has spoken with governors of the midwestern and southern states that were struck by deadly tornadoes and severe weather overnight. In his call, Biden spoke with Arkansas Governor Asa Hutchinson, Illinois Governor J B Pritzker, Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear, Missouri Governor Mike Parson, and Tennessee Governor Bill Lee, according to the White House. A readout of Biden’s call with these governors said that he expressed “his condolences for the lives lost and the damage impacting their states as a result of the tornadoes and extreme weather overnight”. Biden asked each governor what their state needed and how he could help. “The president asked each governor what his state needs and how he can be most supportive. The president expressed his commitment to delivering assistance as quickly as possible to impacted areas via FEMA,” the readout said. Biden also asked the governors to call him directly if they needed any federal support and said he will “remain focused on doing everything he can to help communities recover from the effects of this historic storm”. FEMA administrator Deanne Criswell, Homeland Security advisor Liz Sherwood-Randall, deputy chief of staff Jen O’Malley Dillon, and White House director of intergovernmental affairs Julie Chavez Rodriguez, were also on the call. Biden is expected to speak later this afternoon about the storms. Residents of Mayfield, Kentucky, were warned that a deadly tornado was heading toward their town more than 20 minutes before it reached them, according to a CNN analysis. The first tornado warning for Mayfield was posted at 9.05pm local time. This National Weather Service advisory “confirmed [a] large and extremely dangerous tornado” and warned that it would arrive at about 9.30pm local time. This initial notice, from NWS’s Paducah, Kentucky office, also warned of “considerable damage”. The warning advisory then became an upgraded “tornado emergency” around 9.26pm local time. That is the “highest level” tornado warning, per CNN. The upgraded notice warned that this presented a “life-threatening” situation. The deadly tornado hit Mayfield around 9.27pm local time, CNN’s analysis determined. The average lead time for tornado warnings in the US is just 13 minutes, the network said. First responders in Mayfield, Kentucky, are facing additional challenges amid their rescue efforts because the deadly tornado system wreaked havoc on public safety infrastructure. Jeremy Creason, Mayfield’s fire chief and emergency medical director, said that the “main station and the hub of our department” was not operational, according to CNN. Creason reportedly said the station was directly in the tornado’s path. “That station is fully inoperable at this point. We had to extricate our own fire and EMS apparatus from that building just so we could respond last night,” Creason said. Creason told reporters that he is looking for another location to house nearly four dozen firefighters and their equipment. During a news conference, Mayfield police chief Nathan Kent told reporters: “Our police station was destroyed in the storm. The bulk of our fleet that was parked there has also been compromised, but we are making do.” Eleven counties have sent ambulances to Mayfield to help local authorities in their search and recovery efforts, per CNN. The tornadoes and severe weather that tore through six midwestern and southern states overnight have killed more than 70 people. In the US, tornadoes have repeatedly caused mass casualties, injuries, and untold damage to communities. While the month of December has previously seen severe tornadoes, it is very rare. The Associated Press has compiled a list of the deadliest tornadoes in the US since 1900 that gives some additional perspective on these deadly storms. These tornadoes have all been in the spring months. Among the deadliest events: — 695 deaths, March 18, 1925, in Missouri, Illinois and Indiana — 216 deaths, April 5, 1936, in Tupelo, Mississippi — 203 deaths, April 6, 1936, in Gainesville, Georgia — 181 deaths, April 9, 1947, in Woodward, Oklahoma — 158 deaths, May 22, 2011, in Joplin, Missouri — 143 deaths, April 24, 1908, in Amite, Louisiana, and Purvis, Mississippi — 116 deaths, June 8, 1953, in Flint, Michigan. — 114 deaths, May 11, 1953 in Waco, Texas — 114 deaths, May 18, 1902 in Goliad, Texas — 103 deaths, March 23, 1913, in Omaha, Nebraska Following a deadly outbreak of tornadoes and severe weather across six midwestern and southern states overnight, residents are assessing damages to their homes and businesses. Photos and video from the hardest hit areas show neighborhoods reduced to rubble. For those who want to help tornado victims, there are several relief funds available, including with the Kentucky Red Cross. United Way of Kentucky is also accepting donations. More organizations are listed on the WFPL News Louisville website. There also might be opportunities to volunteer for Kentucky relief efforts, both through the state and local Red Cross. Emergency management authorities in Kentucky have noted that storm-damaged communities “do not need goods at this time” and encourage monetary donations instead. The American Red Cross is accepting donations for disaster relief across storm-struck areas. According to the Cleveland Fox affiliate, the organization has already deployed teams to Missouri and Arkansas. After deadly tornadoes and severe storms tore through six states in the midwest and south, hundreds of thousands remain without power. In Tennessee, 130,401 power customers are without power. In Kentucky, 76,257 do not have electricity, PowerOutage.US said. Indiana is seeing power outages for 65,433 customers, and 56,247 are without power in Ohio. The storm system, which had previously caused chaos such as heavy snowfall in the upper midwest and Great Lakes regions, appears to have caused power outages in Michigan. According to PowerOutage.US, 280,202 customers in that state are without power. An 84-year-old woman near Defiance, Missouri was killed by a tornado that tore her house off its foundation. Her husband, also 84 years old, was injured, according to the St Louis Post-Dispatch. Ollie and Vernon Borgmann were at home when the tornado struck. They were speaking with one of their sons on the phone when the line went dead, the newspaper reported. “The next thing Vernon remembers is waking up in a field surrounded by debris,” the newspaper reported. Another one of their sons, Mark Borgmann, told the newspaper that Ollie was sweet, and a “typical grandmother”. Mark said that rubble from his childhood home was scattered at least one half mile down a nearby highway. Following the deadly storms that are feared to have killed dozens and injured scores, some have wondered if there have ever been severe tornadoes in December. According to the New York Times, deadly tornadoes are “rare” during this month, but they are not unprecedented. In 2000, tornadoes tore through Alabama, causing 12 deaths. And tornadoes ripped through Tennessee, Mississippi, and several other nearby states before Christmas in 2015, killing more than one dozen people. Three people died in 2019 when several tornadoes emerged across four southern states in 2019, per the Times. The tornadoes that resulted in destruction across six midwestern and southern states overnight were part of a storm system that had caused chaos near the Great Lakes and upper midwest US regions, including extensive snow, the newspaper notes. Kentucky governor Andy Beshear has described the town of Mayfield, Kentucky, as “ground zero” for destruction wrought by a tornado that traveled more than 200-miles. “We have half of some of our towns here in western Kentucky that are just gone. It’s hard to see,” Beshear told CNN. At least 110 people were in a candle factory when the storm hit this town of 10,000, collapsing its roof. Beshear reportedly said that the last successful rescue at the plant was at 3 am local time. “It looks like a bomb has gone on off here,” Mayfield mayor Kathy Stewart O’Nan told the news network. Photos and video of Mayfield shows numerous buildings were severely damaged and that some were reduced to piles of rubble. Mayfield’s historic courthouse was among the buildings hit. President Biden said this morning that he was briefed about the tornadoes that struck six midwest and southern states overnight. In a tweet, Biden described storm deaths as an “unimaginable tragedy”. There are more details on the extent of the tornadoes that swept through midwest and southern US states – and the destruction they caused. In Kentucky, at least four tornadoes touched down overnight, leaving a trail of destruction more than 12 counties, according to Reuters. The main tornado moved 227 miles across the state. Severe weather killed at least three people in Tennessee. Officials said that there were “confirmed fatalities” at the Amazon warehouse in Illinois that was struck by a tornado. The storms also derailed a freight train in Kentucky, but there were no injuries. In Bowling Green, Kentucky, authorities reported that numerous apartment complexes had suffered major structural damage, and said that some factories collapsed, the Associated Press reported. The sudden eruption of tornadoes stemmed from a series of overnight thunderstorms. Among those storms was a “super cell storm” that emerged in northeast Arkansas. This storm traveled from Arkansas to Missouri, reaching east to Tennessee and Kentucky, Reuters said. Dramatic photos of the deadly tornadoes that are thought to have killed dozens, and injured scores, are emerging on social media. Zach Holder, a meteorologist with Arkansas’ Region 8 News, described the tornado in Monette and Leachville as an “absolute monster.” Holder also shared a photo taken in Bay, Arkansas from a woman name Kaylee Lawrence. Reed Timmer, a meteorologist and storm chaser, also posted images of the Monette tornado. Timmer also posted a photo of a massive tornado approaching Hayti, Missouri. A worker at the Mayfield, Kentucky candle factory that was hit by a tornado has provided a harrowing account of her experience inside the building. Authorities fear that dozens were killed when the tornado struck the factory. “It was extremely scary. Everything happened so fast. They had us in the area where you go in case there is a storm,” Kyana Parsons-Perez told the Today show. “We were all there, and then the lights got to flickering, and then all of a sudden we felt a gust … [we] could feel the wind.” Those in the factory felt it sway a little bit. “And then boom – everything came down on us. All you heard was screams.” Parsons-Perez called 911 and then went live on social media in the hopes of securing help. Parsons-Perez was stuck for at least two hours. “It was absolutely the most terrifying thing I have ever experienced in my life,” Parsons-Perez said. “I did not think I was going to make it at all.” Here is the video of Parsons-Perez’s interview. Meteorologists warn that the deadly storm system continues to pose a threat as it moves north, through Appalachia, toward the northeast. Weather Channel meteorologists have warned that “we’re not done by a long shot.” They have said that a tornado threat persists for areas in Tennessee such as Nashville, and Lexington, Kentucky. The storm appears poised to move through northern Georgia and through North Carolina, as it eventually ascends mid-Atlantic states. Images of the storm’s progression shows it extending to New York. Early reports from the areas hardest struck by these tornadoes have provided some details on fatalities resulting from the massive storm system. “We believe our death toll from this event will exceed 50 Kentuckians, probably end up closer to 70 to 100 lost lives,” Kentucky governor Andy Beshear commented Saturday morning. At least two people died at an Amazon warehouse in Edwardsville, Illinois. The warehouse collapsed during the storm. First responders have had to move slowly in their rescue efforts due to dangers from hanging debris, police chief Mike Fillback said in comments reported by CNN. In Monette, Arkansas, one person died when a tornado damaged a nursing home. In the nearby city of Leachville, Arkansas, a woman died “in a Dollar General store when the storm hit and they could not get out,” the county sheriff told CNN. More than 30 tornadoes were reported over a 200-mile expanse ranging from Arkansas through Kentucky, according to CNN. Good morning, readers. The Guardian will be providing live updates on the deadly tornadoes and severe weather that struck six midwest and southern states overnight. Officials have said that several died and were injured due to these tornadoes and severe weather, but fear that dozens might have been killed. The storm system severely damaged a candle factory in Kentucky, an Amazon warehouse in Illinois, a care home in Arkansas, as well as many homes and buildings. Kentucky governor Andy Beshear said that many people were feared dead at the candle factory in the city of Mayfield, and described the situation as “tragic,” according to the Associated Press and other news agencies. “There were about 110 people in it at the time that the tornado hit it,” Beshear reportedly remarked. “We believe we’ll lose at least dozens of those individuals. It’s very hard, really tough, and we’re praying for each and every one of those families.” More soon.The banner behind the goal in front of the Timbers Army proclaimed Portland as “Soccer City USA” but the MLS Cup trophy is bound for the Bronx. Seven years after Manchester City’s owners underlined their global ambitions by entering MLS and signing splashy European imports, a less starry but more effective New York City FC side are champions. They do not yet have their own stadium, but they have a title. The blue-shirted team whooping and bouncing on the dais, silverware in hand, as fireworks lit up the gloomy sky: this was not how it was supposed to go for the Portland Timbers, with their febrile fans and frightful weather widely expected to deliver a decisive home-field advantage. Basking in the momentum shift from their stunning injury-time equalizer, we might have expected Portland to prevail. Perhaps – for the scriptwriters with a sense of romance and reward – on penalties, with the Timbers legend Diego Valeri delivering the coup de grace in his last game for the club. But Valeri and Felipe Mora – the scorer of that 94th-minute goal – saw their penalties saved by Sean Johnson in the shootout. New York dispatched the New England Revolution, the team with the best regular-season record in MLS, on penalties earlier in the playoffs, also after conceding a late leveller. “We’ve been in that position before, that’s what I told the boys, don’t put your heads down, there’s a lot of game left to be played,” Johnson said on ABC. “Embrace the moment.” Given that the home side had won eight of the previous 10 MLS Cups, and Portland – boisterous fans, artificial surface and all – boast an excellent record at Providence Park, this outcome was an upset, though the visitors were the more composed and coherent team in a game too lacking in clear chances to be a true classic. Still, the spectacle of Mora pouncing on a loose ball to sweep in the equaliser and cancel out Taty Castellanos’ soft 41st-minute header was immensely dramatic, even if there seemed to be a foul in the build-up. And NY were impressively obdurate in extra time. “I think we had full control of the game,” the NYCFC head coach, Ronny Deila, told ABC. “We were broken… but this bunch of players, they are winners, they are standing up for each other, they are fighting.” Rain mixed with tears on his face at the end, either from joy or the sudden realisation that he would now have to make good on his promise to strip off his clothes if his team won. Regardless of the standard of play or the identity of the winners, this was a dream match-up for MLS’ rulers: a showpiece in a city with a characterful stadium and arguably the most vibrant soccer culture in North America, with Portland facing a team from the US’s biggest media market that is also a symbol of the league’s growing international relevance and appeal to billionaire owners. Judging a club by how many of its fans will camp out for days in miserable conditions – not for a ticket but for a prime position in the stands – seems like a better gauge of authenticity than whether a team calls itself “FC” or “SC” in a rebranding exercise. Given all the praise earnt by the Timbers fans, it was a shame that one of them hurled an object that struck NYCFC’s Jesus Medina after the opening goal. “This is everything that you want a championship game to be, a city that’s basically been taken over with excitement for their club,” MLS commissioner Don Garber told Taylor Twellman on ABC, later describing the atmosphere as among the best in the world. Garber is entitled to feel upbeat. with new media deals to be negotiated, the US looking likely to qualify for the 2022 World Cup and joint-hosting the tournament four years later, the league is in a strong position. The most remarkable number of the season was not a scoreline but the $400m reportedly paid by a New York businessman in June for the worst team in the Western Conference, the lightly-supported Houston Dynamo (the deal also included the NWSL’s Dash). Given such inflation in values despite the struggles of a pandemic-stained 2020, it may not be long before the biggest MLS clubs are valued at $1bn. MLS expands to Charlotte next season and St Louis in 2023. And then, to Nevada? The normally-guarded Garber appears to think so. “Vegas is a front-runner,” he said on the broadcast, salivating at the thought of a stadium by the Strip, floodlights amid the neon lights. So, from the dampness, history and intensity of Portland on championship day, to visions of the desert and the challenge of creating a genuine and enduring MLS culture in a whimsical playground with a replica of the Eiffel Tower and an ersatz Venice. If you’re going to gamble, might as well do it in Vegas. This, though, was not a day for glitz, glamour or star power, as New York, now prioritizing solidity over celebrity, showed what can be achieved with shrewd signings, patience and a plan.Ronny Deila is Norwegian. He has been the manager at Strømsgodset, where he ended his playing career, then Celtic and Valerenga. He twice won the Scottish Premiership with Celtic. He burst into tears when NYCFC clinched victory. Sean Johnson, the goalkeeper and captain, playfully ran around with the trophy a bit before lifting it with his team. Like a lot of Cup competitions, this game was alternately infuriating and exhilarating. It started with too many fouls. Regulation time ended with too many complaints. But two industrious teams couldn’t be denied their goals, and the NYCFC celebrations are a worthy finale for the league’s comeback season after dealing, as we all have, with COVID. May the disease be kept at bay so that we can enjoy another one next year. Until then, have a great offseason. I hear there’s some league in England ... NYCFC dominated through much of the game. They were undone by a last-minute equalizer -- controversial in some eyes, but also a lapse by their otherwise excellent defense -- and regrouped to stop the Timbers’ momentum and get the better of Portland on penalties. Cruel finish for Diego Valeri and for all the fans in Portland aside from the long-ejected person who threw a beer that hit NYCFC’s Jesus Medina, but the Timbers squandered home-field advantage with a meandering attack that lacked urgency for most of the game. Should playoffs and penalties determine a league champion? Maybe, maybe not. But you can’t say NYCFC are undeserved winners. After a bit of underachievement in the club’s early years, a stout defense and smooth attack paved the way for the visitors to lift a well-earned trophy. No doubt from Alexander Callens, and Portland won’t get a chance to prolong the proceedings. Emphatic shot cuts it to 3-2. NYCFC shooting for the win ... The 19-year-old big signing slips his shot under Clark. 3-1 NYCFC, and Portland must score. Moralez sends Clark the wrong way to score. Moreno does the same, taking Johnson out of the picture. Clark is all smiles after stopping Morales. But Johnson emphatically denies Valeri, possibly at the end of his great career. The NYCFC keeper guesses correctly, leaps effectively and easily keeps out a shot from Mora. 1-0 NYCFC after one shot each. Castellanos converts. The Timbers Army chanted “Steve” for goalkeeper Steve Clark, but the Golden Boot winner just had too much power. 1-0 NYCFC. One thing the referee crew has gotten wrong. They’re wearing orange. So is NYCFC keeper Sean Johnson. Why not blue? Red? Black? (Clark is wearing yellow; Portland is green.) Doesn’t matter now. Off to the spot/mark we go. Using my system of rewarding the team that did the most attacking in extra time, Portland would be the winner. But it doesn’t work that way. Ouch: 116 min: NYCFC corner. Portland has not defended well on set pieces, but this one is punchless. 113 min: SAVES at each end. Clark’s is routine, though the shot from Tayvon Gray was well-struck. Johnson’s is not, as the NYCFC keeper had to be quick to his right to keep out Paredes, who took the pass from the influential Valeri. 111 min: To save time, I’m looking ahead to kicks from the mark, the referee’s way of saying “penalties.” 108 min: I should acknowledge the email from Gareth Rogers: “The ref swallowed his whistle. Clear foul.” I would acknowledge the remarkable attacking play on the field right now if there was any to acknowledge. 106 min: The second session of extra time is underway. NYCFC took advantage of the break to complain some more. To be sure, NYCFC had the better of play for about 80 minutes. And it wasn’t close. 105 min: Extra time so often disappoints, doesn’t it? We’ve had a couple of Timbers chances, at least. Last word on the non-call on the equalizer, I think: 100 min: And now Valeri has a chance to put Portland ahead, thanks to a ball dropped to him by Yimmy Chara at the top of the 18. He puts it high. 98 min: Valeri goes to work on the touchline. Cleared, but Portland gets another free kick, and Valeri will take it. The ball drops to the far post but isn’t turned on frame. 96 min: Neither team in control at the moment. From Twitter, from a high-up USL official who’s been in the game forever, regarding Clattenburg’s comments: Good clarification. But given the EPL’s constant bungling of VAR, isn’t that worse? 93 min: Paredes with a long shot for Portland, powerful but too close to Johnson, who holds it well. Mark Clattenburg, continuing to make people wonder if the real referee named Mark Clattenburg has been beamed to another planet and replaced by an alien who will one day rule the planet, thinks he saw a foul. But MLS, he says, tends to have fewer foul calls. This from a guy from the land where it’s not a foul unless someone needs X-rays. Extra time. Here we go ... I see no foul, and I have one of the lowest thresholds for a foul of any ref in Northern Virginia. Niezgoda had the initial shot on a scramble in the penalty area. It’s blocked, but unfortunately for NYCFC, it falls to Mora, who coolly finishes. NYCFC players, led by Chanot, are yelling at the referees. Yell all you want. Villarreal’s performance with the whistle has been outstanding, and we’re going to extra time. Would you believe it? 90 min +4: Portland goes direct out of necessity after NYCFC tries to deflate the ball. The Timbers win a corner. Goalkeeper Steve Clark races forward. The ball is cleared, and Clark plays the ball wide. Well done. 90 min +2: A chant of “NYC” can be heard in Providence Park. That’s shocking. Portland’s fans ramp up the noise after a few seconds of that. 90 min +1: Castellanos dives. Villarreal isn’t interested. Portland goes forward. NYCFC fouls. Medina hoofs the ball to the sky and gets a yellow card. The Timbers will surely think, “Great, but can we have another 30 seconds?” 90 min: We will play four more minutes, pending additional substitutions and dives. 89 min: Valeri’s appearance at least perks up the uncharacteristically subdued crowd. Portland earns a corner, and it’s cleared. On the counter, Medina goes 1-on-1 with Diego Chara. Chara wins. He’s arguably Portland’s best player today. 87 min: Villarreal ignores a frivolous NYCFC attempt to draw a foul at midfield. Portland’s possession continues. It appears Diego Valeri will indeed come on, but is it too late? At the risk of assuming too much, yes, yes it is. 83 min: It will be Polish striker Jaroslaw Niezgoda, not Valeri, in place of Dairon Asprilla. Another cross gets to Mora, and he makes good contact this time, though it’s deflected for a corner. The corner bounces out to Blanco, whose 25-yard scorcher is blocked by a teammate’s face. That kind of day. 82 min: CHANCE, the best for the Timbers by far. Yimmy Chara puts a free kick onto the penalty spot, where Felipe Mora is implausibly alone. He only makes slight contact, though, and Johnson covers up the ball. Questions for Portland coach Giovanni Savarese: 79 min: Castellanos shoots wide as NYCFC breaks the pressure, such as it is. The visitors’ Santiago Rodriguez gets a yellow card as he is substituted. Stopping to adjust your shin guards as you’re leaving the field is not a good way of saying, “No, I’m not delaying the game.” 78 min: I can’t make heads or tails of this, like the coins in my curling club that have “bear” and “queen,” but it’s apparently another way of saying Portland’s attack has been minimal. 76 min: A shot on goal! A shot on goal! Jose Carlos van Rankin is left alone and puts in a diagonal shot to the far post. Easy save for Johnson, but the 0 is wiped from the stat sheet. 75 min: Yimmy Chara, finally, gets a step after dispossessing an NYCFC midfielder. Maxime Chanot, who has been superb, intercedes, and a deflected shot lands in Sean Johnson’s arms. 74 min: The Timbers have a kickabout in their own half, as you’d expect from a team that’s up 2-0. What? They’re down 0-1? 72 min: Portland is stringing together more passes. But this possession goes nowhere, and the vaunted Timbers Army isn’t making much noise right now. 70 min: More crosses for the Timbers. Still nothing on target, but it’s mildly promising. The crowd grows restless over an NYCFC “injury” that takes a while to clean up. 68 min: Out of nothing, Portland gets a cross in front of Johnson, but the NYCFC defense expertly responds and doesn’t allow a shot. The Timbers have STILL put nothing on target. NYCFC has five shots on goal. 66 min: The action remains in Portland’s defensive third. Unless someone fancies an 80-yard shot beating Sean Johnson, that won’t do for the Timbers, who look as dreary as the persistent rain at the moment. 62 min: Portland subs: Santiago Moreno replaces Sebastian Blanco. Cristhian Paredes replaces George Fochive, who should have been playing on a yellow card for the last 50 minutes. Twitter’s gonna Twitter, and plenty of people are calling out the entire Portland fan base over the beer thrown from the stands, but 99.9999% of Timbers fans are heartbroken to see someone do that. 60 min: Free kick, NYCFC, near the sideline. The first effort is cleared. The second effort ends with NYCFC foul, emphatically called by referee Armando Villarreal. For all our complaining about the lack of cards in the first half (“murder” is the runaway winner on the poll asking where the threshold would be set), Villarreal has done well here. Portland prepping some subs. 58 min: Clark again is called into action with a good save to keep it 1-0. Portland goes the other way to earn a corner. The Timbers desperately need to make something happen. 56 min: Rodriguez has a solid shot from 22, but Portland keeper Steve Clark smothers it comfortably. Timbers fans must be asking why he couldn’t have done that on the NYCFC goal. 53 min: A shout for a penalty on a potential NYCFC handball in the 18 off a Portland corner. Play continues, so we haven’t seen the replay yet. Now we see it -- no. Ball is drilled off the defender’s thigh and up into his arm. Good no-call. The coaches I ejected from an Under-14 youth game in the spring may disagree, but youth soccer coaches are not good authorities on the Laws of the Game. 52 min: More on our projectile-thrower: Through a wet camera lens, we see that Portland has earned a free kick to the side of the 18 -- this time, a legitimate foul. Have to say that the early rash of unkind challenges has mercifully ceased. 49 min: Castellanos earns a free kick from 22 yards out as some of a Portland defender’s leg hairs brush against his. Moralez clangs it off the bar. The belief is that Clark got a hand to it, and NYCFC has a corner kick that somehow eludes two onrushing attackers. More calamitous defending from the Timbers. 47 min: Updates from ESPN sideline reporter Sam Borden -- Moralez is fine, Medina is fine, and the lead perpetrator in the beer-throwing has been ejected. Seems like there was more than one projectile, though. But maybe he grabbed his neighbor’s beverage as well. 46 min: ESPN returns from halftime commercials just a second or two before kickoff. Sam Moses writes: “You’re doing a great job. This email sent from the jungle in Sumatra 4 a.m., by a near-Portland resident, following the game on both livestream and your comments. “P.S. I covered the first “Soccer Bowl” for Sports Illustrated, 1975, Tampa Bay Rowdies beat the Timbers. I was a rookie at SI, knew nothing about soccer, got the assignment because no one on the staff wanted it.” First off, thanks, and may the jungle treat you well. Those of us of a certain age can relate to covering soccer because no one else would. Several of us old-ish-timers covered soccer in addition to our other duties because we felt our news organizations should be doing so, even if it meant we’d do it in our spare time. The Zoomers tend to roll their eyes when you tell them that, though. MLS commissioner Don Garber confirms that the front-runner to be the 30th team in the league is Las Vegas. That should be enough to split the league in two tiers with promotion/relegation, right? **ducks** The Timbers will want to shred the script from the first act here, with NYCFC on the front foot most of the half, punctuated by a clinic in poor defending near the end and a disgusting act by one or more projectile-throwing fans who are hopefully facing a lengthy ban from MLS stadia. Portland has yet to manage a shot on goal. As Real Salt Lake showed, you can advance in the playoffs without doing so, but not if you concede. 45 min: Neither team has gained the initiative since the goal. As I type that, Blanco rips a shot from 25 yards that whizzes past the post, a couple of feet from an equalizer. If you’re a youth coach who wants to show your players how not to play defense or goalkeeper, here’s the NYCFC goal: The goal is from a free kick from Moralez, who’s gutting it out on a bad leg. Castellanos has too much space, and goalkeeper Steve Clark offers too little resistance. Meanwhile, a replay shows NYCFC’s Medina was hit by a projectile from the stands. Not sure it was quite as bad as he made it look, but it’s inexcusable at any rate. A neat header squibbles it way into the net, but now we might have an incident from the stands. 39 min: Good play from Portland at both ends, nearly connecting on a dangerous pass near the penalty spot, followed by Diego Chara neatly snuffing out the NYCFC counter. 38 min: Santiago Rodriguez crosses for his NYCFC teammates but finds the wrong side of the top netting. Damien Neva writes: “Hello! Tuning in from Brooklyn in support of Portland (I’m a longtime Chelsea fan). That playing surface looks like carpeting, but a cursory search tells me it’s something called FieldTurf, which is manufactured, not grown. For a club whose very identity is rooted in forestry, that’s some tension.” True, though this turf has a reputation for being better than most. 35 min: Blanco is off to the races against two NYCFC players, then cuts it back. But the bigger story is Moralez, who is in serious anguish right now. 33 min: ESPN’s crew tells us Moralez is hobbling. That’s the last thing NYCFC needs right now. But the team in blue continues to maintain possession. 31 min: NYCFC ramps up the pressure, with Portland unable to clear. Moralez gets two chances to put in a dangerous cross, but Castellanos can’t quite get his foot to the second. 29 min: More Portland possession, and Sean Johnson is grateful to grab a cross from Blanco. I’m soliciting opinions on the threshold for a yellow card: 24 min: Give no cards, and you end up with players fighting. That’s why there’s a code in hockey. Portland’s Larrys Mabiala gives a hockey-style check to NYCFC’s scoring king Castellanos. Players complain and shove. Still no card. Mark Clattenburg says that by the Laws of the Game, Villarreal could have given four yellow cards by now, but he doesn’t need it. Yeah, but the rest of us do. Portland gets a chance, as Felipe Mora’s shot is blocked. The ensuing corner comes to nothing. NYCFC breaks the other way. Actual soccer being played. 22 min: Portland wins possession at midfield and avoids being fouled. They turn it over anyway, and we’re back where we’ve been -- NYCFC keeping possession 20-40 yards from the Portland goal. 19 min: The action goes again toward the Portland end, with Medina earning a couple of touches within the 18. Portland breaks the other way and ... it’s another bit of brutality, this time by NYCFC’s James Sands. “Smart tactical foul by James Sands,” says Taylor Twellman. 16 min: That’s more like it for Portland. Yimmi Chara, one of two Charas in the Timbers XI, breaks free in the penalty area and sets up Sebastian Blanco, who scuffs his shot. The Timbers extend the possession with another half-chance. 13 min: Portland’s George Fochive gets away with his second card-worthy offense at midfield. The Timbers thus far have done nothing else. 11 min: NYCFC’s Maxi Moralez flings himself face-first to the Portland turf, just inside the penalty area. Villarreal is smarter than that. This game needs a serious boost. 9 min: English referee Mark Clattenburg on ref Armando Villarreal: “He certainly doesn’t want to give an early yellow card and set a precedent.” Based on the first two fouls in this game, Clattenburg and Villarreal should reconsider. Corner kick to NYCFC. 6 min: Medina inflicts a kick to the leg of Portland’s Asprilla. There’s a UFC PPV tonight if you’re into that. 4 min: FINALLY, someone at ESPN flips the switch on the app, and I can watch. My five-minute trial of UniMas was about to end. No other shots have been noted in the live stats. Michael Vraney writes: “Great to see you back on the soccer beat at the Guardian… love these fans, who would have ever believed in this type of support back when MLS started… BTW, I’ve got Timbers winning 2-0, hoping for a entertaining game!” You and me both. 1 min: Maxi Moralez shoots for NYCFC. It’s saved. I’m getting this from the MLS site because ESPN’s app, which is supposed to show ABC Sports content, is still not showing this game. My apologies for the technical difficulties that have made it impossible for me to catch the kickoff. How’s it going? If you’ve just joined us, here’s a look at MLS Cup so far ... The game itself is scheduled to start at 3:33 p.m. ET. More time to go to the fridge ... Meanwhile, those who argue for promotion/relegation in US Soccer are complaining on Twitter that they’re being misrepresented. This is the same movement that has long insisted that people who point to the legitimate business reasons why it hasn’t happened are being paid under the table by a cabal of MLS, former US Soccer president Sunil Gulati and the ghost of Chuck Blazer, the Falstaffian figure who turned FIFA/CONCACAF whistleblower under duress. That’s Twitter for you. If you’d like to chat with me during the game, tweet @duresport -- you know what, just email me. We can discuss different formats for MLS, including a potential opening for promotion/relegation and more immediately a change to the playoff structure, after we discuss the rules in basketball that allow 30 seconds of action to take place over eight minutes. Yes, we’re now running long into the MLS broadcast window. Thanks, UConn, for missing all those free throws. For TV viewers in the US: The good news is that Connecticut’s dominant women’s basketball team, often an annoyance for other teams who think it’d be nice if someone else won for a change, has pulled away from UCLA, which means the game preceding our broadcast is likely to end on time. And I’ve spoken too soon, as UCLA hits a 3-pointer to cut the lead to nine, just enough to make the Bruins feel justified in taking timeouts to prolong the last minute for an hour or so. But the other good news is that US sports broadcasts often start long before the game does, so kickoff will be sometime between 3:15 ET and our eventual rule by robots from Proxima Centauri. The Portland weather report calls for a 100% chance of Portland. That’s wind and rain: How NYCFC got here: The glamour of a Manchester City/New York Yankees offshoot that brings in Patrick Vieira to coach David Villa, Andrea Pirlo and Frank Lampard has faded. In its place is a pretty good team. Like other successful MLS teams of recent years, following the path set by Atlanta United, the roster is heavy on good players from South America and unheralded European countries rather than famous players from England and Italy. The team in Man City light blue beat Atlanta 2-0 in the first round, shocked New England on kicks from the mark in the quarterfinals after a 2-2 draw, then scrapped their way past what was left of the Philadelphia Union after COVID protocols struck in the semifinals. Neutrals will bemoan the fate of the Revolution and Union, with good reason, but with Golden Boot winner Taty Castellanos (19 goals) up front, this is not an unworthy title contender. Argentine playmaker Maxi Moralez had 11 assists, and occasional US international Sean Johnson is an adept goalkeeper. How Portland got here: The Timbers still have some potent players from their 2015 Cup-winning run. Argentine midfielder Diego Valeri isn’t in the same form from his 2017 MVP campaign, but to say he has been successful on this stage would be an understatement. Forward Dairon Asprilla scored a career-high 10 goals, though he missed the semifinal against Real Salt Lake after incurring a last-minute red card against Colorado. Felipe Mora led the team with 11 goals. Steve Clark was claimed off waivers (for non-US audiences: other teams said, “Nah, we don’t want him”) in 2018 and has been a reliable goalkeeper at age 35. Portland beat Minnesota 3-1 in the first playoff round, upset the top-seeded Colorado Rapids in the quarterfinals and cruised to a win over Real Salt Lake, the seventh and final seed in the West and the architects of an unlikely run to that stage, in a 2-0 decision to complete the trip to a final in their home stadium. Welcome everyone. We’ve had a thrilling MLS season marked by the runaway dominance of Bruce Arena’s New England Revolution in the East and an entertaining race between the Colorado Rapids, Seattle Sounders and Sporting KC. So, naturally, we’re about to watch a league championship between NYCFC and the Portland Timbers. Maybe not the fairest way to determine a league champion, but it’s undeniably exciting. Beau will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s Patrice Worthy’s look at the Timbers’ troubling history with race.If you favour a rock’n’roll-inspired outfit, Monsoon’s Theodora print blouse makes the perfect highlight under a black suit. Or add a touch of Chrissie Hynde edge with Alexachung’s gold trousers (7, below), styled with a tuxedo jacket. For disco divas, mini dresses are back with a bang. All Saints’ Lilliana dress (1, below) and Rixo’s mini dress (£7 per day to hire, mywardrobehq.com) are scene stealers. While Artclub’s one shoulder silver top (£275, net-a-porter.com) is pure Diana Ross at Studio 54. Search resale websites for party showpiece bargains. Current top buys include a gold Burberry dress (£55, marketplace.asos.com) and a metallic pleated skirt (£14, depop.com). Vestiairecollective.com lists a slew of preloved designer shoes, including silver Prada platform sandals, £106, and Isabel Marant glitter courts, £50. There are endless rental options when it comes to partywear. For example, hurrcollective.com offers a metallic leopard dress by BA&amp;SH at £55, and a silver paillette dress by Ilta at £40, both for a four-day hire. Alternatively, look for pieces you can wear year long with some clever styling. Baukjen’s silky gold leopard-print wrap dress (£89) can be styled over a roll neck with boots for a cold January day. On the recent press tour for House of Gucci, Lady Gaga rocked several metallic looks, including a silver iridescent animal-print coat dress and silver heels. But you don’t have to go full Gaga. Shiny accessories, like the vegan-friendly Electra ankle boots (3, below) by beyondskin.com, will bring the party to your outfit. Add a grunge twist to a favourite LBD with Zara’s gold stomper boots (8). Or dress up a trusty black dress with a metallic bag like Wandler’s mini bag (2, above). Finish your look with a pair of vintage statement earrings, visit susancaplan.co.uk for retro bling worthy of Alexis Colby. 1. Lilliana kettu dress, £179, allsaints.com 2. Gold dress, £360, queensofarchive.com 3. Electra gold faux leather, £295, beyond-skin.com 4. Theodora metallic blouse, £60, monsoon.co.uk 5. Earrings, £60, relliklondon.co.uk 6. Silver dress, £205, ganni.com 7. Trousers, £191, Alexachung at mytheresa.com 8. Ankle boot, £49.99, zara.com 9. Luna mini bag by Wandler, rent from £55, hurrcollective.com 10. Silver slingback, £228, reformation.comAustralia has said it will shorten the wait time for people to receive Covid-19 booster vaccines. Health minister, Greg Hunt, said the time interval will be shortened to five months after the second dose. Another 633 Omicron cases have been found in the UK, the biggest daily increase since the Covid-19 variant was detected last month. The latest figure, a 50% day-on-day increase, brings the total number of confirmed Omicron cases to 1,898 across the country, the UK health security agency said. Brazil’s supreme court justice, Luis Roberto Barroso, has ruled the country must demand proof of vaccination for visitors seeking to enter the country. The Omicron variant could cause between 25,000 and 75,000 deaths in England over the next five months if no additional measures are taken beyond Plan B, according to scientists advising the government. A booster dose means the risk of symptomatic infection with the Omicron variant is “significantly reduced”, according to health officials who have urged all those eligible to make sure they get their third jab. Tens of thousands gathered in Austria’s capital Vienna to protest mandatory Covid vaccines and home confinement orders for those who have not yet received the jabs. Taiwan’s government said on Saturday that it had detected the island’s first cases of the Omicron variant, found in three people who had arrived from abroad. Mexico’s health ministry reported 235 more deaths from Covid-19, bringing the country’s official toll since the pandemic began to 296,620. The health ministry has previously said the real number is likely significantly higher, Reuters reports. Boris Johnson is facing further questions over whether he breached Covid laws after pictures emerged of him hosting a Christmas quiz in Downing Street while London was under tier 2 restrictions. The prime minister was pictured on a screen reading out questions while staff were sat behind computers and conferred on the answers, the Mirror reported. London was then under restrictions banning any social mixing between households. Official guidance also stated: “You must not have a work Christmas lunch or party, where that is a primarily social activity and is not otherwise permitted by the rules in your tier.” Staff working for the Work and Pensions Secretary (DWP) in England drank alcohol and ate takeaways “late into the evening” on a number of occasions while coronavirus restrictions were in place, the department confirmed. It comes after the Sunday Mirror reported that political staff and officials frequently drank after work until the early hours of the morning, and ordered food to Therese Coffey’s office at the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). The newspaper said some of these evenings took place while hospitality and office parties were banned under Covid regulations. The DWP has confirmed there were times when alcohol was consumed in a work space outside the Cabinet minister’s Whitehall office but stressed it took place while work was continuing past normal employment hours. A source told the PA news agency the desks in the office are socially distanced and there was “no party atmosphere going on”. A DWP spokesman said: “Throughout the pandemic, DWP officials have followed Government guidance while continuing to deliver vital services for millions of people. “Staff worked from home where possible but a core team working directly to the Secretary of State regularly worked from the office, in accordance with the Covid-19 rules as they evolved. “The team regularly worked late into the evening and on a number of occasions they ate takeaway food and drank some alcohol. No karaoke took place.” Asked about the Sunday Mirror’s suggestion that Coffey gave presents to staff while they stayed late one night over last year’s festive period, the spokesman replied: “On one occasion close to Christmas, the Secretary of State gave gifts to her core team, as she does every year.” The Treasury has confirmed “impromptu drinks” occurred when England was locked down. People in the UK should be able to get their Covid-19 jabs while doing their Christmas shopping, Labour said, as the opposition party calls for a “national effort” to increase the rate of booster shots. With recent research from UK scientists finding that booster shots are likely to be effective against the Omicron variant, Labour is urging ministers to open more vaccinations sites and to open up booking slots to all double-jabbed adults. Pop-up vaccination centres in supermarkets and shopping centres should be set up so people can get their third shot while on the high street doing their Christmas shopping, the party has suggested. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, is pressing the government to “pull out all the stops” to meet the prime minister’s target of having offered a booster jab to all those aged over 18 by the end of January, PA reports. Brazil has registered 53 new Covid-19 deaths, the country’s health ministry said on Saturday, bringing fatalities in the country to a total of 616,744. The country had 3,355 new cases of coronavirus over the last 24 hours, reaching a total of 22.19 million, Reuters reports. Australia has said it will shorten the wait time for people to receive Covid-19 booster vaccines following a rise in cases of the Omicron variant. It had previously said it would offer a booster to everyone over-18 and who had their second dose of the vaccine six months prior, Reuters reports. But with rising cases of the Omicron variant, Australia’s health minister, Greg Hunt, said the time interval will be shortened to five months after the second dose. “A booster dose, five or more months after the second dose, will make sure that the protection from the primary course is even stronger and longer lasting and should help prevent spread of the virus,” Hunt said in a statement. Brazil’s supreme court justice, Luis Roberto Barroso, has ruled the country must demand proof of vaccination for visitors seeking to enter the country. President Jair Bolsonaro has repeatedly denied requests of state health regulator Anvisa to demand vaccination proof from visitors, Reuters reports. But Barroso said in his decision that Brazil needs to avoid supporting what he called “anti-vaccine tourism.” The justice said the requirement for proof of vaccination can be waived only when the traveller comes from a country where no vaccines are available or the individual was prevented from vaccination due to health reasons. The government has delayed for a week a regulation that would require non-vaccinated visitors to quarantine for five days due to a cyberattack on the health ministry on Friday. You can follow the latest Covid developments in Australia in our dedicated blog: Israeli researchers said they found that a three-jab course of the Pfizer/BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine provided significant protection against the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The findings were similar to those presented by BioNTech and Pfizer earlier in the week, which were an early signal that booster shots could be key to protect against infection from the newly identified variant. The study compared the blood of 20 people who had received two vaccine doses five to six months earlier with the same number of individuals who had received a booster a month before. “People who received the second dose five or six months ago do not have any neutralisation ability against the Omicron. While they do have some against the Delta (strain),” Gili Regev-Yochay, director of the Infectious Diseases Unit at Sheba, told reporters. The first six cases of the Omicron variant of coronavirus have been detected in Turkey, health minister Fahrettin Koca was reported as saying on Saturday by state broadcaster TRT Haber. Five of the cases were in the western city of Izmir and one in Istanbul, but none of those affected needed hospital treatment, state-owned Anadolu news agency reported. Three West Indies cricketers and a member of the team management have tested positive for Covid-19 after they arrived in Pakistan for the upcoming tour. There was confusion on Saturday about which age groups in England are now eligible to book a booster jab with the NHS, after an apparent glitch allowed younger people to book before they were expected to qualify. People aged 30 and over in England were expected to be able to book a Covid-19 booster from Monday as long as it has been three months since their second vaccine dose, but many 30-somethings reported on social media that they had been able to book their appointments already. The NHS website still said on Saturday evening that “the NHS is working on plans to offer a booster dose to everyone aged 18 to 39 years old”, and that people should note that this service is not yet available to book via their portal. “Please wait to be contacted by the NHS,” a disclaimer on the website added. Almost twice the number of coronavirus patients could be admitted to hospital in England compared with last year due to the Omicron variant, new modelling suggests. Experts from the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) have calculated figures which propose that a large wave of infections could occur over the next few months if tougher Covid measures are not brought in, PA reports. The study projects a median peak of 7,190 daily hospital admissions in England in the worst case scenario – which could see the variant evading vaccines at a high rate as well as low effectiveness against the variant from boosters. The most optimistic scenario (low rate of the variant evading vaccines, high effectiveness of boosters) “is projected to lead to peak daily hospital admissions around 60% as high as the peak in January 2021 in England”. This would mean a median peak of 2,410 daily admissions compared with 3,800 daily admissions in January this year, the study said. France has also reported 120,383 coronavirus deaths since the start of the pandemic, Reuters reports. France has reported 53,720 new coronavirus cases. The country has had more than 8.1 million cases overall. Here is more on the protests in Vienna against mandatory vaccines and confinement orders for people who are unvaccinated. Sir Jeremy Farrar, a former UK government adviser, has tweeted the following: More than half of Angola’s doctors will indefinitely continue a national strike over pay and conditions as the coronavirus pandemic strains the African nation’s depleted public health services. Angola resorted to asking China and Cuba for help to fight the first Covid-19 wave last year with more than 250 Cuban doctors arriving, AFP reports. According to 2020 figures, Angola has 5,200 doctors. The country’s national doctors’ trade union on Friday said 3,000 of its members would “continue the national doctors’ strike in all public health units” after the industrial action began at the start of the week. Tens of thousands gathered in Austria’s capital Vienna to protest mandatory Covid vaccines and home confinement orders for those who have not yet received the jabs. Police said an estimated 44,000 people attended the demonstration, the latest in a string of huge weekend protests since Austria last month became the first EU country to say it would make Covid vaccinations mandatory. A partial confinement since last month ends on Sunday for the vaccinated, but those who have not received the required doses will have to remain at home, AFP reports. The UK recorded 54,073 cases in the latest 24-hour period, bringing the total to 10,771,444. There were also 132 deaths recorded, bringing the total to 146,387. More data from Italy. Patients in hospital with Covid – not including those in intensive care – stood at 6,539 on Saturday, up from 6,483 a day earlier. There were 76 new admissions to intensive care units, the same as the previous day, Reuters reports. The total number of intensive care patients edged up to 818 from 816 on Friday, which compares with 708 a week earlier. Some 565,077 tests were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 716,287, the health ministry said. Dozens of US Navy medics have deployed to New Mexico to treat a Delta variant-fueled surge in Covid-19 patients as part of a military operation to treat virus hotspots across western and midwest states. New Mexico is suffering one of the highest levels of new coronavirus infections in the country, its hospitals reaching record capacity levels. Nearly 50 Navy medics are treating Covid patients at the San Juan Regional Medical Center in Farmington, northwest New Mexico, where critical care patient numbers have been over 200% of capacity for weeks, Reuters reports. The speed at which scientists worked to develop the first Covid jabs was unprecedented. Just nine months after the UK went into lockdown, 90-year-old Margaret Keenan officially became the first person in the world outside a trial to receive the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. But the virus is mutating, and the emergence of the Omicron variant last month is already focusing attention on the next generation of jabs. Italy reported 96 coronavirus-related deaths on Saturday, the health ministry said. The daily tally of new infections rose by 21,042, Reuters reports. Italy has registered 134,765 deaths linked to Covid-19 since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth highest in the world. The country has reported 5.2m cases to date. Another 633 Omicron cases have been found in the UK, the biggest daily increase since the Covid-19 variant was detected last month. The latest figure, a 50% day-on-day increase, brings the total number of confirmed Omicron cases to 1,898 across the country, the UK health security agency said. In England, another 618 confirmed cases of the variant were reported, with 1,757 in total. Scotland reported 11 more cases, with 121 now confirmed. In Wales, two additional cases were reported, bringing the total to 15. A further two were confirmed in Northern Ireland, bringing the total to five. New coronavirus restrictions could be introduced in Scotland next week, the deputy first minster, John Swinney, has said. PA reports that Swinney said ministers are spending the weekend “wrestling with the challenge of what are the right rules to have in place”. But he said he does not think that Scots will face a restricted Christmas. Asked on BBC Breakfast if new Covid measures would be put in place next week, Swinney said: I can’t say definitively that will be the case, but that’s certainly been looked at over this weekend. And we have to judge what’s the best set of measures that we can take to try to interrupt the circulation of the virus. We can’t have it moving at the pace its moving at just now because the danger is that will overwhelm our public and private services. Nicola Sturgeon is due to give a statement in the Scottish parliament on Tuesday. On Friday, she told a televised press conference that Scotland faced a “tsunami” of Omicron cases. Swinney’s comments come as the latest statistics show 11 more Omicron cases have been confirmed in Scotland, taking the total to 121. There were 4,087 coronavirus cases in total reported in the last 24 hours, with 12 deaths. Asked if Scotland faced a restricted Christmas due to new Covid measures, Swinney said: I don’t think so and I hope not. And we’re working very hard just now to make sure that does not become the case. Meanwhile, a hospital ward in Inverness has been closed to new admissions due to a Covid-19 outbreak. NHS Highland said that Ward 7a at Raigmore Hospital is closed to new admissions and visiting following the detection of a small number of cases of coronavirus. Tests are establishing whether any of the cases are of the Omicron variant and the results are expected next week. The projected number of deaths and hospital admissions caused by Omicron [see 12.12pm.] in England could be “substantially” overestimated if the new variant causes less severe disease than Delta, according to an expert. Prof Paul Hunter, a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia, said any model was “only as good as its assumptions”, adding that one key assumption in this model is that severity of disease outcomes for Omicron is the same as for Delta. He said: Although we will not know for certain for a few weeks indications from South Africa do suggest that Omicron does cause less severe disease than Delta. There is also early as yet not peer reviewed data suggesting that although Omicron mutations are enough to escape antibody, T-cell immunity would be less compromised. It is thought that T-cell immunity is more important for reducing risk from severe disease than it is for reducing the milder nose and throat infections. If Omicron is indeed associated with less severe disease as is, in my view, likely to be the case then these models would overestimate hospital admissions and deaths, possibly substantially. Prof Hunter said he suspects these models “overstate” risk of hospital admissions and deaths and the “worst case” scenarios are “unlikely to be seen”. He added: As better data becomes available in coming weeks we can expect these models to be refined. Authorities in France want to accelerate vaccinations against the coronavirus before Christmas as infections surge and more people with Covid seek medical attention, AP reports. “People can celebrate Christmas normally, but we must respect the rules ... and get vaccinated,” the French prime minister, Jean Castex, told public radio outlet France Blue during an interview on Friday. France has registered a daily average of more than 44,000 new cases over the past week, a 36% increase from the previous week, according to the latest government figures. Weekly hospitalisations of people with Covid went up 1,120, a 41% rise. The government on Monday closed nightclubs until 6 January and tightened social distancing measures in closed spaces and outdoors. Castex said the government is not considering another lockdown that would limit or prohibit public events and social gatherings. With over 48 million of France’s 67 million people fully vaccinated and tens of thousands signing up for either their first shots or booster doses, the country could make it through the holiday season without additional restrictions on public life, the prime minister said. Health workers in France were administering 700,000 vaccine doses a day, Castex said, adding that 90% of French residents had had at least one vaccine dose. “It’s an excellent figure,” he said. The government is discussing whether to have France join other countries that have authorised vaccines for all children aged 5-11. Children under the age of 12 who are considered at risk of complications from Covid will be eligible starting 15 December. Castex, 56, tested positive for the coronavirus on 22 November. His office said at the time that he had contracted the virus from his 11-year-old daughter. He was fully vaccinated, but his daughter was too young to get jabbed. Pointing to himself as an example, the prime minister said: “So yes, vaccinating children is necessary.” Care home residents in England will be allowed only three visitors and one essential care worker under updated UK government guidance announced as part of new measures to protect the sector from the spread of the Omicron variant. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said the move was “in order to balance the current Covid-19 risk and the need to keep people safe in line with clinical advice”. It is understood the guidance will come into force from Wednesday. Fully vaccinated residents visiting family and friends outside the care home will be asked to take a lateral flow test on alternate days for two weeks after each outing, while those not vaccinated will have to isolate after an outside visit. Staff testing will be increased from two lateral flow tests a week to three, alongside a weekly PCR test. The chair of the National Care Association has said new rules on care homes have “almost” taken people back to the restrictions that were in place a year ago. Nadra Ahmed said she was hoping to get clarity on several details on the new guidance, including if people could change the nominated three people to visit someone in a care home. The full story is here: Care home residents in England to be allowed only three visitors at Christmas The Omicron variant could cause between 25,000 and 75,000 deaths in England over the next five months if no additional measures are taken beyond Plan B, according to scientists advising the government. New modelling from the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, who also sit on the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (SPI-M) or the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), used experimental data to look at how Omicron may transmit as the country heads into 2022. Even under the most optimistic scenario (low immune escape of Omicron from vaccines and high effectiveness of booster jabs), a wave of infection is projected which could lead to a peak of more than 2,000 daily hospital admissions, with 175,000 hospital admissions and 24,700 deaths between 1 December this year and 30 April 2022. This is if no additional control measures are implemented over and above the current Plan B introduced by the government in England. The team said mask-wearing, working from home and booster jabs may not be enough, and predict a peak of daily hospital admissions of 2,400 in January. In this scenario, bringing in control measures early in 2022 – such as restrictions on indoor hospitality, the closure of some entertainment venues and restrictions on how many people can gather in one place – would be sufficient to substantially control the wave, reducing hospital admissions by 53,000 and deaths by 7,600. The most pessimistic scenario looked at by the modellers (high immune escape from vaccines and lower effectiveness of boosters) projects a wave of infection that is likely to lead to a peak in hospital admissions about twice as high as the peak seen in January 2021, if no additional control measures are taken. This could cause 492,000 hospital admissions and 74,800 deaths, according to the study, which has not yet been peer-reviewed. In this scenario, the team estimates that stronger measures may be required to keep the peak number of hospital admissions below the January 2021 peak. The scientists assumed Omicron causes the same severity of illness as Delta but did not look at the impact of measures such as mass population testing to control its spread. The paper reads: These results suggest that Omicron has the potential to cause substantial surges in cases, hospital admissions and deaths in populations with high levels of immunity, including England. The reintroduction of additional non-pharmaceutical interventions may be required to prevent hospital admissions exceeding the levels seen in England during the previous peak in winter 2020-2021. Dr Rosanna Barnard, who co-led the research, said that while there remained a lot of uncertainty over Omicron, “these early projections help guide our understanding about potential futures in a rapidly evolving situation”. She said: In our most optimistic scenario, the impact of Omicron in the early part of 2022 would be reduced with mild control measures such as working from home. However, our most pessimistic scenario suggests that we may have to endure more stringent restrictions to ensure the NHS is not overwhelmed Mask-wearing, social distancing and booster jabs are vital, but may not be enough. Nobody wants to endure another lockdown but last-resort measures may be required to protect health services if Omicron has a significant level of immune escape or otherwise increased transmissibility compared to Delta. It is crucial for decision-makers to consider the wider societal impact of these measures, not just the epidemiology. Earlier, we reported that the Treasury has defended an “impromptu” drinks party after Rishi Sunak’s autumn spending review during lockdown. A spokesperson insisted it was a “small number” of staff who celebrated around their desks, despite reports put the number closer to two dozen civil servants at the event. A team of officials working on the chancellor’s spending review announcement stayed after hours for the party on 25 November 2020, the Times reported (paywall). Government sources said the drinks were not planned but the civil servants involved bought beer and wine from a nearby supermarket. A Treasury spokesperson told the Guardian: A number of HMT staff came into the office to work on the spending review 2020. We have been made aware that a small number of staff had impromptu drinks around their desks after the event. The Treasury did not organise an in-person departmental party last Christmas. Here is my colleague Tom Ambrose’s story: Treasury defends ‘impromptu’ drinks party after Sunak’s autumn budget Labour has called on the UK government to give a “Christmas vaccine guarantee” to the hundreds of thousands of eligible children in England who have been unable to receive a Covid jab. With recent figures showing that just 44% of children in the 12-15 age group had been vaccinated on 8 December, Bridget Phillipson, the shadow education secretary, said the government needed to make a bigger push to vaccinate the remainder before they returned to school in the new year. “As Omicron cases in the UK are rising, it’s essential that ministers use the Christmas holidays to get the vaccine out to children, preventing continued chaos next term,” Phillipson said. “Labour has been calling on ministers to use pop-up and walk-in clinics, and bring back volunteers and retired clinicians to increase vaccine rollout, but 13 weeks after the jab was approved [by the chief medical officers] the Conservatives have failed to deliver. “With hundreds of thousands of children out of school each week this term, the government must urgently get a grip and stop neglecting children’s education.” The government had initially aimed to offer vaccinations to all 12- to 15-year-olds by the October half-term break. But the most recent figures suggest it will struggle to vaccinate half by the end of term next week. Read the full story here: Labour demands ‘Christmas vaccine guarantee’ for pupils in England Mauritius has recorded its first two infections of the Omicron variant, with a dozen more contact cases feared, AFP reports. The health minister, Kailesh Jagutpal, told a press conference on Friday the pair were asymptomatic and had tested negative the day before. “They have already gone home,” he said. He added that contact tracing for the two people had been carried out, revealing 12 positive cases with a missing S gene – a telltale sign of Omicron. Health authorities were currently analysing the samples to determine if they are in fact Omicron. One of the two Omicron cases was detected in a man who flew home to the island from South Africa on 27 November 27. The second case was recorded in a woman in the island’s south whose husband had returned from South Africa on 18 November. Mauritius fully opened its doors to international visitors at the start of October, hoping to rebuild its vital tourism industry after long months of isolation because of the pandemic. But it was forced to reimpose restrictions last month as Delta variant cases surged. According to latest figures reported to the World Health Organization, Mauritius has had 62,652 Covid cases and 680 deaths. More than 900,000 people have been fully vaccinated, representing 73.5% of the population, government figures show. What’s the truth about lockdown-busting parties at No 10? Don’t ask Shagatha Christie, writes Marina Hyde in her column this week. Here are some extracts: There was simply no other place a Johnson government would ever end up but mired in rampant lies, chaos, negligence, financial sponging and the live evisceration of public service. To the Conservatives and media outriders somehow only now discovering this about their guy, I think we have to say: you ordered this. Now eat it. Regrettably, though, space constraints must end our recap of the week here. But on it all goes, as Omicron closes in. We’ll play out with a reminder that in a pandemic that has so far killed 146,000 of the Britons who these people are supposed to be in politics to serve, the absolutely vital public health message has now TWICE been most fatally undermined by people who worked at the very heart of No 10 with Boris Johnson. That is absolutely a disgrace, and absolutely not a coincidence. Read the full column here: I have updated my entry for 8.23am to add details of where the arrivals who tested positive for Omicron in Taiwan had travelled from. You may have to refresh the page in order to see the updated post. A year ago humanity embarked on a project to vaccinate every person against Covid-19. But in recent months a shadow vaccination campaign has also been taking place. From giraffes to snow leopards, gorillas to sea lions, zoos around the world have been inoculating their animals with an experimental Covid vaccine as an insurance policy against what they fear could be a similarly fatal illness for certain mammals. Meanwhile, veterinary scientists have been scrambling to understand the scale of Covid-19 infection in our furry household companions, and what the consequences could be for their health – and our own. Last week two hippos at Antwerp zoo in Belgium became the latest in a coterie of creatures to contract Covid from humans. Fortunately, Imani and Hermien had no symptoms apart from runny noses, but other animals haven’t been so fortunate. In November three snow leopards died from Covid-related complications at a children’s zoo in Nebraska. Other zoos have reported infections in gorillas, lions, tigers and cougars. Although Sars-CoV-2 is thought to have originated in an animal, most likely a bat, until recently most of the scientific focus has, understandably, been on human cases of disease. Yet ever since the early days of the pandemic, scientists have worried about the possibility of other animal infections. “We’ve always recognised that coronaviruses have this tremendous capacity to jump species. So it was always predicted that there would be a variety of domestic animals, livestock and potentially wildlife that could be infected,” said Margaret Hosie, a professor of comparative virology at the University of Glasgow’s Centre for Virus Research. If other animals can become infected and transmit the virus, this could put pressure on it to adapt and acquire new mutations, raising the prospect of new variants that could be transmitted back to people. “You could be concentrating on eradicating the virus in humans, but meanwhile the virus could be mutating away quietly in an animal species, and getting hotter and hotter,” Hosie said. Read the full story here: From hippos to hamsters: how Covid is affecting creatures great and small Where did Omicron come from? By all accounts it is a weird variant. Though highly mutated, it descended not from one of the other variants of concern, such as Alpha, Beta or Delta, but from coronavirus that was circulating maybe 18 months ago. So where has it been all this time? And why is it only wreaking havoc now? Researchers are exploring a number of hunches. One is that Omicron arose in a remote region of southern Africa but failed to spread until now. Another is that it evolved in infected animals, such as rats, and then crossed back into humans. But a third explanation is gaining ground as more data come to light, that Omicron arose in a person with a weakened immune system: someone having cancer treatment perhaps, an organ transplant patient or someone with uncontrolled HIV. The latter possibility has sparked global concern. Sub-Saharan Africa is home to two-thirds of the global population living with HIV. For a whole series of reasons, ranging from lack of access to clinics to fear of stigmatisation and disrupted healthcare, 8 million people in the region are not on effective HIV therapy. Beyond the direct problems this causes with disease progression and vulnerability to Covid – people with advanced or uncontrolled HIV are far more likely to die from coronavirus – is the risk that uncontrolled HIV is driving the emergence of Covid variants. “For me there are two key things,” says Dr Richard Lessells, an infectious diseases physician at the University of KwaZulu-Natal in Durban, who was part of the team that first reported Omicron. “First there is the science that needs to go on to get a better understanding of this. But more importantly, on a public health level, we don’t need to wait for the science. It is a reminder that while addressing the immediate challenge of Covid-19, we also need to intensify efforts to end HIV as a public health problem.” Read the full analysis of why HIV prevention could be key to stopping coronavirus here: As Omicron cases are on the increase and a new wave threatens to overshadow Christmas in the UK, the scientists working on Covid are also making calculations about which of their own festivities to go ahead with and which to scale back. Hannah Devlin and Nicola Davis spoke to them about how they will navigate the festive season: Omicron is spreading so fast in the UK that people are “very likely” to meet someone infected with the variant unless they are “living the life of a hermit”, Eleanor Riley, a professor of immunology and infectious disease, said this morning. The University of Edinburgh academic also warned “a lot of people” could still end up in hospital even if the coronavirus mutation proves to provoke milder symptoms than the Delta variant. Prof Riley told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: Omicron is spreading so quickly that, I think, unless you are living the life of a hermit, you are very likely to come across it in the next few weeks. I don’t think anyone should be going around thinking they are not going to catch it, I think that situation has changed. She added: There is a huge ‘if’ about this, ‘is it milder?’. I think it is very dangerous to compare data from South Africa, say, to the UK. Even if it is milder and, therefore, a smaller proportion of infected people end up in hospital, given that so many people are going to come across this virus, even a small proportion of a lot of people is a lot of people in hospital. Some Treasury staff who worked on the autumn spending review last year had office drinks while England was in lockdown, The Times reports (paywall). It comes after more than a week of controversy over allegations of rule-breaking festivities in Downing Street in the run-up to last Christmas. The Times reports that about two dozen civil servants were present for the drinks on 25 November 2020. A Treasury spokesman said: A number of HMT staff came into the office to work on the spending review 2020. We have been made aware that a small number of staff had impromptu drinks around their desks after the event. The Treasury did not organise an in-person departmental party last Christmas. At the time non-essential shops, leisure and entertainment venues were closed as well as pubs, bars and restaurants, and people were urged to stay at home except for limited reasons including work if it could not be done from home. The Times said the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, was not at the event and that it is understood he was not aware of it at the time. On Friday, Downing Street said it has cancelled any plans to hold a Christmas party this year. It came as Boris Johnson’s ex-aide Dominic Cummings said there were “lots” of photos of parties in No 10 that would “inevitably get out”. Cummings dismissed defences from the prime minister’s allies that he would not have known about celebrations going on under his roof amid signs Johnson’s popularity is slumping. The government chief whip, Mark Spencer, insisted Downing Street staff “were not drinking alcohol” and partying during Covid restrictions after it emerged the prime minister’s press chief addressed staff at one event last Christmas. No 10 said Johnson retained full confidence in Jack Doyle to serve as communications director despite ITV reporting he addressed up to 50 people and made a speech at one party on 18 December. Read more: Boris Johnson pressed to say if there were parties in his flat during lockdowns Taiwan’s government said on Saturday that it had detected the island’s first cases of the Omicron variant, found in three people who had arrived from abroad. The Central Epidemic Command Centre said the infections were detected in travellers from the UK, Eswatini and the US. Like all entrants, they were tested on arrival and already subject to two weeks of quarantine. A booster dose means the risk of symptomatic infection with the Omicron variant is “significantly reduced”, according to health officials who have urged all those eligible to make sure they get their third jab. It comes as the experts warned Omicron could become the dominant variant in the UK by mid-December, with the communities secretary, Michael Gove, saying everything is being kept “under review” in terms of measures to tackle the spread. Analysis by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) found that the AstraZeneca and Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines provided “much lower” levels of protection against symptomatic infection with Omicron compared to Delta. But the preliminary data, which looked at 581 people with confirmed Omicron, suggested effectiveness seemed to “increase considerably” in the early period after a booster dose, giving about 70-75% protection against symptomatic infection. The findings come as daily Covid cases reached their highest level in almost a year and the UKHSA predicted that, if current trends continue, the UK will exceed 1 million infections by the end of the month. Read more: Two jabs offer little protection against Omicron infection, UK data shows Gove warned of a “deeply concerning situation” after holding a Cobra meeting on Friday afternoon to discuss the latest data and the co-ordinated response across the four nations. Dr Mary Ramsay, head of immunisation at the UKHSA, said while their early data should be treated with caution, it indicated that “a few months after the second jab, there is a greater risk of catching the Omicron variant compared to Delta strain”. She added: The data suggest this risk is significantly reduced following a booster vaccine, so I urge everyone to take up their booster when eligible. Speaking to broadcasters, Gove said the Omicron variant is doubling every two to three days in England “and possibly even faster in Scotland”. He added that 30% of reported cases in London were the new variant, and warned that evidence suggested Omicron was “more likely” than past Covid variants to “potentially” lead to hospital admissions among the fully vaccinated. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, earlier warned of the possibility of a “tsunami of infections” from the new variant – and said she could not rule out more restrictions north of the border as a result. But No 10 maintained that there were “no plans” to go further with measures in England, amid reports that proposals are being drawn up for a “Plan C” featuring even tougher rules. Gove said the current approach being taken was “proportionate”, but acknowledged that “we absolutely do need to keep everything under review”. He said: Action is absolutely required and, as new data comes in, we will consider what action we do require to take in the face of that data. The Guardian reported that the health secretary, Sajid Javid, had been given a presentation from the UKHSA earlier this week warning that even if Omicron leads to less serious disease than Delta, it still risks overwhelming the NHS with 5,000 people admitted to hospital a day. It said the leaked advice said “stringent action” would be needed on or before December 18 if the variant’s doubling time stays at 2.5 days, although what such restrictions might entail were not set out other than to say measures that would bring the R number – representing the average number of people each Covid-positive person goes on to infect – below 1. Read more: Javid advised to take ‘stringent’ Covid measures within a week, leak reveals Prof Neil Ferguson, from Imperial College London, whose data was instrumental to the UK going into lockdown in March 2020, told the Guardian that projections suggested Omicron could “very substantially overwhelm the NHS, getting up to peak levels of admissions of 10,000 people per day”. He said such a figure could be reached “sometime in January” but added that it was based on assumptions around the variant’s ability to get around existing protection, and the premise that it is similar to Delta in terms of the severity of disease it causes – something that is not yet known. Read more: Omicron could overwhelm NHS if it is as virulent as Delta, Neil Ferguson says Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_