Britain’s biggest retailers have warned that soaring living costs will hit consumer spending after a mixed start to the year amid concerns about the Omicron variant. The British Retail Consortium, which represents more than 5,000 businesses across the country, said soaring household energy prices would mean consumers tightening their purse strings over the coming months, with a knock-on effect on high streets. It said retailers had enjoyed a strong start to the year as the absence of a January lockdown helped to keep the tills ringing during the first month of 2022, despite a drop in spending on food and drink. Helen Dickinson, the chief executive of the BRC, said retailers and consumers faced challenges in the coming months. “Rising inflation, driven by higher costs of production, higher energy and transport prices, as well as other looming price hikes this spring will mean consumers will have to tighten their purse strings,” she said. According to the latest industry sales snapshot, families prioritised home purchases in January with growth in spending on household appliances, electronics, homeware and furniture. On a total basis, retail sales increased by 11.9% compared with January 2021 and by 7.5% compared with the same month in 2020 before the coronavirus pandemic. It said there was strong sales growth for footwear, furniture and jewellery, while spending on food and drink, toys and computing all fell in the first month of the year. Separate figures from Barclaycard showed consumer spending growth slowed in January as the government’s plan B restrictions in England and concerns over high rates of coronavirus discouraged people from heading to shops, pubs and restaurants. Barclaycard, which processes almost half of UK credit and debit card transactions, said spending rose by 7.4% in January compared with the same month in 2020 – the smallest uplift since April 2021 – as office-based workers stayed at home and hospitality sales slumped. Unlike the BRC, which compiles its figures by surveying retailers, the bank’s data is taken from card spending across retail, hospitality and leisure. Spending on specialist food and drink increased by 67.3% compared with the same month in 2020 as Britons shopped locally due to work-from-home guidance and restarted meal box subscriptions after Christmas. However, hospitality and leisure spending dropped 6.3% compared with the same month two years ago despite sales remaining stable among younger age groups – a possible sign of less concern over Covid-19. Reflecting growing concerns about Britain’s cost of living crisis, a survey of 2,000 adults on behalf of the card provider showed almost nine out of 10 consumers were worried about the impact of rising inflation on their finances. Three in 10 said they expected rising energy bills to affect the amount they spend on discretionary items. Official figures show inflation reached 5.4% in December, the highest rate in 30 years, while the Bank of England has forecast the measure for the rising cost of living could peak at 7.25% in April. It comes after Ofgem, the energy regulator, announced its cap on household gas and electricity bills would rise by 54% from April to reflect surging wholesale market costs. The government has announced a package of repayable discounts and support for poor households to cushion the blow, although charities have warned the measures are badly targeted and unlikely to prevent a sharp rise in fuel poverty for millions. Paul Martin, the UK head of retail at KPMG, which works with the BRC to compile its monthly retail snapshot, said the stronger performance for retailers in January should be put in the context of last year’s lockdown restrictions. Although retailers would be hoping for robust levels of consumer confidence after the government moved back to plan A Covid restrictions in late January, he said there were headwinds facing firms. “We could see a challenging few months ahead if wider macroeconomic conditions start to squeeze household incomes to the point that they start cutting back on retail spending,” he said. “We could easily see the health of the sector start to deteriorate if consumers choose to sit on savings to weather the storm.”The government has revived plans to make pornography websites carry out age checks, which would require British users to provide data such as their credit card or passport details to prove they are over 18. Ministers said the forthcoming online safety bill will be altered to ensure that commercial porn sites are brought within its scope, updating the draft legislation, which now applies to providers of user-generated pornography such as OnlyFans. The digital minister, Chris Philp, said it is too easy for children to access pornography online. “Parents deserve peace of mind that their children are protected online from seeing things no child should see,” he said. “We are now strengthening the online safety bill so it applies to all porn sites to ensure we achieve our aim of making the internet a safer place for children.” The policy of introducing age checks on pornography was first announced by the Conservatives during the 2015 general election campaign but has repeatedly run into difficulties. Two years ago the government abandoned its previous plans to introduce age verification for adult sites when faced with technical difficulties, concerns from privacy campaigners and a legislative oversight. The government said that any age assurance method used by pornography sites would have to protect users’ privacy. However, individual companies will be allowed to decide how to comply with the new rule, although the communications regulator, Ofcom, may recommend some age-checking technologies. More than a third of the British population are estimated to watch online pornography, according to estimates by the age verification industry, meaning it could be an enormous technical challenge to check all their ages – and a potential big business for the companies that carry out the checks. Privacy campaigners have previously warned that requiring users of porn websites to log in could make it easier to collect – and leak – data on an individual’s viewing habits. Smaller pornography producers have complained that the change could also favour websites owned by the global pornography giant MindGeek, such as PornHub and YouPorn, which has developed its own age verification service. Jim Killock, executive director of the Open Rights group, said: “There is no indication that this proposal will protect people from tracking and profiling porn viewing. We have to assume the same basic mistakes about privacy and security may be about to be made again.” Pornography outlets that fail to comply with the new legislation face being fined 10% of their income, or being blocked by UK internet service providers. The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport said potential solutions include checking a user’s age against data held by the mobile phone provider, using a credit card check or government database checks including passport data. The Age Verification Providers Association (AVPA) said a range of age assurance methods can be used, including artificial intelligence programmes that estimate a user’s age from a selfie. Iain Corby, executive director of the AVPA, said a “double blind” method would ensure user privacy by concealing the user’s identity from commercial pornography websites, while the age verifier would not retain any data identifying which website the user visits. Despite the abandonment of previous attempts to introduce age assurance for adult sites, the issue has remained on the political agenda. Last year the UK’s data watchdog, the Information Commissioner’s Office, introduced the children’s code, which is designed to prevent websites and apps misusing children’s data, with age assurance – the broad term for methods used to determined someone’s age online – among the options. John Carr of the UK Children’s Charities’ Coalition on Internet Safety has argued that the ICO should use the children’s code to force pornography websites to introduce age assurance – an argument the data watchdog has rejected. Andy Burrows, head of child safety online policy at the NSPCC, said: “It’s right the government has listened to calls to fix one of the gaps in the online safety bill and protect children from pornography wherever it’s hosted.”He is one of Shakespeare’s most reviled characters, distinguished by his “deformed, unfinish’d” figure. Now, for the first time, the Royal Shakespeare Company has cast a disabled actor in the title role of Richard III in a new production opening later this year. For Arthur Hughes, it is a “dream come true” although his first reaction to being cast as the 15th-century king of England was disbelief. “It’s a part I’ve always wanted to play, it’s a very complex role, and it’s the biggest thing I’ve done,” said Hughes, 30. Amid debate about whether actors need lived experience to give depth and authenticity to certain roles, Hughes said: “When Richard is played by actors who are able bodied, there’s an issue of how to portray the disability, how to wear this costume. “With me, when I walk out on stage, it’s completely apparent that I have a disability. I can’t hide that. There’s a truth to it immediately, before I’ve even opened my mouth.” Having able bodied actors play disabled characters was “problematic in many ways”. He added: “It’s not to say [able bodied] people can never play these parts. But I think it’s time that we had that lived experience shown properly.” Hughes was born with a rare condition known as radial dysplasia, which affects one in 30,000 people. He has no thumb or radius bone in his right arm, and his right wrist is disfigured. He identifies as “limb different”. Richard III, depicted by Shakespeare more than 100 years after his death as an ugly hunchback, in fact suffered from scoliosis or curvature of the spine. When the last Plantagenet king’s skeleton was discovered beneath a Leicester car park 10 years ago, his twisted vertebrae were unmistakable. He came to the throne in 1483 after his nephews, the sons of King Edward IV, were consigned to the Tower of London. The children were later murdered, apparently on Richard’s orders. Richard reigned for just 26 months before being killed in the Battle of Bosworth Field during the Wars of the Roses. Directed by Gregory Doran, Shakespeare’s eponymous play will open at the company’s theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon in June. Before then, Hughes appears in a BBC drama, Then Barbara Met Alan, to be aired in the spring. It tells the story of two disabled cabaret performers who became the driving force behind the Direct Action Network, campaigning for disabled rights. “They were very brave, real freedom fighters,” said Hughes, who plays Alan Holdsworth alongside Ruth Madeley as Barbara Lisicki. “They used to throw themselves in front of buses, chain themselves to Downing Street and organise these huge actions shutting down bridges to get themselves into the spotlight. It’s a love story set against a wider backdrop of a civil rights movement.” The TV drama and the RSC production showed attitudes were changing, said Hughes, who has encountered certain “perceptions and underestimations” during his acting career. “Lead parts for disabled actors is a real next step forward. Disabled actors that you see on TV and on stage are often in smaller, fringe parts. For true representation, we need to have leading disabled actors telling stories about disability and also not about disability.” But the real breakthrough would come when disabled actors were cast in non-disabled parts, or in dramas where disability was not a central part of the story but was “just there” as part of a character’s life, he said. The RSC has cast disabled actors before, including Charlotte Arrowsmith, who identifies as deaf and uses sign language, Karina Jones, who is visually impaired, and Amy Trigg, who was born with spina bifida and uses a wheelchair. This year, the RSC is teaming up with TikTok to offer £10 tickets to all its productions to young people aged 14 to 25 with the aim of developing “a lasting commitment and love of theatre and live performance” and “diverse audiences of the future”. Erica Whyman, acting artistic director of the RSC, said the company was committed “to partnership, to inclusion and justice”.MPs have urged the government to introduce mandatory reporting of the pay gap between staff of different ethnicities, saying there is no excuse for failing to tackle racial inequality in UK workplaces. Large companies should be required by law to publish data on employee salaries, following the framework already in place for gender, the House of Commons women and equalities committee (WEC) said in a report published on Tuesday. The cross-party group of MPs said it is the “first step” to addressing pay disparities between employees from different ethnic backgrounds and cited research showing such efforts to address racial inequality could boost the UK economy by £24bn a year. The report recommends imposing the law from April 2023. Caroline Nokes, the Conservative MP who chairs the committee, said: “The government’s failure to move forwards on ethnicity pay gap reporting is perplexing. We already have the systems in place to start reporting on the ethnicity pay gap, as well as a clear impetus: tackling inequality benefits not only marginalised groups, but the whole economy. “The government has no excuse. All that is lacking, it seems, is the will and attention of the current administration.” A Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) consultation on introducing mandatory pay gap reporting ended in January 2019 but the government is yet to publish any proposals. A petition with 130,000 signatories was debated in parliament, but no government response followed. Wilf Sullivan, race equality officer at the Trades Union Congress, said: “The government is dragging its feet. Mandatory ethnicity pay gap reporting is one of those rare areas where there is universal agreement across trade unions and businesses. “But the government still seems reluctant and has not said why they are not taking action on a consultation that happened two years ago. If you do not have the facts about racial inequality in your workplace, it becomes much easier to dismiss.” In a joint letter in June last year, the CBI business lobby, TUC and Equality and Human Rights Commission urged ministers to introduce mandatory disclosure to increase the number of employers reporting staff ethnicity pay gaps and spur the actions needed. Nokes said: “The government proves itself to be blind to the importance of levelling up within our communities and address longstanding disparities along the lines of protected characteristics.” In a WEC evidence session last month that heard from business and trade union leaders, Sandra Kerr, race director of network Business in the Community, said: “Company data on the ethnicity pay gap is not a silver bullet, but it is an important indicator that, as people progress up the organisation, they also get the right amount of pay.” A government spokesperson said: “We want to ensure everyone, whatever their background, has equal opportunity to succeed and achieve on merit. “We are considering the findings of the Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities independent report, which included recommendations on ethnicity pay reporting, alongside feedback to our consultation on this issue. We will set out our response to this - as well as the Women and Equalities Committee report - in due course.”Thousands of homes could soon be paid to halve their electricity usage for a couple of hours daily when the UK’s power demand is high under a new scheme to help reduce energy bills and create a zero carbon power supply system. From next week the trial by Octopus Energy and National Grid’s electricity system operator will offer the household supplier’s customers the chance to earn money by cutting their power use by between 40% and 60% below normal levels during a set two-hour period. They could be asked to delay a laundry cycle or a dishwasher load when demand on the UK’s power grid typically climbs, such as between 9am and 11am and again between 4.30pm and 6.30pm. If they meet their electricity reduction targets they could earn up to 35p for every kilowatt-hour of electricity saved. Households will be told about each two-hour trial window by 4pm the day before it is scheduled, so they can choose in advance whether to opt-in or not. Octopus Energy is poised to invite 1.4m of its customers with an installed smart meter to take part from Friday this week, and expects about 100,000 homes to sign up for the trial which runs until the end of March. The trial could be a welcome opportunity for eligible households after the energy regulator warned that the cap on energy tariffs would soar by almost £700 from April to an average of about £2,000 a year to reflect the recent surge in global gas market prices. The trial will also help National Grid’s electricity system operator to gather data which it could use to reach its goal of running a zero carbon electricity grid by 2035. Convincing households to become more flexible about when they use electricity is also expected to be crucial in the UK’s ambition to become a net zero carbon economy by 2050, according to Isabelle Haigh, the head of National Grid’s electricity system control rooms. “This trial will provide valuable insight into how suppliers may be able to utilise domestic flexibility to help reduce stress on the system during high demand,” she said, which could help lower the cost of matching the UK’s electricity supply and demand. The scheme is similar to contracts already offered to high-energy-using companies by National Grid’s system operator arm, which pay them to cut their electricity use when demand is high. It also mirrors an existing Octopus Energy tariff which in the past has paid thousands of customers to use more electricity when renewable energy supplies outstrip demand, such as in the early hours of a blustery morning. James Eddison, the chief technology officer at Octopus and co-founder of the company, said its previous home energy trials have shown that households “can play a key role” in improving the efficiency of the UK’s electricity system and “making sure that we’re making the most of homegrown green energy when it’s abundant”. The trial could pave the way for new tariffs that make it possible for households to cut their power bills while helping the UK to become more energy efficient and less reliant on fossil fuels such as gas power plants. It could also encourage households to install smart devices such as digitally connected electric car chargers, washing machines and dishwashers alongside home solar panel and battery packs which are expected to play a growing role in creating a carbon neutral electricity system.A trucker-led protest against vaccine mandates in Canada has raised several million dollars on a Christian crowdfunding site after being removed from GoFundMe, sparking debate over how online platforms moderate campaigns. The mayor of Ottawa declared a state of emergency over a week-long protest led by truck drivers over Covid-19 restrictions, three days after GoFundMe blocked fundraising for the “Freedom Convoy”. The protest began in response to requirements that cross-border truckers between US and Canada be fully vaccinated. By Saturday, Ottawa police had reported about 5,000 protesters and at least 300 counter protesters in the city’s streets with trucks blocking the street and shooting off fireworks. In response, GoFundMe stated that the “previously peaceful demonstration has become an occupation” and revoked more than $8m protesting truckers had raised on the crowdfunding platform. GoFundMe said on Saturday the group had violated its terms of service, and that the platform automatically refunded those who had donated to the cause. In response, the protestors migrated their fundraising to GiveSendGo, a self-proclaimed Christian crowdfunding site that in the past has hosted fundraisers for far-right groups including members of the Proud Boys and participants in the 6 January Capitol riots. GoFundMe’s decision to block fundraising for the group has drawn criticism from both ends of the political spectrum, with some condemning tech platforms for allowing fringe groups to fundraise while Republicans claim anti-conservative bias. Republican attorney general Patrick Morrisey of West Virginia urged residents on Friday to report GoFundme if they had been “victimized by a deceptive act or practice” and Donald Trump Jr tweeted that “All GOP Attorney Generals” should follow suit. Four other states over the weekend promised to investigate GoFundMe, including Florida, Louisiana, Ohio and Texas. Ohio attorney general Dave Yost told the Washington Post he is looking into GoFundMe’s policies on refunds and suspensions of campaigns. “What are you going to do next time when it’s not as visible a thing and you decide to pull out of a fundraiser for your own purposes?” Yost said, adding that the automatic refund “shouldn’t just be a result of public pressure, that should be the way they do business.” Texas attorney general Ken Paxton, also a Republican, said his office has “assembled a team to investigate” possible wrongdoing. On Twitter he called GoFundMe a “BLM-backing company” that “went woke”, referring to the Black Lives Matter movement. • This article was amended on 11 February 2022. GoFundMe blocked fundraising for the “Freedom Convoy” before the state of emergency was declared, not after as an earlier version stated.Buying an SUV is a promise to your future self. An SUV is versatile, is likely to have great safety features, will fit the kids or the dogs – or both – and offers both convenience and adventure in one vehicle. It’s the kind of car that can take individuals, couples and families through a busy working week and then onto the open road on a Saturday morning. But without the right tyres, your SUV driving experience might fall flat. Here’s why the choice you make for your tyres is as important as the car itself. Tyres have an impact on your whole driving experience David Laing is a tyre expert. As business segment manager at Michelin, he makes it his business to understand the impact a great tyre can have on every aspect of a drive. “When we purchase a car, we tend to take many things into account: its performance, the safety features, the look of the car, what would this car allow me to do, the value,” he says. “There are a heap of considerations. A tyre, whilst arguably not as exciting as getting a new car, should be given that same consideration.” Tyres are our car’s only contact with the road, Laing says. which makes them a contributor to cabin noise, and a critical part of vehicle performance and safety during adverse weather conditions – on wet roads, Michelin tyres have been shown to stop up to 4.6 metres shorter than competitors’ tyres. Tyre quality can also have an impact on fuel efficiency, how often the tyres need to be replaced and the way the ride feels to passengers. “The contact patch is where it all happens,” Laing says. “It’s where the traction, handling, steering, comfort, and braking comes from. The difference you would feel and notice between brands is quite remarkable.” If you’re an SUV owner, the right tyre can help create that lifestyle you envisaged when you got behind the wheel. “The tyres enhance the experience you were after in the first place,” Laing says. A flexible car needs a versatile tyre To find the right tyre, Laing suggests drivers reflect on the reason they bought their car. “You can buy an SUV for a multitude of reasons,” he says. “Some of it is safety features, or bigger space to go on adventures or trips. These days, you even get performance cars like high-end Porsches or Mercedes-Benz.” Safety is a non-negotiable, on which we can all agree, he says, especially as SUVs are so popular with families. “It’s only when we come to an emergency situation that we thank ourselves for choosing the safest option. It’s not just safety when the tyre is new, but over its lifetime.” For performance, SUV drivers need a tyre that can enhance the excitement and enjoyment of the drive. If it’s adventure and exploration they seek – on and off the road – a different tyre again may be the ideal pick. Michelin’s range includes a tyre for every kind of SUV driver, but for versatility on and off-road without compromising on robustness, Laing recommends the LTX Trail. “It’s able to provide a remarkable life on paved and unpaved roads, with specifically designed tread blocks that resist cutting and chipping. It’s also got a more durable sidewalk construction to resist splitting and puncture. Plus, the LTX is surprisingly quiet, like a normal passenger tyre.” Next-generation tyres are a constant evolution As the automotive landscape evolves, so do the tyres that support it. Modern tyres must adapt to new vehicle demands, extreme weather and a renewed focus on work-life balance. The best tyre companies are those that can pivot and innovate to support drivers’ changing needs. “Michelin spends around €650m [$1bn] per annum on research and development, which is why we are placed well to be ahead of the curve,” Laing says. He uses electric vehicles as an example of the importance of tyre technology – without engine noise, the only cabin sound comes from the road. “The tyre needs to be able to deliver and deal with the performance of the vehicle, but it needs to be whisper quiet.” To ensure it continues to provide the best possible driving experience, Michelin knows it must evolve with car manufacturers. “Tyre technology evolves with car demands,” Laing says. “Michelin tyres are performance-made to last. The features of the tyres play to that statement, but also maintain that high level of safety and performance over their lifetime.” Complete your driving experience with Michelin’s new LTX TRAIL. Buy yours now.That’s it for today. Here’s what happened: Joe Biden and Olaf Scholz held a press conference following a meeting at the White House to coordinate their response to a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. Both leaders insisted the nations were united and threatened crippling sanctions, though they offered no specifics on whether Berlin was willing to halt operations of Nord Stream 2 in the event of a possible attack. Biden said the controversial pipeline, which runs under the Baltic Sea from Russia to Germany, was “not going to happen” in such a scenario. But he did not provide an explanation for his guarantee. Secretary of state Anthony Blinken delivered a similar message alongside European Commission vice-president Josep Borrell. He said the US and its allies were “fully aligned” over how to address a potential Russian invasion. New Jersey governor Phil Murphy announced he was ending a statewide mask mandate for schools, saying the time had come to shift from a “pandemic to endemic phase of this virus”. Jen Psaki defended the White House’s decision not to fire Eric Lander, the president’s top science adviser, after an internal investigation concluded that he bullied and demeaned subordinates, even as she called the behavior “inappropriate”. He apologized to staff for his behavior. The supreme court voted 5-4 to allow Alabama to proceed with its current congressional map, despite a lower court’s January ruling that it violated the Voting Rights Act by diluting the vote of its Black residents. The FBI sent Google a warrant seeking user information on people who were in the vicinity of a Seattle police union headquarters during a BLM protest over the killing of Jacob Blake, newly unsealed documents show. Peter Thiel is stepping down from Facebook’s board, which he joined in 2005, to focus on backing Trump allies in the midterm elections. - Lauren, Johana, Martin The number of people who’ve died while homeless has shot up by 77% in the last five years, according to an exclusive report and analysis of 20 US urban areas by my colleague Erin McCormick. More from Erin’s story here: The rise from 2016 through 2020 was driven by many factors, including ever-rising numbers of people living on the street and the growing dangers they face, such as violence, untreated disease and increasingly deadly illicit drug supplies. From 65-year-old Randy Ferris, killed when a car veered into a California sidewalk encampment, Justine Belovoskey, 60, who died alone in a tent during a Texas cold snap, and Anthony Denico Williams, stabbed to death at age 20 in Washington DC, to scores of young people succumbing to overdoses on the streets, their stories reflect the harrowing tragedy of an epidemic of homelessness. “People who die while experiencing homelessness are some of the most neglected in society,” said Matt Fowle, University of Washington researcher and co-creator of the organization Homeless Deaths Count. “These are folks who most need our help and are least likely to receive it.” Coronavirus was just one more hazard people struggling on the streets and in shelters faced in the last two years. While the federal government makes no effort to count deaths nationally of people deemed homeless, the Guardian worked with Fowle to collect local data from large urban areas, where consistent year-to-year counts were available. The stark results stretch from Los Angeles and Seattle to New York, Philadelphia and Miami, via the heartland. The Guardian’s analysis counted 18,000 people who died homeless over five years in encampments, on sidewalks or in shelters, including 5,000 deaths in 2020 alone. In most cases, the deaths were tracked by county coroners and medical examiners, but in a few locations only local non-profits kept track.” Newly unsealed documents show that the FBI served Google with a geofence warrant to find out which Android users were in the vicinity of a Seattle police union headquarters during a Black Lives Matter protest over the shooting of Jacob Blake. The headquarters was the target of an attempted arson but did not sustain considerable damage. In response, the FBI asked Google to provide information about all the Android devices in the area using the controversial legal search technique called a geofence warrant. A geofence warrant allows law enforcement to request information about anyone within a certain perimeter or location. Whereas other legal processes and subpoenas target specific suspects and individuals who law enforcement has probable cause to believe committed a particular crime, geofence warrants are broader and can capture a wide swath of individuals who happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. The former asks whether a specific person committed a specific crime whereas the latter still asks who committed the crime. Read more from the Verge here. Disgraced former governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo is not ruling out a return to the political arena, according to two separate stories. Cuomo resigned in August 2021 after facing impeachment over a series of sexual harassment allegations and his mishandling of the pandemic. New York attorney general Leticia James found that the allegations by 11 women were credible and that Cuomo violated federal and state harassment laws. However, both CNN and Bloomberg are reporting that Cuomo may consider a future run for office. In an interview with Bloomberg, Cuomo said he “never resigned because I said I did something wrong. I said, I’m resigning because I don’t want to be a distraction”. CNN sources said he may even consider challenging James for the attorney general seat in a Democratic primary this year. Virginia Governor Glenn Youngkin’s first few months in office is already off to a rocky start. Youngkin has been accused of creating a “culture of toxicity” after aides in his office named, posted a picture of and tried to shame a high school boy who shared a news story about the governor. Here’s more from my colleague Gloria Oladipo: On Saturday, Ethan Lynne, 17 and, according to his Twitter biography, a Democrat, posted an article which suggested Youngkin could be trying to stop work to highlight the history of enslaved people at the Virginia executive mansion. In response, Youngkin’s campaign account posted a picture of Lynne with the former governor Ralph Northam, next to a picture from Northam’s medical school yearbook of two men in racist costumes: one in Blackface and one in a Ku Klux Klan costume. “Here’s a picture of Ethan with a man that had a Blackface/KKK photo in his yearbook,” Team Youngkin tweeted. In 2019, Northam admitted being one of the men in the photograph, an admission he later recanted. Virginia governors cannot serve consecutive terms. Youngkin beat the Democrat Terry McAuliffe, a former governor, in a bitter 2021 election in which the Republican made teaching about race and racism in US history a key campaign issue. Amid outrage at an attack on a minor, the Team Youngkin tweet was deleted. Speaking to the Washington Post, Lynne said: “A governor’s campaign account has attacked a minor – to me that was a new low … it was up for over 12 hours. I received no apology, no communication, nothing.” On Monday, Youngkin said: “On Saturday night, an unauthorized tweet came from a campaign account. I regret that this happened and it shouldn’t have. I have addressed it with my team. We must continue to work to bring Virginians together. There is so much more that unites us than divides us.” Donald Trump says in a new statement that David Friedman, his former ambassador to Israel, has written “a great new book” about “how our foreign policy of ‘peace through strength’ brought about unprecedented support for Israel and once-in-a-lifetime peace agreements between Israel and five Muslim nations (with more to come) – the Abraham Accords”. The book, Sledgehammer, is out tomorrow. The Guardian has had a look, and found Friedman detailing what could have been a major embarrassment for Trump, caused by what Friedman describes as startlingly naive behaviour in a meeting with the Israeli president. It isn’t clear whether Trump has read that bit yet. Read more here: In a 5-4 vote, the supreme court put a hold on a lower court’s order requiring Alabama to redraw its congressional map. A three-judge-panel ruled in January that the state should have two districts and not one and that the current districts violate the Voting Rights Act by diluting the votes of the state’s Black residents. The supreme court granted Alabama Republicans’ request to put a hold on that order, which means the new congressional map will be in effect for this year’s elections. Here’s more from NBC News: In drawing Alabama’s new map, the Republican-controlled legislature maintained a single district in which Black voters are the majority — the seventh, which includes Birmingham and several counties along the state’s western border. In response to lawsuits, a panel of three federal judges said the map should add a second district “in which Black voters comprise a voting-age majority or something quite close to it.” The panel, which included one judge appointed by Bill Clinton and two appointed by Donald Trump, said Black voters had less opportunity to elect their candidates of their choice to Congress. An emergency application to the Supreme Court filed by Alabama Republican officials said drawing two minority districts would actually force the state to violate federal law. “It will result in a map that can be drawn only by placing race first above race-neutral districting criterial, sorting and splitting voters across the state on the basis of race alone,” they said. Read more here: Hi there, it’s Johana taking over the blog with some big tech news. Peter Thiel, the co-founder of PayPal and Palantir Technologies, is stepping down from the board of Facebook’s parent company, Meta after 17 years. Thiel, Facebook’s longest serving board member and one of the largest donors to the Republican party, plans to focus on backing Trump allies in the November mid-term elections, according to the New York Times. He recently donated $10m each to the Senate campaigns of Blake Masters, who is running for a seat in Arizona, and JD Vance, who is running in Ohio. Masters is the chief operating officer of Thiel’s family office and Vance used to work at one of Thiel’s venture funds. “Peter has been a valuable member of our board and I’m deeply grateful for everything he’s done for our company,” said Mark Zuckerberg, chief executive of Meta, in a statement. “Peter is truly an original thinker who you can bring your hardest problems and get unique suggestions.” Thiel has long been a controversial figure on Facebook’s 10-person board, particularly as one of a few major tech figures who vocally supported Trump. Thiel, who served on Trump’s transition team, was seen by critics as a part of the reason Facebook did not take down Trump’s posts that violated its community standards. Thiel is a close confidante of Zuckerberg’s – he accompanied him to a private dinner with Trump in 2019 and has successfully advocated that he can withstand pressure to take political speech and ads off the platform. But recently he’s publicly criticized Facebook’s content moderation decisions saying he’d “take QAnon and Pizzagate conspiracy theories any day over a Ministry of Truth”. “It has been a privilege to work with one of the great entrepreneurs of our time,” Thiel said in a statement on Monday. “Mark Zuckerberg’s intelligence, energy and conscientiousness are tremendous. His talents will serve Meta well as he leads the company into a new era.” It’s been a busy afternoon in Washington. Joe Biden and Olaf Scholz held a press conference following a meeting at the White House to coordinate their response to a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. Both leaders insisted the nations were united and threatened crippling sanctions, though they offered no specifics on whether Berlin was willing to halt operations of Nord Stream 2 in the event of a possible attack. Biden said the controversial pipeline, which runs under the Baltic Sea from Russia to Germany, was “not going to happen” in such a scenario. But he did not provide an explanation for his guarantee. Speaking earlier in the day, secretary of state Anthony Blinken delivered a similar message alongside European Commission vice president Josep Borrell. He said the US and its allies were “fully aligned” over how to address a potential Russian invasion. The New Jersey governor, Phil Murphy, announced that he was ending a statewide mask mandate for schools, saying the time had come to shift from a “pandemic to endemic phase of this virus.” Jen Psaki defended the White House’s decision not to fire Eric Lander, the president’s top science adviser, after an internal investigation concluded that he bullied and demeaned subordinates, even as she called the behavior “inappropriate”. He apologized to staff for his behavior. The first question to Biden is about Nord Stream 2. Did Chancellor Scholz pledge to halt Nord Stream 2 to if Putin invades? Scholz was vague on the particulars and wouldn’t explicitly say what Germany would do should Russia act. Biden said should there be a Russian invasion, which he defined as “tanks or troops crossing the border” with Ukraine, “there will be no longer a Nord Stream 2, we will bring an end to it.” Asked whether Scholz to committed to ending operations, Biden said: “I promise you we will be able to do it.” “We have intensively prepare everything to be ready with the necessary sanction if there is a military aggression against Ukraine,” Scholz said. In English, the German chancellor said: “We will be united. We will act together, and we will take all the necessary steps.” Pressed on their ambiguity, Biden insisted that Germany was a “reliable partner” and Scholz insisted that the US and Germany were “united.” “The notion that Nord Stream 2 would go forward with an invasion by the Russians is just not going to happen,” Biden said. Asked if he had a message for Americans in Ukraine, Biden said his advice would be to “leave.” “I think it would be wise to leave the country,” he said. At the end of the press conference, Biden responded to a shouted question about whether he still believed there was a diplomatic off-ramp to the rising tensions. “The answer’s yes,” he said, but didn’t respond to the follow-up: “How?” Following their meeting, Biden and Scholz are holding a joint press conference. “If Russia makes a choice to further invade Ukraine, we are jointly ready and all of Nato is ready,” Biden said. He promised “swift and severe consequences” in the event of an incursion in Ukraine but stressed that the US prefers diplomacy. “There’s no issue of global importance where Germany and the United States are not working together,” the president stressed. Scholz, speaking in German, said the US and Germany agreed upon a set of responses, including sanctions, as fears of a Russian invasion mount. “There will be a high price for Russia,” the German leader said, describing a potential Russian military aggression as a “serious threat to European security.” He said the message had been delivered clearly enough so that “even Russia understands now”. Last week, the Republican National Committee officially declared the assault on the riot and the events that preceded “legitimate political discourse.” It also acted to censure two members of the House GOP - Liz Cheney of Wyoming and Adam Kinzinger of Illinois - who are participating in the January 6 investigation. Several Republican senators have expressed their unease with the move, even as the lawmakers, leaders and officials in the party continue to minimize the assault and the attempt by Trump to overturn the election. According to Politico, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, who has been critical of Trump’s role in the attack but voted to acquit the former president in the Senate impeachment trial, will address the RNC’s action tomorrow. The IRS announced it would “transition away” from using facial-recognition software to identify taxpayers accessing their accounts on the agency’s website after a bipartisan group of lawmakers raised security and civil liberties concerns. The decision comes as the agency, already dealing with staffing shortages, faces daunting challenges this tax season related to the pandemic-era stimulus payments and the temporary expansion of the child tax credit. The agency said it would change how it verifies taxpayers’ identities using methods that do not involve facial recognition “over the coming weeks” in an effort to prevent “larger disruptions to taxpayers during filing season.” The IRS takes taxpayer privacy and security seriously, and we understand the concerns that have been raised,” said IRS Commissioner Chuck Rettig. “Everyone should feel comfortable with how their personal information is secured, and we are quickly pursuing short-term options that do not involve facial recognition.” The agency said they transition “does not interfere with the taxpayer’s ability to file their return or pay taxes owed.” “People should continue to file their taxes as they normally would,” it said. On the US approach to deterring Russian aggression, Psaki said the goal is to “make it more difficult for them to lay a predicate for invading Ukraine.” “Our objective is to deny Russia the opportunity to use some of the tactics, sometimes some of the lies that they have done in the past to justify an invasion of Ukraine,” Psaki said. She again affirmed the White House’s support Electoral Count Act reform, after Trump and his allies on Capitol Hill attempted to use ambiguity in the provision to subvert the election. But she said that it was not a substitute for voting rights reform to combat the wave of restrictions Republican-controlled legislatures have put in place ahead of the 2022 midterms. During the Olympics, China chose a Uyghur cross-country skiier from the western Chinese region of Xinjiang to deliver the ceremonial flame. What did the White House make of it? “We can’t allow this to be a distraction from ... the human rights abuses,” Psaki said. She was peppered with questions about Biden’s trip to Camp David this weekend and his deliberations over his choice to replace justice Stephen Breyer on the Supreme Court. Psaki did not rule out the possibility the president would meet potential candidates during his trip to Camp David. Psaki didn’t say whether Biden had consulted Anita Hill as he puts together a team to vet his future supreme court nominee. Asked about the police killing of Amir Locke, who was fatally shot after officers executed a “no-knock” warrant, Psaki reaffirmed the White House’s support for the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act that is stalled in Congress. She said the bill would limit the use of no-knock warrants, and hoped members of Congress would act because the president is limited in what he can do unilaterally. Asked again why Lander wasn’t fired, Psaki said Biden’s safe workplace pledge set in motion a process for investigating the complaints made against him. But Biden said he would fire on the spot anyone who was disrespectful to a colleague, so his continued employment is hard to square with that pledge. “No one is suggesting that this behavior is acceptable,” Psaki said. “Corrective action was needed and we will monitor for compliance.” She noted that, as has been reported, he sent a note to his staff apologizing for his behavior and committing to do better in the future.” She said it is the hope of the White House that Lander will “make changes.” She did not answer a question about whether the president has spoken to Lander since the investigation was completed. Asked about the dissonant messages coming from Kyiv and Washington about a Russian invasion of Ukraine, Psaki said: “We’re ready either way for whatever decision President Putin might make.” “We certainly would prefer a diplomatic solution. I think that’s everybody’s preference, everybody’s hope,” she said. She encouraged reporters to ask chancellor Scholz about Germany’s views about the operations of Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which has been a major sticking point in the negotiations. She urged states to continue following the CDC guidance to wear masks in school, despite actions by the New Jersey governor to end the requirement in his state. Asked whether the White House should have taken more action against Eric Lander, the director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), after complaints of bullying and demeaning behavior were made against him, Psaki called his behavior was “inappropriate”. She said corrective actions were needed and that Lander would “be held to account on delivering on that.” Does allowing him to keep his job undermine Biden’s pledge to fire employees who “disrespect” colleagues? Psaki said the president remains committed to having a “respectful work environment very seriously.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki started the press briefing by cheering on Team USA at the Olympics. Pointing to her Team USA water bottle and pin, she said the US diplomatic boycott of the Olympics in Beijing did not take away from their support for the athletes competing for Team USA. “We made a decision, the United States, not to send a diplomatic or official delegation to Beijing given the PRC’s ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses. That was a clear statement and policy made by our government,” she said. But, she continued: “We’re watching from home. ...We’ll be rooting for US athletes even as we made a very important statement.” Moments ago, Joe Biden welcomed German Chancellor Olaf Scholz to the White House. Ahead of their meeting, Biden told reporters that the countries were “in lockstep” on confronting Russian aggression at the border with Ukraine. “We’ve got a lot to talk about,” Biden said, listing China, climate change and the pandemic among the other issues on the agenda for the leaders to discuss. Scholz called it “an important meeting at an important time” and said the US and Germany was working “intensely” to deter a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Reporters were ushered out of the room shortly thereafter. Neither leader responded to shouted question. They will hold a join press conference after their meeting. In the meantime, we will tune in for Psaki’s White House briefing. Stay tuned! Following up on an earlier post, New Jersey governor Phil Murphy formally announced his decision to end the statewide mask mandate for schools and child care centers during a briefing this afternoon. Citing the state’s falling infection and hospitalization rates, he said the state could “responsibly take the step”. “We are not going to manage Covid to zero. We have to learn how to live with Covid as we move from a pandemic to an endemic phase of this virus,” he said. “We are optimistic that given the decreased severity of this new variant, and the continued increase in vaccinations, that we are finally nearing this inflection point.” To this day, only footsoldiers have paid a price for the riot at the Capitol last January 6. Politicians who spurred them on, praised them afterwards, and now incite further hatred with hallucinatory talk of “political prisoners” have remained smugly immune. This could change in one case: the Republican congressman Madison Cawthorn, who was on the mall that fateful day, implored Trumpists to “fight,” and is now seeking re-election in North Carolina. His candidacy is being challenged on the basis of the 14th amendment. Passed after the civil war, it disqualifies from holding office anyone who has sworn allegiance to the constitution and then engages in insurrection. Other democracies are comfortable not just with restricting individual rights to run for office, but with banning entire parties suspected of undermining democracy. Americans, by contrast, have been inclined to leave things to sort themselves out in the political process. But here drastic measures are justified: citizens in a democracy have to accept being governed by politicians they disagree with; they don’t have to put up with politicians who start insurrections when things don’t go their way. Disqualification could have a salutary effect on the Republican party as such; and it might provide a model for banning Trump from holding office again – something that was on the table during the 2021 impeachment and endorsed by seven Republican senators at the time. In North Carolina, citizens can challenge a candidate to prove they meet qualifications for Congress. Unlike the House committee investigating the events of January 6th, the board on elections could force a sitting member of Congress to testify about the role he played before, during, and after the insurrection. In the end, his fate could resemble that of many Confederates after the civil war: not necessarily criminal punishment, but exclusion from exercising power. Discussing with the Guardian attempts to ban his books from US school libraries, the Pulitzer prize-winning graphic novelist Art Spiegelman cited an unexpected exemplar for such politically motivated moves: Joe Manchin’s uncle. “You know how Joe Manchin is a thorn in our side?” Spiegelman said. “His uncle, A Jamie Manchin, was the state treasurer of West Virginia in the 80s. He said that Garbage Pail Kids should be banned because they’re subverting children. It runs in his family. “It reminds me that things keep changing, but we’re still dealing with permutations of the same struggles.” Joe Manchin, a West Virginia senator, has frustrated progressives by standing in the way of attempts to pass Build Back Better, Joe Biden’s $1.75tn domestic spending plan, as well as voting rights protections and other policy priorities. Here’s the full interview: And here, for good measure, is Adam Gabbatt’s report from a Banned Book Club run by teens in Pennsylvania: Pressed again on whether the US’s strident warnings about Russia’s intentions could forestall a diplomatic solution, Borrell demurred, saying it’s important to warn of the risks while working to deter the worst from unfolding. A second reporter followed up, asking whether the US strategy – declassifying intelligence about the Kremlin’s plans and stressing that Vladimir Putin could act at any point – was the most effective approach for deterring Russian aggression. “This is not alarmism, this is simply the facts,” Blinken said. “We have to deal the facts.” He said the US was operating based on the fact that Russia had amassed tens of thousands of troops at the border and based on recent history, the invasion of Crimea in 2014 among them. “We don’t believe that President Putin has made a decision,” Blinken said. “But he has put in place the capacity, should he so decide, to act very quickly against Ukraine in ways that would have terrible consequences for Ukraine, for Russia, but consequences also for all of us.” Whatever Putin ultimately decides, Blinken said, he will find a Europe and United states that are “fully aligned, fully coordinated.” Taking a handful of questions, Blinken says the US and Ukraine still believe the Minsk agreement is the best path forward to resolving the conflict in the Donbas region. He said if Russia was serious about implementing this agreement, it would find eager partners in Ukraine, but said the Kremlin has not showed a “seriousness of purpose” yet. “Ukraine is committed to Minsk if Russia is too,” he said. Asked if the EU shares the US’ assessment that an invasion of Ukraine by Russia could be imminent, and if so, why it hasn’t used the same urgent language, Borrell said: “We share a strong concern about a risk that are accumulating at the Ukrainian-Russian border. “We are living , to my understanding, [in] the most dangerous moment for the security of Europe [since] the end of the Cold War,” he continued, adding that there was “still room for diplomacy.” “140,000 troops amassed at the border is not to go to have tea,” Borrell added. “So we have to increase our efforts in order to avoid a big risk.” Borrell said the US and EU partners have been in “speed-dial mode,” coordinating a response to the threats posed by Russia in Ukraine. He stressed that the goal was to become carbon-neutral, while addressing the short-term security risks in the context of the “Russia and Crimea crisis.” “Russia doesn’t hesitate to use the significant energy supplies to Europe as leverage for geopolitical gains,” he said. “And when gas prices in the European Union from 6 to 10x higher than they were one year ago...this has a major impact on consumers” and the economy.” The Kremlin has repeatedly denied claims that is uses energy for geopolitical gains. Borrell said it’s important for nations to diversify the sources of energy, and to do so by transitioning from fossil fuels to renewables. “It is the best way of facing the challenge of climate change.” “We believe that the diplomatic way out of the crisis is still possible and this is our clear and first priory and that’s what we are investing all our efforts. But at the same time we remain firm in our resolve that further aggression against Ukraine would have... major consequences. We hope for the best but prepare for the worst. Should Russia continue on a path of aggression, European Union and United States actions will be closely aligned, including on sanctions.” Secretary of state, Anthony Blinken, speaking alongside the EU High Representative, Josep Borrell, said the US and its allies in Europe are acting “in unity” in response to Russian aggression and a potential conflict with Ukraine. Blinken vowed “real and profound consequences should Russia choose to continue aggression”. “We developed a high-impact, quick-action response that would inflict massive costs on the Russian economy and financial system including sanctions and significant export control,” Blinken said, adding that the EU is preparing “complementary” actions. The nations were coordinating with countries and partners around the world about contingencies plans “in the event that Russia turns off the spigot or initiates a conflict that disrupts the flow of gas through Ukraine.” Those efforts include surge energy supplies and sharing energy reserves, he said. “We and our allies and partners are united across the board,” Blinken stressed. He opened his remarks by laying out the stakes, should Russia disrupt gas supplies. “When Russia halted gas supplies over a dispute with Ukraine in 2009, people died from the cold. And when energy supplies fail, economies falter,” he said. “We’re determined to prevent that from happening and to mitigate the impact on energy supplies and prices should Russia choose to cut natural gas supplies to Europe more than it already has.” House Democrats have asked the IRS to “halt its plans” to use facial recognition technology on millions of Americans who use the agency’s website to pay taxes or access documents. In a letter to the IRS Commissioner, Chuck Rettig, the lawmakers said they were “deeply concerned” about the IRS’s deal with ID.me, a face-recognition company, and asked the agency to scrap the deal. “Millions of Americans use the IRS website annually for a variety of vital functions, and, as a result, each of them will be forced to trust a private contractor with some of their most sensitive data,” the lawmakers, Ted Lieu, Anna Eshoo, Pramila Jayapal and Yvette Clarke, said in a letter. “We urge the IRS to halt this plan and consult with a wide variety of stakeholders before deciding on an alternative.” The software also “discriminates against those unable to afford reliable broadband and the required video capabilities,” they write. The letter comes amid bipartisan concern over the agency’s plans to use a third-party contractor to collect sensitive data. Senator Ron Wyden, a Democrat, also sent a letter to Rettig on Monday asking the agency to reverse the decision to use facial recognition software. And last week, a bipartisan group of lawmakers sent the agency three different letters demanding answers about its plans to require all IRS.gov account-holders to register with ID.me by the this summer, according to Cyberscoop. Tennessee governor Bill Lee, a Republican, gave final approval to the state’s new congressional map on Monday, a plan that increases the number of Republican-controlled seats in the state’s already heavily GOP congressional delegation. The map notably wipes out the state’s 5th congressional district, a reliably Democratic one that includes all of Nashville. The new plan slices voters there up into three, far-flung solidly Republican districts. The plan also slices communities of non-white voters in Nashville and attaches them to districts that are overwhelmingly white, making it harder for them to have their voices heard. Congressman Jim Cooper, a Democrat who has represented the district for decades, announced he was retiring right after Republicans passed the map, saying it would make it virtually impossible for him to win. Republicans already represent six of Tennessee’s seven congressional districts. Under the new plan, they will represent seven of the eight. Tennessee is the 30th state to complete redistricting. Courts recently have ordered lawmakers in Alabama, North Carolina, and Ohio to redraw congressional districts, saying they were too distorted and unfair. Blogger note: to understand how the new map came to be, check out this excellent visual explainer by Sam and Andrew Witherspoon. In a new report for the Guardian, Peter Stone spoke to former federal prosecutors who said Trump’s comments at a rally in Texas, during which he dangle pardons for insurrectionists and called for protests if indicted, could help make a case for obstruction of justice against the former president. Taken together, veteran prosecutors say Trump’s comments seemed to reveal that the former president now feels more legal jeopardy from the three inquiries in Atlanta, Washington and New York, all of which have accelerated since the start of 2022. ... Dennis Aftergut, a former federal prosecutor who is of counsel to Lawyers Defending American Democracy, told the Guardian that Trump “may have shot himself in the foot” with the comments. “Criminal intent can be hard to prove, but when a potential defendant says something easily seen as intimidating or threatening to those investigating the case it becomes easier,” Aftergut said. Aftergut added that having proclaimed “his support for the insurrectionists, Trump added evidence of his corrupt intent on January 6 should the DoJ prosecute him for aiding the seditious conspiracy, or for impeding an official proceeding of Congress”. Likewise, a former US attorney in Georgia, Michael Moore, said Trump’s comments could “potentially intimidate witnesses and members of a grand jury”, noting that it is a felony in Georgia to deter a witness from testifying before a grand jury. Keisha Lance Bottoms announced that she was joining CNN as a political commentator months after the former mayor of Atlanta surprised political observers last year by declining to seek re-election. Bottoms, considered a rising star in Democratic politics who Biden considered as his running mate, announced the news on Twitter, saying it had been a longtime dream to work at the network. As a college student at Florida A&amp;M University in 1987, she said she applied to work at CNN as a video journalist and wasn’t accepted. “To now join the team nearly 30 yrs later is a reminder that a dream deferred is never a dream denied,” she wrote. “Union Joe” – a moniker Biden said he earned after decades of support for organized labor – promised to be the “most pro-union president” in history. Now, with the pro-union Pro Act stalled in the Senate, he’s trying to make good on that promise. The Biden administration on Monday laid out 70 recommendations to encourage union membership in the US, including making it easier for many federal employees to join unions and eliminating barriers for union organizers to talk with workers on federal property, Steven Greenhouse reports for the Guardian. The recommendations were compiled in a report by the 13-member White House Task Force on Worker Organizing and Empowerment, chaired by vice president Kamala Harris. According to Greenhouse, the report “reiterates Biden’s robust backing of unions. “At its core,” the report says, “it is our administration’s belief that unions benefit all of us.” “Researchers have found that today’s union households earn up to 20% more than non-union households, with an even greater union advantage for workers with less formal education and workers of color,” the report states. Read about the recommendations here: Deciding to pick the inexperienced and extreme Sarah Palin as his running mate – a choice many say ultimately facilitated the rise of Donald Trump, threatening US democracy itself – John McCain mimed rolling a pair of dice and said: “Fuck it. Let’s do it.” The pithy vignette is revealed in a new book, Insurgency: How Republicans Lost Their Party and Got Everything They Ever Wanted, by Jeremy W Peters, a New York Times reporter. It was reported by Axios. McCain, a Republican senator from Arizona, enjoyed a reputation as a political maverick. He sometimes tried to deny it, for example in 2010 telling the reporter David Margolick: “I never considered myself a maverick. I consider myself a person who serves the people of Arizona to the best of his abilities.” But that earned mockery – Jon Stewart said it was “like Rudy Giuliani coming out and going, ‘Hey, I never mentioned 9/11! What are you talking about?’” – and the new story from Peters only adds to the impression McCain was happy to take political risks, sometimes to the detriment of himself and those around him. Full story: New Jersey governor Phil Murphy, a Democrat, is expected to lift the state’s longstanding school mask mandate for students and employees, according to the New York Times, and confirmed by local outlets. Early in the pandemic, Murphy imposed some of the most stringent coronavirus restrictions as the virus ripped through the region. The announcement, expected on Monday, will end the requirement requiring students students, staff and visitors to the school to wear face coverings beginning on 7 March. The decision comes as the US enters a new phase of the pandemic, according to health officials, where the threat of the virus will continue to be present, but will not disrupt every day life as it did during the last two years due to the widespread availability of vaccines that protect against the worst outcomes. Covid-19 cases and hospitalizations surged in New Jersey in December and early January amid the Omicron wave, but have dropped precipitously since then. More than 900,000 Americans have died from the virus. It remains unclear if individual school districts can implement their own mask policies. Schools have been on the frontlines of the culture wars over the pandemic, pitting parents, teachers and local officials against one another in debates over remote learning and masking in school. Murphy will hold his weekly coronavirus briefing at 1pm, when it is expected he will make the announcement and provide more details. Donald Trump was never one for following protocol. In fact, he seemed to delight in flouting the very rules and regulations that guided his predecessors throughout their time in office. That applied to the retention of his presidential records. According to a new report from the Washington Post, presidential records including “love letters” from Kim Jong-un had to be retrieved from Mar-a-Lago after Trump “improperly removed” them from the White House. According to the Post, advisers to the former president “denied any nefarious intent and said the boxes contained mementos, gifts, letters from world leaders and other correspondence. “The items included correspondence with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, which Trump once described as ‘love letters’, as well as a letter left for his successor by Barack Obama, according to two people familiar with the contents.” The Archives and a Trump spokesman did not comment. The records were returned to the National Archives in January, the Post said. Trump’s treatment of White House records has been under the spotlight recently, as a House investigation continues into the January 6 insurrection he incited. Trump went to the supreme court but failed to stop records relevant to January 6 being transferred to the House committee. Some records the panel obtained were reportedly ripped up and taped back together – according to Trump’s widely reported practice. Lindsay Chervinski, a presidential historian, told the Post: “The only way that a president can really be held accountable long term is to preserve a record about who said what, who did what, what policies were encouraged or adopted, and that is such an important part of the long-term scope of accountability – beyond just elections and campaigns.” Lack of access to documents about issues of national security could “pose a real concern if the next administration is flying blind without that information”, Chervinski said. Trump’s correspondence with Kim, during attempts to negotiate with the North Korean leader, was the subject of widespread conjecture – and ridicule. In September 2018, Trump told a rally in West Virginia: “We fell in love. No, really. He wrote me beautiful letters.” The Washington Post reporter Bob Woodward obtained 25 such letters for his second book on the Trump White House, Rage. His publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster, described “an extraordinary diplomatic minuet”. On Monday, Stephanie Murphy, a Florida Democrat who sits on the 6 January committee, told the Post of Trump’s handling of records: “That they didn’t follow rules is not a shock. As for how this development relates to the committee’s work, we have different sources and methods for obtaining documents and information that we are seeking.” Read the full story here. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden will meet with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz this afternoon as tensions remain high over Russia’s troop build up at the border with Ukraine. The leaders will hold a join press conference at 3.15pm, after their meeting. Scholz told the Washington Post there would be a “united and decisive” response from the west in the event of a Russian attack on Ukraine, and said Germany was willing to consider blocking the operations of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which has been a major sticking point in the sanctions negotiations. This comes as French president Emmanuel Macron, who spoke to Biden on Sunday, will visit Moscow on Monday to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin. White House press secretary Jen Psaki will brief reporters at 1.45. Later this evening, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer will hold a moment of silence for the 900,000 people who died from Covid-19.In Scott Morrison’s preferred virtual reality Australia would be emerging from a restorative summer of freedom ready to embrace his government’s efforts to tame online trolls by holding big tech to account. In this parallel metaverse the only damaging character assessments in our gaze would be the ones delivered over social media platforms, where vulnerable users have become cannon fodder for a business model that privileges the outrage over the civil. The government’s determination to keep women and children safe online would be emerging as a political game changer, part of a well-crafted election pitch to keep Australia safe: safe from the trolls, safe from the virus (#missionaccomplished) and safe from China (#dontrisklabor). The hastily convened parliamentary inquiry into online safety held over the summer would have driven the sleepy holiday news cycle with vivid retellings of online pile-ons, orchestrated harassment and platform nonchalance and neglect. While not a partisan battle, a war with an industry that is consistently ranked less trusted than even our politicians would have given the prime minister a forward agenda, directly appealing to anxious parents using the same micro-targeting tools that have given the platforms their power. Strapping on the oculus, the summer would have been loaded up with front-page empathy bombs as sympathetic victims (girls with eating disorders, religious minorities, female public figures) pitched against a weakened Facebook, whose market share is plummeting in the face of falling user numbers, tighter regulation and a collapse in social license. The Omicron outbreak crashed this program, but this week’s Guardian Essential report shows there is broad support for enforcing and imposing more rules on the way social media platforms operate. The radically libertarian values underpinning social media – the brazen assertion they are neutral platforms allowing for the free exchange of ideas – has been mugged by reality. On key issues being canvassed in the inquiry relating to platform responsibility and accountability, three-quarters of voters are on board for greater government intervention. Where there are differences of sentiment it is not in the usual partisan affiliation but between the generations, with older voters significantly more receptive to regulatory intervention and younger people happier to let it all rip. This is politically relevant for a Coalition whose base skews older: in a separate question the issue of online safety emerges as one more likely to hold current voters and, critically, entice people who voted elsewhere in 2019. Our PM, the retail politician par excellence, has been circling online safety for some time influenced by the focus groups picking up this community sentiment that “something must be done” and his own experience with his family. Online safety was to be his global signature, with a landmark speech to be the centrepiece of his G20 appearance last year before French president Emmanuel Macron’s free character assessment derailed the trip. But like all leaders, Morrison’s strengths are also his weakness; when it comes to big tech the government has been all RAM and no ROM. An objective look at the Coalition’s record with big tech would find it has been a scattergun of high-profile political interventions: the creation of an e-safety commissioner to deal with sexting and bullying; emergency takedown laws in response to the Christchurch massacre, the news media bargaining codes at the behest of the major media companies. Wearing my other hat as director of the Australia Institute’s Centre for Responsible Technology, I am a big fan of regulating the platforms. I leaned in behind the Morrison government when it introduced the news media bargaining code in the hope it was the first step in the comprehensive reform agenda that the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission had laid out in its digital platforms inquiry. But as I argued to the committee, piecemeal “get tough” regulation might be popular but will not bring about the systemic changes required to place public interest parameters around big tech. Like focusing on the skidmarks of a car that continually careers out of control, we focus too much on the point of impact and not enough on the engine design that keeps blowing up in our faces. We need more than tough action on specific activity: we need systemic reform to change how these companies operate. As we argued in our submission to the inquiry, much of the thinking has already been done: the 23 other recommendations from the ACCC’s digital platforms inquiry are waiting for action from the government, an equally groundbreaking Human Rights Commission report on the impact of AI is gathering dust on the attorney general’s desk, reforms to privacy law moves at snail’s pace. The Labor party’s Tim Watts points out in the Burning Platforms podcast that the Centre for Responsible Technology hosts, there are nine discreet regulatory inquiries into big tech currently under way scattered across different portfolios. There are five separate initiatives for age verification currently in train. As Watts says: “This is no way to run a railway.” Here’s the frustration. The public wants change, the detailed policy work has been done. The roadmap to better regulation is set: anti-monopoly intervention, safety by design, privacy reform, platform accountability. Any one of these initiatives would be globally significant; developed in a coordinated and sequenced way they could be transformative. “Anti-trolling” is a politically convenient catchall that justifies any intervention – trolls are naturally bad people, bullying behaviour is abhorrent. But it creates an environment where bad behaviour is personalised and not the natural consequence of current business models that deliberately nudge users to be their worst selves. The idea of taming big tech by wielding the big legislative stick to crack down on trolls makes a great political meme, but the real work of understanding the models, building corporate accountability and imagining alternative models of public infrastructure may be less likely to go viral but is much more important. Like the child trapped in a wormhole, consuming unverifiable content, bouncing from darkened discussion boards to narcissistic performative platforms, this government lacks the focus to brings these threads together. • Peter Lewis will discuss the findings of the week’s Guardian Essential Report at 1pm on Tuesday 8 February – free registration here.More than 500 elderly Australians have died in aged care with Covid-19 during the first few weeks of 2022. With Omicron plaguing nursing homes, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and Coalition frontbenchers have been out defending their management of the crisis. Here are some of their recent claims that Guardian Australia has fact-checked, including comments on the booster rollout, the reasons for low booster uptake, and how the sector is faring as staff report atrocious conditions and burnout. Most of those who died in aged care with Covid-19 were in their ‘last days of life’ The health minister, Greg Hunt, said of those who died in aged care from or with Covid, 60% were palliative and “in the absolute last days of their lives”. It is a statement Hunt repeated in subsequent press conferences. A spokesman for Hunt said the 60% figure is based on data provided by the states and territories on lives lost in residential aged care residences since July 2021. However, an aged care situation report published by Leading Age Services Australia on Wednesday said: “Further clarification of these statements is needed.” The Leading Age Services Australia chief executive, Sean Rooney, said this was because palliative care is care provided to someone with an advanced disease and terminal prognosis where the main goal of treatment is quality of life. “This is not the same as people who are in the last days of their life. People can be palliative for years,” he said. Families are a barrier to aged care residents receiving booster shots Hunt told the ABC on 3 February that: “My gentle message to families is, please, please, please, allow your residents, your families, your loved ones, to have that booster, to provide that consent.” Hunt previously said: “We know that some families have, for whatever their reasons, not provided consent for their loved ones to take up the booster.” Rooney said the number of cases where this was relevant was “quite small”. The director of the Australian Health Services Research Institute at the University of Wollongong, Prof Kathy Eagar, told the Sydney Morning Herald on Friday: “Families are not the problem. The vaccine booster program in aged care has been poorly implemented.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning There had been reports of people struggling to get boosters for their family. The director of Aged Care Matters, Dr Sarah Russell, said the role of families not consenting had been overplayed. “I know a family member who gave consent in early December,” she said. “She is still waiting for her mother to be vaccinated.” Russell said a comprehensive survey of aged care providers and residents is needed to determine the main factors contributing to low booster rates. The aged care sector is performing ‘extremely well’ The minister for senior Australians, Richard Colbeck, said on 2 February that the aged care sector was performing “extremely well” despite the Omicron outbreak. He said in 2020 there were 28,000 Covid cases in Australia, of which 2,051 were in aged care [7.2%], but of the 1.8m Covid cases as of 2 February, 10,500 [0.58%] were in aged care. Rooney said aged care staff and management had done extremely well, and “it’s absolutely appropriate to acknowledge this whenever we talk about the current situation”. “But the impact on the sector has still been devastating. And there is no doubt that there would have been fewer cases and fewer deaths if we had had enough RATs for daily screening of everyone, access to PCR tests where needed, access to surge workforce as promised and reliable access to PPE.” The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation said the results of its national survey, published on 1 February, found that nurses and carers were still being forced to pay for their own rapid antigen tests (RATs) to go to work. This was despite Hunt announcing on 15 August that RATs would be available to aged care homes. The survey also found 20% of nurses said they were planning to leave their position within the next 12 months and 38% within the next one to five years. According to Russell, only 668 of 2,704 private aged care homes had received RATs by 7 January. “This was a total abrogation of the government’s duty,” she said. With nurses protesting in Canberra on Tuesday morning over woeful staffing, and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, announcing on Monday 1,700 defence troops would be sent into aged care homes in an attempt to fill staffing gaps, the sector was clearly struggling. Australia is doing well compared to Canada Scott Morrison told the ABC’s Sabra Lane on 2 February: “Right now, outbreaks in Canada in aged care facilities are 13 times higher than they are in Australia, and they have the same vaccination rate as us.” The federal government’s weekly aged care report now also includes data from Canada to draw a comparison. The latest report, published on Friday night, said: “By comparison, Canada has experienced over 11 times the number of deaths in care homes than Australia as at 4 February 2022.” Prof Alexandra Martiniuk, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Sydney and adjunct professor of epidemiology at the University of Toronto, said Canada has had much larger waves of Covid in the past two years compared to Australia. But the elderly in Canadian and Australian aged care residences were probably not comparable, she said. “Only the sickest of the elderly are in long-term or aged care in most Canadian provinces,” she said. “So the comparison needs to consider the population. Given more aged care is given in homes in Canada, those in residential facilities are likely to be much older and sicker, and therefore likely more susceptible to Covid-19 infection and severe outcomes and deaths. “Canada also has had better and earlier access to RATs, anecdotally, than Australia.” 35,000 people in aged care have not had a booster Hunt said during a press conference on 3 February that there were about 190,000 people in aged care, and of those, about 20,000 had either not had their second dose, or been vaccinated at all. He said this left a pool of about 170,000 people eligible for their booster, and of those, 125,000 had received it. “So it’s about 35,000 that have not taken it up.” Rooney said the government’s weekly report just gave the total number of doses delivered, making it impossible to ascertain booster rates from this. “We noticed odd changes in this figure, including falls in some weeks,” he said. “It is not clear why this has fluctuated, but we expect it is a function of people entering and leaving care, and then data for new and departing residents being updated.” From 4 January, the government began reporting a standalone residential aged care figure in its daily reports. This is stated in terms of number of people “fully vaccinated” or “partially vaccinated”. But the federal government definition of fully vaccinated is two doses, making it hard to ascertain booster figures. Russell said if we accepted this figure of 35,000 residents who had not received the booster, 18.5% of all residents had not been boosted, which she said was concerning. “The figures for how many residents have not received their booster shot are not public,” she said. “When Richard Colbeck was asked for this figure, he took the question on notice.”As New Zealand hits new records for daily case numbers, prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said she expects Omicron infections to start peaking in late March. The country reported 202 cases of Covid-19 on Tuesday, following several days of numbers sitting around the 200 mark – including a record 243 cases on Saturday. The past seven days are among the highest weeks of case numbers since the pandemic began. On Tuesday morning Ardern told RNZ, the national radio broadcaster, that she expected New Zealand’s cases to peak at between 10,000 and 30,000 cases a day. “It’s widely variable and ultimately the defining feature of where we will peak will be booster uptake. The more people who take a booster, the lower the likelihood of our peak,” she said. “While there’s uncertainty in case numbers, if you looked at low case profiles in a place like say South Australia and you applied that to New Zealand, you would have something like 10,000 cases a day at its peak.” Covid-19 minister Chris Hipkins said over the weekend that rising case numbers were expected given the emergence of the Omicron variant. “We do expect case numbers to continue to grow in the coming days and weeks and I urge people not to panic but to plan for that,” he said. Nearly 30% of New Zealand’s total population, including children, have received a booster shot; 83% have had at least one dose, and 77% two doses. Among the population aged 12 and over, 94% of New Zealanders are vaccinated with two doses – but rates are lagging among Māori, 86% of whom are double-vaccinated. While the vast majority of the country is vaccinated, some New Zealanders continue to object to vaccination, particularly the mandates that affect about 40% of the workforce. On Tuesday, anti-vaccine protesters made for parliament in what they called a “Freedom Convoy” modelled on the truckers’ protest that has caused a state of emergency to be declared in Ottawa. New Zealand’s convoy has so far been a smaller affair: an estimated 1,500 protesters were gathered at parliament on Friday afternoon. Police said that the protest was “expected to cause congestion on routes into Wellington City”. Ardern said she would not be meeting the protesters.Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, has welcomed plans to reopen Australia’s border but warned travellers may need a third Covid-19 vaccine dose in order to move freely about the state. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, on Monday announced the nation would open on 21 February to all visa holders, including tourists, who had received two doses of a vaccine. The border’s reopening was praised by Andrews, who on Tuesday said it was “good for the economy, good for jobs”. “The fact that being vaccinated remains a requirement … that’s obviously a really, really good outcome and it’s about getting back to normal as best we can be in the midst of a global pandemic,” he told reporters. But international travellers with only two doses of a vaccine could face the prospect of being able to travel into Victoria but not access hospitality, retail and other services. National cabinet is still awaiting advice from Australia’s independent expert group on vaccination, Atagi, on whether it will change the definition of fully vaccinated to mean three doses of a Covid vaccine. Andrews has been lobbying for the change for some time and has already mandated the third dose for workers in health and aged care, disability, emergency services, corrections, quarantine accommodation, food distribution and education. When Morrison was asked on Monday if incoming travellers would ever need three doses to be considered fully vaccinated, even if the definition changed domestically, he replied: “No.” “It will be two [doses]. There are various arguments around the world for three doses. Two doses is what the chief medical officer says is sufficient,” he said. However, Andrews suggested that if the advice from Atagi was to change, so should the federal government’s position. “I’m sure the commonwealth government will reserve the right to change its view based on advice that comes from experts,” he said. “They (Atagi) must be getting very close to making that decision. We’ve got a national cabinet meeting on Thursday. Hopefully we can receive it before then or at that meeting. “All the international evidence, all the advice I get from our team is that three doses is what’s required in order to be as safe as it can be.” Andrews has consistently said if Atagi changes its definition of fully vaccinated, the Victorian government will also extend its vaccinated economy. Currently, people must have proof of two vaccine doses or a valid medical exemption to be able to attend hospitality venues and events in Victoria, as well as some retail, including hairdressers and beauty salons. Asked if the vaccinated economy would apply to international travellers, Andrews replied: “It will apply here in the state of Victoria.” “As far as those who get into the country, and the circumstances in which they get into the country, I think we’ve well established that is a matter for the commonwealth,” he said. Almost 46% of Victorians aged 18 and over have had three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, while 93% aged 12 and over have had two doses. Almost 50%of Victorians between five and 11 have had one dose. Victoria’s opposition leader, Matthew Guy, said mandating two vaccine doses was “enough”. “We can’t conduct 2022 like it’s 2020 or 2021. We’ve got to move on,” he said.The beloved Heeler family home from the hit Australian children’s TV series Bluey has been recreated in real life and will be made available to stay in for one weekend. Brisbane, the city which inspired the show’s colourful animated backdrop, is home to the replica of the Heeler’s home, featuring details such as the red letterbox and Bluey’s toys. The global phenomenon follows the adventures of Bluey – a loveable, inexhaustible six-year-old Blue Heeler dog – who lives with her mum Chilli, dad Bandit and little sister Bingo. Nestled on a quiet, tree-lined street in one of Brisbane’s most picturesque neighbourhoods, the house is a collaboration between Airbnb and BBC studios and took two years to build. Despite the effort involved, it will be available to rent for only one weekend later this month. “The Heeler house is almost a character in its own right,” said Madeleine Jelfs, Bluey senior marketing manager, BBC Studios Australia and New Zealand. “We’ve been amazed at the outpouring of love the fans have shown for this iconic setting, and for all the beautiful Queensland locations the crew have so lovingly included across the three series. “Bringing Bluey’s backdrop to life in such an ingenious and colourful way for our fans has been an absolute delight.” Not just beloved by kids, the house on the show has become a talking point among parents, who have questioned how it is that Bluey’s parents – who work as an airport security guard and an archeologist – could afford the home, which is estimated to cost more than $1m in real life. Last year comedian Zach Mander went so far as to suggest Bluey’s parents had paid for their house through involvement in the drug trade. “The median pay for both these jobs in Australia is $67,000 and $22 an hour respectively,” he said in a video. “There is no way the bank is approving them for a mortgage on a million-plus home. “It seems to me that Bluey’s parents could be up to some nefarious activities.” Staying in the house will be a lot cheaper. This two-night stay, for one family of four, will take place from Friday February 18 to Sunday February 20 and cost AU$20. Airbnb says booking will open 15 February and it will go to whoever gets in first. Guests will spot some familiar features like the red letterbox, bone-shaped chimney and bay window. Inside, the girls’ playroom has a rainbow canopy, kiwi rug and numerous toys – including Bluey’s beloved Chattermax and magic xylophone. Kids can stay overnight in Bluey and Bingo’s bedroom, equipped with two single beds fitted with a stained-glass window feature, hanging lanterns, cloud cushions and, of course, a watermelon rug. “Like many parents with young children, I’ve been captivated by the adventures of Bluey and her family, which bring so much joy and quintessential Aussie humour to audiences across the globe,” said Susan Wheeldon, Airbnb manager for Australia and New Zealand. “There will be nothing quite like waking up in the Heeler house and getting to live and breathe in Bluey’s magical world for one wondrous weekend.” At this stage, there is no plan to make the house a permanent stay on Airbnb but Wheeldon said “never say never”.The Morrison government’s demand that the ABC and SBS add a new layer of accountability has been blasted by Labor as “regulation by stealth” that could lead to a loss of independence. At the same time as the Coalition pledged to restore ABC funding to 2018 levels on Monday, the communications minister, Paul Fletcher, unveiled a plan to impose new reporting conditions on both public broadcasters. The so-called statements of expectations will be on top of the broadcasters’ already rigorous reporting requirements to parliament. The government will restore ABC funding to 2018 levels, when Malcolm Turnbull imposed an $84m indexation pause, but the pledge will not make up for the $526m cut from the ABC budget since the Coalition came to power. Labor’s media spokesperson, Michelle Rowland, warned the accountability plan is a slippery slope which could lead to a loss of independence; and questioned whether the regulatory frameworks for the ABC and SBS support such a demand. “Make no mistake, minister Fletcher’s ‘statement of expectations’ requiring additional regional reporting is a form of regulation by stealth, and the notion the national broadcasters should comply with this minister’s expectations as a quid pro quo for funding is wholly unacceptable,” Rowland told Guardian Australia. Fletcher has written to the ABC board chair, Ita Buttrose, saying he expects the broadcaster to detail key activities every year including staffing levels and editorial outputs in regional and rural areas, how it spends the news budget and levels of Australian content. The ABC has declined demands to report levels of content separately as the ABC Charter already ensures it meets the requirements for telling Australian stories. “It is my expectation as minister that, for improved transparency, the ABC will report on the following metrics in its future annual reports,” Fletcher said in his letter. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesperson for the ABC confirmed the board had received the letter. “The minister has written to the chair about the Statement of Expectations,” he said. “The Statement will be considered by the Board in due course.” A spokesperson for SBS said: “As has been acknowledged, SBS already provides extensive information on its Australian content as part of its annual report, and we will work constructively on any new reporting framework.” Labor is planning to ask the government to explain why it believes it has the power to impose the new conditions at Senate estimates next week. “The national broadcasters are key democratic and cultural institutions whose independence is enshrined in legislation, and funding stability is an important guard against political interference,” Rowland said. “It is, therefore, concerning that the minister has issued ‘Statements of Expectations’ that the ABC and SBS undertake a new reporting function, given the minister is not empowered to issue Statements of Expectations to the national broadcasters. “The ABC and SBS are not subject to direction by or on behalf of the government, except in limited circumstances, and the ABC board need only give consideration to government policy in specific circumstances.” In December 2020 Buttrose accused Fletcher of a pattern of behaviour which “smacks of political interference” in a robust defence of the public broadcaster’s independence after he wrote to the board demanding answers to 15 questions about Four Corners’ Inside the Canberra Bubble program. In his letter setting out the scheme Fletcher said he “continues to recognise and respect the ABC’s statutory independence and the legislative requirement that it perform its functions free from government interference or direction”. “Nothing in this letter is to be taken as a direction issued to the ABC by or on behalf of the Government,” he said. Guardian Australia understands apart from specific and limited circumstances the ABC Act is expressly not subject to direction by or on behalf of the government. There is nothing in the act which details the concept of a ministerial statement of expectations. “The decision on whether to provide additional reporting is entirely a matter for the ABC and SBS, who already provide transparency in a range of ways,” Rowland said. “While Labor has no issue with transparency and reporting in principle, we note it may be used as an avenue for political interference in the national broadcasters, in certain circumstances, and we reject this Minister’s governance invention.” The Coalition has cut $526m from the ABC since its first budget, including an “indexation pause” for the past three years which Fletcher denies is a cut. A poll of 1,000 voters conducted by the Australia Institute found that 52% want the $84m cut from the ABC in the last three years to be restored, more than double those who oppose it (25%).The Indian coal mining tycoon Gautam Adani has become Asia’s richest person thanks to a push into green energy that has boosted his fortune to $88.5bn. Adani has overtaken fellow countryman Mukesh Ambani to enter the top 10 of the world’s richest people, according to figures from Forbes and Bloomberg, after seeing his personal fortune rise by $12bn in the past year. Among the mega-rich whom Adani has leapfrogged to reach the world top 10 are Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, who slipped down the table several places last week after losing $30bn of his personal fortune. Although Adani has become the face of big coal around the world with its pursuit of the hugely controversial Carmichael mine project in Australia, the mogul’s ascent into the top echelons of world billionaires is down to his expansion of green investments. His Adani Group controls the port of Mundra, India’s largest, in the mogul’s home state of Gujarat and he also owns 74% of Mumbai international airport. But his push into green energy has paid off handsomely in the past year with the listed company Adani Green Energy now his most valuable after its share price almost doubled in the past 12 months. The group is in the process of ploughing $70bn into green energy projects by 2030 with the aim of becoming the world’s largest renewable-energy producer. Adani found his ambitions dovetailed with those of Indian prime minister and fellow Gujarati, Narendra Modi, who leveraged India’s huge uptake in solar power to map out more ambitious goals for cutting carbon emissions at the Glasgow climate conference in November. India plans to reach a target of 500 gigawatts of non-fossil fuel capacity by 2030 and that 50% of electricity capacity would come from renewables by the same point. It plans to be net-zero by 2070. Overseas investors in Adani and India’s solar revolution include the French oil company Total, which last year bought 20% of Adani Green Energy. “The Adani Group has spotted and entered all the happening sectors at the right time, which has appealed to a select band of foreign portfolio investors,” Deepak Jasani, head of retail research at Mumbai-based brokerage HDFC Securities Ltd, told Bloomberg. “The sectors are capital-intensive and the company has faced little difficulty in raising funds to expand.” Despite the greener outlook for Adani, the group is still pressing ahead with the giant Queensland mine in the face of fierce resistance from a rainbow coalition of anti-fossil fuel activists, biodiversity conservationists and Indigenous groups. The bitter battle over the mine has seen a succession of on-site protests, legal battles, and the use of a private investigator by the company to secretly photograph the family of activists.Nurses and other workers in aged care descended on parliament house on Tuesday morning protesting dangerous staff shortages, underpayment, and a lack of personal protective equipment – issues that persist more than two years after the Covid-19 pandemic began and despite numerous inquiries into the aged care sector. Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation federal secretary Annie Butler addressed protesters and said nurses are “fed up with this government for abandoning aged care workers and residents”. “Our aged care workers and nurses are holding the system together as best they can but they have got virtually nothing left. This is a crisis that should never have been allowed to happen and we are saying directly, Mr [prime minister Scott] Morrison, you let this happen.” She said the government had allowed a breakdown of privately run nursing homes, having failed to implement recommendations from last year’s aged care royal commission and numerous aged care inquiries that preceded it. “The government’s own royal commission reports – that I can barely lift because of their depth – are all ignored,” Butler told protesters. “It’s always too little too late.” She said nurses asked for support from the Australia Defence Force one month ago. Defence support was only announced by the government on Monday. “In that time, 500-plus people have died,” she said. Aged care workers have shared their stories with Guardian Australia, with staff reporting elderly people yelling out for help and lying in their own faeces and urine, and gardeners and maintenance staff being called upon to do laundry and feeding. An aged care manager in Victoria said she went into her office “and cried” after the federal government delivered latex gloves and hand sanitiser instead of the supplies her home urgently needed. “During our recent outbreak I requested isolation gowns and N95 masks from the national stockpile,” Jane said. “Instead, we received latex gloves and hand sanitiser. I laughed, then I went into my office and cried. It’s like a bad joke.” The manager, who asked to be identified only as Jane, said she has worked 80-hour weeks managing the home since Omicron hit, and has filled shifts in the laundry, kitchen, and in personal care. She said she has struggled to get appropriate PPE or surge workforce staff from the government, and feels that homes are being punished with audits and punitive action rather than receiving much-needed government support. A nursing unit manager working at a home in New South Wales described how she resorted to buying and hoarding PPE because she couldn’t get supply from the federal government. She eventually received thousands of gowns from the national stockpile, but only after Omicron had passed through the facility. “I have 20,000 gowns I don’t know what to do with,” she said. A home-care manager working in Queensland said he had to source and pay for approved rapid antigen tests and PPE from overseas because he couldn’t source any in Australia, though he said the federal government will reimburse the costs. “We had to go and scramble outside of the normal supply chain and source them from China,” he said. A spokesperson for the minister for senior Australians and aged care services, Richard Colbeck, said the spread of Omicron had seen more than 6,000 requests from aged care facilities since January. More than 17m face masks, 6m gowns, 20m gloves, 4m goggles and face shields and 4m million rapid antigen tests had since been deployed, he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “To manage this volume of activity, some orders were split into two or more deliveries to ensure product is delivered as soon as possible and the remainder of the order is delivered when available,” he said. Jane said the home she manages has also struggled to get clinical waste collected. “We asked weeks ago for extra bins, but they still have not been delivered.” Jane said she felt staff were not being recognised for the care they managed to provide despite woeful staff shortages, and that it was impossible to put contingency plans in place. “We ask for agency staff on a daily basis, but there are very, very few available,” she said. “We are doing everything possible to make sure we have enough appropriately trained staff. There simply aren’t any more out there. “It’s not the physical exhaustion that will get me. It is the punitive approach of the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission. It’s the relentless paperwork I fill in for staff and PPE I don’t get. I honestly don’t know if I can do this for much longer. I don’t even know if I want to stay in nursing.” A commission spokesperson said homes whose workforces had been “temporarily reduced through Covid-19 infection are expected to activate their contingency plans and do everything possible to minimise the impact on their consumers”. “The commission will act promptly where older Australians are at risk of harm and will continue to be present in aged care services to perform its functions,” the spokesperson said. Susan Walton, an aged care nurse who has worked in the same residential aged care facility for 18 years, said at Tuesday’s protest that she works night shift on the floor by herself looking after 40 residents. “Our residents are getting sub-standard care, you can not physically look after 40 people by yourself,” she said. “Mr Morrison, do I go to Mr Smith who is in pain, or Mrs Jones who is on the floor, or John who has got behaviour problems and is intruding into other peoples rooms? I have floor alarms going and buzzers going. What would you like me to do? “Somebody. Speak up for the elderly.” Do you know more? melissa.davey@theguardian.comTen million jobs in creative industries worldwide were lost in 2020 as a result of the Covid pandemic, and the increasing digitisation of cultural output means it is harder than ever for artists to make a living, a Unesco report has said. Covid has led to “an unprecedented crisis in the cultural sector”, said Audrey Azoulay, the director-general of Unesco, the UN’s cultural body, in a foreword to the report. “All over the world, museums, cinemas, theatres and concert halls – places of creation and sharing – have closed their doors … “What was already a precarious situation for many artists has become unsustainable, threatening creative diversity.” Although the cultural and creative sector is one of the fastest growing economic sectors in the world, it is also one of the most vulnerable and is often overlooked by public and private investment, said the 328-page report, Reshaping Policies for Creativity. Government spending on creative industries was declining in the years preceding the pandemic, and Covid led to a collapse in income and employment. Although many national and local governments offered emergency support to creative industries hit by pandemic restrictions, the global gross value added (the measure of a sector’s value) of the creative industries contracted by $750bn in 2020. The report called on governments to bring labour protection of artists and cultural professionals into line with the general workforce, and suggested a minimum wage for cultural workers, and better pension and sick pay for freelancers. “Even in countries with social security schemes designed for freelancers or self-employed people (who constitute a large part of the creative economy workforce), a significant proportion of such workers were often ineligible,” it said. Since the pandemic began, “digitisation took a front seat … as it became more central to creation, production, distribution and access to cultural expressions. As a result, online multinationals consolidated their position, and inequalities in internet access became more significant”. For most artists, the digital environment did not provide enough income to support a professional career. Action was needed to address the “streaming value gap” – the disparity between the value that streaming platforms extract from content and the revenue generated by those who create and invest in creation. Ernesto Ottone, Unesco’s assistant director-general for culture, said: “A basic paradox has emerged, whereby people’s global consumption of, and reliance on, cultural content has increased, however at the same time those who produce arts and culture find it increasingly difficult to work. “We need to rethink how we build a sustainable and inclusive working environment for cultural and artistic professionals who play a vital role for society the world over.” On the upside, many artists and cultural professionals have “seized the opportunity of the rise of niche streaming services to develop innovative projects in the digital sphere”. The report cited Deedo, a pan-African music streaming platform, created in 2017 by Senegalese entrepreneur Awa Girard, that features more than 12m tracks and is accessible in six African countries as well as France and the UK. “Within four years, Deedo has not only become a key player in the African music industry, but has also increased the visibility of African artists, while offering social engagement through its initiative ‘One song, One soul’ (which donates 5% of each subscription to the non-profit organisation of the user’s choice).” The report also said gender equality was “a distant prospect” even though female workers made up 48.1% of the culture and entertainment sectors. “Evidence suggests that women remain under-represented in positions of leadership, have less access to public funding and their work is far less visible and acknowledged than their male counterparts,” it said. The Covid pandemic may also have taken a disproportionate toll on female artists and cultural professionals. Only 33% of awards for the main film categories of 60 major film festivals worldwide were given to female artists and producers in 2019. Less than a quarter (24%) were awarded for best director and best screenplay. The female workforce in the gaming industry is 30% worldwide. “This confirms women’s under-representation in some creative industries (particularly those linked to fast growing technologies) and overrepresentation in other, traditionally more precarious ones.”Juan Romero shakes his head as looks out across the lake at the wading spoonbills, the pipe-cleaner silhouettes of the flamingos and the glossy ibis that flash against the Andalucían sky. “This is an illusion,” says the ecologist, a retired teacher. The birds are real enough, of course, and so too are the tufty-eared Iberian lynxes that will be sniffing out a breakfast of rabbit in the quieter, wilder reaches of the huge Doñana national park in southern Spain. The illusion is what the water level in the lake before him says about the health of the reserve. Although there is far less water in the Charco de la Boca than there should be at this time of year, it is faring better than many parts of the sprawling wetlands known as one of Europe’s green lungs. Water supplies to Doñana, whose marshes, forests and dunes extend across almost 130,000 hectares in the provinces of Huelva, Seville and Cádiz, have declined drastically over the past 30 years because of climate change, farming, mining pollution and marsh drainage. A fresh crisis now looms as regional authorities consider granting an amnesty to the farmers illegally tapping its aquifer to feed the booming strawberry sector. Nine years after Unesco warned that the area’s world heritage status was being jeopardised by such illegal tapping, the regional branch of the conservative People’s party (PP), which has governed Andalucía for the past three years, has announced a proposal to regularise the illicit farms and wells that stretch across 1,460 hectares near the protected natural space. On Wednesday, the Andalucían parliament will vote on whether to begin the legislative process. The PP, whose bid is backed by both the far-right Vox party and the centre-right Citizens party, claims the move would help “safeguard historic rights and a traditional activity [practised] since time immemorial”. Opponents fear it will spell further disaster for the local environment, and point out that the area’s love affair with strawberries, known locally as “red gold”, began in the 1980s. Between January and June last year, Huelva’s exports of soft fruit – almost 20% of which are to the UK – were worth €801.3m (£678m). The campaign group Ecologists in Action describes Doñana as “a hostage to agriculture” and says the aquifer is already being stressed by irrigation demands. SEO BirdLife, the Spanish Ornithological Society, sees the plan as “a new assault on the Doñana natural space that favours a proliferation of irrigation and runs contrary to regional, national, European and international legislation”. Unesco, which declared the Doñana national park a world heritage site in 1994, has asked the Spanish government for an urgent report on the issue “before any decisions are taken that might be difficult to reverse”. The mooted law comes eight months after the European court of justice ruled that Spain had not fulfilled its obligations on preventing illegal water extraction around Doñana and had failed to take the measures needed to stop “significant alterations” to its protected habitats. The European Commission says it is “deeply worried” at the possible impacts of the proposed changes and has not ruled out taking Spain to the court of justice once again. For Felipe Fuentelsaz of WWF Spain, the environmental importance of the region cannot be overstated. “Doñana is a unique place that sits between the south of Europe and north Africa and it’s the main migration route for all the birds in Europe,” he says. “More than 6 million birds – and 200 or 300 different species – come through it each year. It’s mainly a wetland, but it also has a very important coastal dune zone and lots of surrounding forest. So it’s three ecosystems in just one place and it’s the lung of Europe.” Romero, a spokesperson for Ecologists in Action who has lived in the area all his life, dismisses the PP’s plan as a naked attempt to win the votes of legal and illegal farmers before a possible early regional election. “If people haven’t been obeying the law, then the People’s party can’t come along and tell them – for electoral gain – that they’re going to [get their] land legalised,” he says. “It’s a trick and a ruse.” The plain truth, he adds, is that Doñana simply cannot cope with the water demands of any more fruit farms. Drive around the area, where huge white polytunnels break in plastic waves across a landscape of pine and prickly pear, and the feelings of many local farmers are plain to see. Not far from some of the many decommissioned illegal wells – 420 have been shut down in recent years but others soon spring up elsewhere – are signs graffitied with a slogan that demands “no more harassment” from the Guadalquivir Hydrographic Confederation, an agency of Spain’s ecological transition ministry. While the local small farmers’ union, UPA Huelva, supports the PP-led proposal, arguing it will help those who missed out on their “historical rights” under a 2014 moratorium that banned any new cultivation or well-sinking, it says it will not “defend those who have invaded forest areas to turn them into agricultural lands without the correct authorisation”. Not all the local farmers approve of the plan. At the end of January, 300 farmers from nearby Almonte walked away from a regional group that backs the amnesty, complaining that the move would “only serve the interests of a minority of irrigation users”. One local fruit farmer, who asked not to be named for fear of reprisals, says the new plan is neither fair nor sensible. “I think it’s just madness,” he says. “Doñana is something we all love and respect. But there’s a political party that are proposing something – supported by two other parties – that I simply can’t understand.” The farmer says the planned amnesty is fundamentally flawed and dangerously short-sighted. “You have to start with the water and not the land,” he says. “If you hand out the land, then everyone’s competing with each other, the aquifer’s suffering and awful things happen. We can’t kill the goose that lays the golden eggs. But that’s what they’re trying to do and it’s bad for everyone – bad for the park and for the farmers.”A controversial $252m New South Wales government grant program “lacked integrity” and did not use any consistent guidelines in awarding more than 95% of the money to local councils in Coalition state seats. A scathing report on the scandal-plagued Stronger Communities Fund, released by NSW auditor general, Margaret Crawford, on Tuesday revealed former premier Gladys Berejiklian and deputy premier John Barilaro personally chose projects for the fund with “little or no information about the basis” for their selections. The auditor’s findings also confirmed the government had never published program guidelines and instead favoured local councils that had “worked constructively” with them in the past over council mergers. On the same day that Crawford’s report was released, the Sydney Morning Herald reported that more than 75% of a separate $100m gambling revenue grant program was given to Coalition-held and battleground seats over a decade. Responding to the Stronger Communities Fund grants made in 2019, in the leadup to the state election, the auditor general found a lack of formal systems in place “prevent(ed) accountability and transparency over the government’s approach to selecting councils for funding”. “Councils and projects were instead identified by the former premier, deputy premier and minister for local government and communicated to (the Office of Local Government) with little or no information about the basis for the council or project selection,” the report read. “There was no merit assessment of identified projects. This process resulted in 96 per cent of funds allocated to Coalition state seats.” The report found the only records kept of the approved grants made to 22 councils were found in a series of emails from the staff of both Berejiklian and Barilaro. That was interpreted in a briefing note to Berejiklian as councils that “did not take legal action against us”. The audit found Berejiklian personally identified 41 projects for funding, valued at $142m while Barilaro selected 188 projects totalling $61m. First announced in 2016, program guidelines for the Stronger Communities Fund, developed by the Office of Local Government, were found to be “deficient” in a number of areas, yet were still not used to guide funding selections, Crawford found. She pointed to $8m in funds which were earmarked before guidelines were approved. “It is difficult to understand the merit of project funding decisions, and it is troubling that the Office of Local Government did not seek justification to support projects put forward with limited documentation by the staff of the then premier, deputy premier and minister for local government,” the auditor stated. The auditor’s report comes after a NSW parliament inquiry last year found the fund had been deliberately designed to allow pork-barrelling, and to punish councils which had opposed the government’s controversial local council mergers. Inner West mayor, Darcy Byrne, is calling for his council and others that missed out to be compensated. “The Stronger Communities Fund was established to support forcibly amalgamated councils like the Inner West and Canterbury-Bankstown with local infrastructure, but we were improperly prevented from even applying for funds,” he said. “We still desperately need financial assistance for infrastructure, and the premier should stand up today and commit to working with us on a compensation fund. “It’s time now to act and show that he (Perrottet) is the premier for all of NSW not just blue-ribbon Liberal electorates.” Shadow special minister of state, John Graham, called on the state government to tighten regulations for grants. “This confirms all the worst fears that the public would have had about these schemes,” he said. “Most concerningly, this could happen again.” The auditor general’s report also examined the $100m Regional Cultural Fund, finding that while it was “robust and produced transparent and defensible recommendations” for the then arts minister, Don Harwin, he and Barilaro did not follow the recommendations in more than a fifth of cases. “Reasons for these changes were not documented by Create NSW,” the report found. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Crawford found the “integrity of the approval process for funding allocations was compromised” because Harwin and Barilaro “did not follow the recommendations” in multiple cases and did not document the reason for the changes. “The then minister for the arts, in consultation with the former deputy premier, did not follow the panel’s recommendations for 22 per cent, or more than one in five, of the applications assessed for funding,” the report stated. “Thirty-four applications that were recommended by the independent panel did not receive any funding. In the second funding round, seven of the top 10 ranked applications were not funded. “The minister for the arts approved funding for 22 applications that were not recommended by the independent panel. This resulted in around $9.3m being awarded to applicants that were not rated highest by the independent panel, including six applicants that received grants of $500,000 or more. Most did not meet one or more assessment criteria and received low ratings.” On Tuesday, the Herald reported how about $75m of the $103m raised from poker machine taxes was then spent in Coalition electorates between 2013 and 2021. In response to the revelations NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, highlighted the positive impact of grants programs and said all ministers were aware of their responsibilities. “Grants are important. People criticise grant programs - I’ve seen on my visits to regional NSW - a number of playgrounds and netball courts that never would have been built without grants,” he said. “There is zero tolerance for pork barrelling. I’ve made it abundantly clear to every one of my ministers that they are responsible for those grant programs.”When winter has settled into the bones, not a sound carrying over the stones, into the silence of earth and frost – a tiny, tinkling goldcrest drops. Along with the firecrest, it is the UK’s smallest bird, flickering through bark in busy bursts. Weighing about the same as a 20p piece, it can be hard to spot high in fir and pine trees. Yet, when you catch sight of the gold-striped head, it is not the kind of light you forget. The yellow or orange crown gleams, flooding the bark with its golden stream. Where I stand in the field by a border of pines, the ground encrusted with a rust of ice, a pair dash in and out of sight – bright sparks flying as the trees ignite. With counts slightly lower this winter, it is especially reassuring to see them. I catch one’s eye – gleaming, wild – then watch the small run of its beak and feel the tingling release. Notes so high-pitched that they’re inaudible to some strum like sunbeams across the leaves. If sunlight could be heard, perhaps it would be this – I tilt my head back to its golden pitch. Ears shift into higher frequencies for its contact call of “zree-zree-zree”. With their small size, lighter, on average, even than the firecrest, goldcrests can use up a lot of their energy to keep warm – on cold nights, up to 20% of their body weight. But as the notes flow between us, the coldness goes. The gold seems to find its way into the bones. There is, everywhere, a warming current. Waves of sound splash upon us. The colour begins to return to my cheeks as I stand in the glow. Yellow drips down from branch to branch as the birds continue their glistening advance. Despite their small size, their impact is huge. I am held by the spectacle and cannot move. Through lit peals, their chime resounds, tolling the days through to warmer ground. Their presence, even now, delivers an ease, a heat that pours steadily down through the trees. The earth, the leaves and treetops thaw, and winter, for just a moment, withdraws. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAustralia’s mean temperature last year was 0.56C warmer than the long-term average despite 2021 being the country’s coolest year in a decade. It was a year of contrasting weather and climate conditions, the Bureau of Meteorology said in its annual climate statement, with long-running heatwaves in northern Australia and widespread flooding in eastern states, in part due to a La Niña event. In the west, severe tropical cyclone Seroja was the southernmost tropical cyclone to make landfall since the 1950s. Averaged across the continent, last year was Australia’s 19th warmest year on record. Mean annual maximum and minimum temperatures were above average for most of northern Australia, Tasmania, and parts of the west coast, but temperatures were cooler than average for parts of inland New South Wales and central Australia. “Although 2021 was Australia’s coolest year since 2012, temperatures were still much warmer than the historical average,” said climatologist Jonathon Pollock. “In fact, of all the years on record prior to the year 2000, only five were warmer than 2021.” The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change last year reported that Australian land areas were on average 1.4C hotter than early last century, and warming was unequivocally due to human influence. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The country had its wettest November on record in 2021 and across the year experienced its highest rainfall levels since 2016. Nationally averaged rainfall was 9% above the 1961–1990 average, with 509.7mm. For much of Australia the amount of rainfall was above average compared to all years since 1900. The wetter weather was influenced by several climate drivers, including La Niña, which persisted through the 2020-21 summer and emerged again in November. A negative Indian Ocean dipole in winter and spring fuelled above-average winter–spring rainfall over parts of southern Australia, compared to the distribution of rainfall across all years since 1900. “Two years in a row of above average rainfall meant by the end of 2021, and for the first time in five years, no large parts of the country were in meteorological drought,” said Pollock. He said major water storages across eastern Australia had recorded significant increases. In western NSW, the Menindee Lakes filled for the first time since 2012. There were some exceptions, however. The most significant was in south-east Queensland, where water storages have remained low.Australian consular officials have been denied access to a dual Australian-Chinese citizen detained in Hong Kong for 11 months for alleged “subversion”. The Australian government – which has had an increasingly strained relationship with Beijing – renewed its concerns about “the erosion of basic freedoms and autonomy in Hong Kong” under the territory’s broadly worded national security law. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has disclosed new details about the case of a dual Australian-Chinese citizen detained in Hong Kong under that law, after officials had previously said the person was “subsequently released”. The man, born in Hong Kong, was first arrested on 6 January 2021 “for conspiring to subvert state power” and was released on bail the following day, Dfat said in a written response to a parliamentary question. “On 28 February 2021 Hong Kong police advised the individual that he was to be charged for ‘subversion’ and was required to attend West Kowloon magistrates’ court on 1 March 2021, where he was again placed under arrest. “The individual remains in detention.” That timeline means the man has been in detention for the past 11 months. The new details were first reported on Tuesday by the ABC, which notes the man faces a potential jail term ranging from 10 years to life if convicted of subversion. The Australian government has not confirmed his name. Hong Kong authorities first notified the Australian consulate general in Hong Kong of the arrest in January 2021, although China does not recognise dual nationality. “Officials from our consulate general have attended the subsequent court hearings,” a spokesperson for Dfat said on Tuesday. “However, we have been denied consular access despite multiple attempts because the individual is deemed to be a Chinese citizen under China’s citizenship laws, which do not recognise dual nationality.” Australia’s bilateral consular agreement with China, including Hong Kong, only allows access to Australian citizens who entered on an Australian passport. Dfat was “in regular contact” with the man’s lawyers and would “continue to attend future court hearings”, the spokesperson said. “Australia and many other countries have expressed concern about the erosion of basic freedoms and autonomy in Hong Kong and have called on Hong Kong and Chinese authorities to abide by their human rights obligations,” they said. “The Hong Kong National Security Law could be interpreted broadly and therefore result in detention that is arbitrary or lacks transparency as well as the removal of basic individual rights.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Beijing imposed the sweeping national security law in Hong Kong in mid-2020 in response to months of pro-democracy protests in 2019, sparking accusations from western nations that China was undermining rights and freedoms it guaranteed as part of the handover from the UK. The independent South Australian senator Rex Patrick, who first asked about the matter in Senate estimates in October, said he held “grave concerns for this individual, along with the others being held in arbitrary detention by the Chinese Communist Party”. “His arrest highlights the plight of the more than 100 Hongkongers that have been arrested and charged since the CCP repression of Hong Kong began,” Patrick said. Labor said it would seek a briefing on the case, describing the “deeply concerning development” as a reminder of “the direct impact of the continued erosion of basic freedoms in Hong Kong”. “We strongly support efforts by Australian officials to provide consular assistance and attend court hearings,” a spokesperson for the shadow foreign minister, Penny Wong, said. Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch, also said the latest case was “worrying”. “Hong Kong’s draconian national security law is a roadmap for repression – it criminalises all sorts of peaceful activism and criticism that is usually unremarkable in a democracy,” Pearson said. “We are deeply concerned about every person being prosecuted under the national security law, and it’s worrying to see even an Australian dual citizen is facing charges of ‘subversion’.” In December, authorities arrested Cantopop star Denise Ho – who is also a Canadian citizen – in a raid on reporters and prominent figures linked to the Hong Kong media outlet StandNews. That matter involves allegations of conspiracy to “publish seditious materials” in Ho’s role as a former director of the independent news provider. Hong Kong’s security bureau declined to comment on individual cases, but told the ABC Chinese nationals were “not normally entitled to consular protection” in the territory “on account of their holding a foreign travel document”. It added: “Western countries such as Australia, the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand, etc. have all enacted laws to safeguard their respective national security.” The Chinese embassy in Canberra was also contacted for comment. China is particularly sensitive about criticism related to Hong Kong and Taiwan, the latter of which is a self-governed democracy of 24 million people but which Beijing claims as its territory. In December the Chinese embassy accused the Australian government of “violently interfering” in its internal affairs. That broadside came after Australia joined with its Five Eyes allies to voice grave concerns about the “erosion of democratic elements” and elimination of “any meaningful political opposition” in Hong Kong.So that’s that. Well done Australia! Not a thriller to finish with, largely due to England’s splutterings with the bat but Australia got the job done in style. They haven’t dropped a game all series and sent a pretty clear message to the rest of the world that they are in fine fettle ahead of the World Cup. That is due to get underway on the other side of ‘The Ditch’ in a few weeks time btw. Excitingly for the Aussies the whole Ashes campaign was a true squad performance. Trusted performers stood up - the likes of Perry, Lanning, Jonassen and Mooney showing their class but also a host of newer names such as Darcie Brown, Annabel Sutherland, Alana King and Tahlia McGrath all put in strong showings. They look a very slick outfit. Beware world. What of England? Well the series sort of tailed off for them, they’ll feel aggrieved about the T20 washouts as they would have fancied their chances of stealing a few points from those to get them into the series. The Test match was a humdinger, for a good while it looked like they were going to pull off a memorable heist and set up a ding-dong finish in the fifty over stuff. Sadly, they just ran out of steam on that fourth day and in all honesty were lucky to escape with a draw in the end. Kudos to both teams for putting on such a thrilling Test. Let’s hope it leads to more. Geoff’s match report will be along soon, shout out to him for all his work in these pages over the series, OBO-ing and match reporting, a class act. Thanks for your company. I’ve safely avoided the 5am caffeine hit, the only thing I’m hitting now is the hay, or 10.5 tog duck down to be precise. We’ll meet again, goodbye! Here are the captains. Apologies for any typos - they’re rattlin through... A gracious but disappointed Heather Knight: “It was not the ideal build-up but we made the best of a bad situation. We went toe-to-toe at certain times, we’ll be frustrated at few big moments we didn’t win. The last two games aren’t a reflection of us as a side. It was a brilliant Test match and gutting that we couldn’t get over the line. We haven’t quite nailed it in the ODI series. A few little tweaks we need potentially with the bat and looking forward to getting to New Zealand.” and here’s victorious Aussie skipper Meg Lanning: “It’s been an outstanding series...would like to thank England for coming out and being part of the series. We’ve had so many contributors and haven’t relied one or two players. There’s always a few spanners that get thrown at us, we’ve done an extremely good job in adapting the things that have been thrown at us. Gives us a lot of confidence. Today was a pretty complete performance. We’ll enjoy this win, it’s a massive achievement then we’ll adjust to those conditions in New Zealand.” Thalia McGrath is crowned player of the series! McGrath: “I’ve found a lot of confidence and enjoyment in the game... It was extremely difficult to break back into the side, I was a big fan on the sideline and just loving that I’ve been able to string some games together.” She’s been magnificent with both bat and ball. That blistering innings to steal the game in the first T20 really set the tone for the series. She hasn’t looked back since. Someone called McGrath dominates an Ashes series? Surely not... Annabel Sutherland is awarded player of the match for her very tidy 4-31: “I’m just enjoying my cricket at the moment, having a lot of fun. It was a really good bowling performance all-round. Playing against the England girls is tough and they brought a lot of fight. We really enjoyed it.” Did we mention there is a World Cup around the corner? Lanning finishes it off in fine style! Farrant pitches one up and the Aussie captain send its soaring over long off! Congratulations Australia. A nice moment for Lanning and Perry to be there at the end. The Ashes are well and truly theirs. Australia 164-2 ( Lanning 57* Perry 31*) 36th over: Australia 158-2 ( Lanning 51 Perry 31) All over bar the warbling here. Perry whips Davies through midwicket for a boundary and another brace of singles bring Australia within one hit. 35th over: Australia 152-2 ( Lanning 50 Perry 26) Just a single from it and Ecclestone ends with 1-18 off her ten overs. Hats off to her. And hats off to Lanning. Her team have outclassed England in each of the three formats in this series. 34th over: Australia 151-2 ( Lanning 50 Perry 25) Fifty for Meg Lanning! A classy innings for the skipper. She’d love to be out there to see this home. She reaches the half ton with a thick edge that goes down through third to the boundary. 62 balls. Well batted skipper! 33rd over: Australia 146-2 ( Lanning 46 Perry 24) Just a couple off Ecclestone. MUST STAY AWAKE. 32nd over: Australia 144-2 ( Lanning 45 Perry 23) This is really winding down now, another seven runs picked up easily off Davies’ over. I’m starting to flag, Lord knows how Geoff got through England’s innings earlier. I guess he has the advantage of it being daytime over there. It is inky black still in South London. The sound of my tapping is the only sound to be heard. Too early for the dawn chorus. Too early even for the neon lycra clad joggers. On we go. 31st over: Australia 137-2 ( Lanning 39 Perry 22) Seven taken off Farrant’s latest set as Lanning once again peels off a lovely straight drive. 30th over: Australia 130-2 ( Lanning 32 Perry 22) Eight off the over as Dean starts to leak a few runs. Lanning clatters her down the ground and gets the sweep out to pick up a few more. Not long now. I think I’m going out hold out for duvet. 29th over: Australia 122-2 ( Lanning 25 Perry 21) Farrant nearly completes a maiden but Lanning gets a boundary away off the final ball, a coaching manual straight drive back past the bowler to the sponge. 28th over: Australia 118-2 ( Lanning 21 Perry 21) Just a single each off Dean and so still the symmetry continues for the two batters. Could do with Australia polishing this off now as I’m starting to debate whether to go caffeine or duvet. 27th over: Australia 116-2 ( Lanning 20 Perry 20) Four singles off it to keep Lanning and Perry on symmetrical scores. 26th over: Australia 112-2 ( Lanning 18 Perry 18) Wahey! Chunky over for Australia. 12 off Dean. Perry strokes her for a classy six down the ground and Lanning gets a sweep away fine for four. 25th over: Australia 100-2 ( Lanning 13 Perry 11) 100 up for Australia. They are breezing this. Just on Will Pucovski, this piece from Jo Harman, of the good ship Wisden Cricket Monthly, is well worth your time: 24th over: Australia 98-2 ( Lanning 11 Perry 11) Seven off the over as Lanning picks off a few and then Perry gives a full toss the treatment it deserves. 23rd over: Australia 91-2 ( Lanning 8 Perry 7) Just a single off Ecclestone who is bowling miserly here. This is nice to see 22nd over: Australia 90-2 ( Lanning 7 Perry 7) Glorious from Ellyse Perry who greets the new bowler, Charlie Dean, with a hop and a skip and a flick away for four. 21st over: Australia 84-2 ( Lanning 6 Perry 2) Just a single off Ecclestone’s latest. Australia still comfortable heading for this target of 164. “A trifle traipse?” emails Derek Pascoe (a relation of Len?) Well yes Derek, but England have just curtailed Australia slightly in the last few. 20th over: Australia 83-2 ( Lanning 6 Perry 1) Lanning shows her class, picks up a couple with a dab into off and then a delicious late cut, almost out of keeper Amy Jones’s gloves, heads to the fence. 19th over: Australia 77-2 ( Lanning 0 Perry 1) A maiden from Ecclestone, Perry forcing off the back foot a couple of times but can’t beat the fielder. A wee bit better from England. 18th over: Australia 77-2 ( Lanning 0 Perry 1) Tidy over from Davies, she keeps Lanning honest. Haynes c Lamb b Ecclestone 31 (Australia 74-2) And now Haynes departs, holing out to mid-off, the bat twisting in her hands as she attempted a bit of a smear. ENGLAND WELL IN THIS... sorry. 17th over: Australia 74-1 ( Lanning 0 Perry 0) Healy ct Beaumont b Davies 42 (Australia 74-1) A leading edge to Beaumont at point and Healy has to go. She’s more than played her part here and broken the back of this chase. Davies gets a wicket, she deserves that after having one dropped off her very first ball 16th over: Australia 74-1 (Haynes 30 Lanning 0) 15th over: Australia 71-0 (Healy 40 Haynes 30) 14th over: Australia 69-0 (Healy 39 Haynes 29) Haynes is catching Healy up, a cover drive off Davies’ final ball brings her another boundary. 13th over: Australia 64-0 (Healy 38 Haynes 25) A single each to Haynes and Healy before Haynes smokes the last ball of the over down the ground, she nailed it, so much so that mid off got a decent piece of it but it still races away to the rope. 12th over: Australia 58-0 (Healy 37 Haynes 20) Healy charges down to Freya Davies and though she doesn’t get to the pitch she goes through with the shot, one had sliding off the handle in the process. It bounces once and plops over the boundary. Four singles are nabbed by the openers and it’s eight off the over. What’s another way of saying cakewalk? Meringue Hike? Trifle trapeze? 11th over: Australia 50-0 (Healy 31 Haynes 18) Three singles off Ecclestone’s first over of tweakers and FIFTY UP for no loss for Australia. 10th over: Australia 47-0 (Healy 29 Haynes 17) A maiden from Davies completes the powerplay. Sophie Ecclestone is coming into the attack. More sorry stats. 9th over: Australia 47-0 (Healy 29 Haynes 17) Shrubsole continues and three runs are picked up off the over with little threat. You decide. Both good grabs. 8th over: Australia 44-0 (Healy 28 Haynes 15) DROP! Oh no. Freya Davies is into the attack and she finds Healy’s edge with her very first delivery, pitched up, bit of nibble away and a feather to Jones who puts it down! Dunnay do that! Healy, inevitably, picks up a boundary a couple of balls later with another classy pull. At least this might be over quite quickly. England will be out of their misery... and I will be back in me bed. 7th over: Australia 40-0 (Healy 24 Haynes 15) Four more - a two and two ones off the over as the ladies in yellow go about their business. ‘No dramas’ as our antipodean friends might say. 6th over: Australia 36-0 (Healy 23 Haynes 12) Healy is giving a mini masterclass here. Three boundaries off the over, two cuts through point as again Farrant misses her line and then a dismissive pull off the last ball that skims, pebble-like across the outfield. Australia have hit five boundaries. It took England 32 overs to hit the same. Ain’t no demons in this pitch. 5th over: Australia 24-0 (Healy 11 Haynes 12) Three from Shrubsole’s next. England have really tailed off towards the end of this series: 4th over: Australia 21-0 (Healy 10 Haynes 10) A more probing over from Farrant, four dots including a play and miss on the forward prod from Haynes. A thick edge then flies wide of Heather Knight at 1st slip and away for another boundary. Fair to say Australia are making this look quite easy. At the same stage England were 1-2. 3rd over: Australia 16-0 (Healy 9 Haynes 6) Shrubsole continues and Australia pick off singles and rotate the strike, simple things that England failed to do in their dig. The difference in intent between the two batting line-ups is marked. 2nd over: Australia 13-0 (Healy 7 Haynes 5) Tash Farrant’s left-arm from the other end, a neat start to the over but she then serves up a short and wide one with her fourth ball and this time it is Haynes who doesn’t miss out - square driving confidently and threading the gap for another boundary. Farrant lobs in a wide outside the off tramline too. 1st over: Australia 7-0 (Healy 6 Haynes 1) A boundary first ball to Healy! Cut away for four, Shrubsole offers too much width and is put to sword immediately. England scored nine boundaries in their innings... Australia showing their intent from the get go. The players are out. Haynes n Healy with the bat. Shrubsole with the ball. Play! Nicht so gut: Thanks Geoff, a darkened room and a lie down await you sir. Hello! Jim here to pick up the Australian chase, yes those italics are loaded. What a confused innings that was from England, not the way they would want to finish the series. It was less tortoise and hare more, I don’t know... sloth and mayfly? It’s creeping up to 3am here in London, so if you’re out there then do give us (by which I mean me, the rest of the household is very much asleep) a shout with any thoughts, theories, missives or whimsy. We’ll be underway in just over five minutes. An email. “Am I the only one who has found both England women and men to have been disappointing this summer?” I doubt it, Murray Henman. That’s me done. I’ll go off and sit quietly in the corner, while James Wallace comes in to marshal the chase. Well, that was awful. The bowling was good: consistent and disciplined. The pitch is difficult to score on. This is not a 250 wicket, it’s ok to treat different matches in different ways. But still, and still, and still. It was the complete lack of ability from England’s proper batters to turn the strike over. It was 20 runs from the first ten overs. No one needed to be carving sixes over cover, but they couldn’t knock ones into the gaps. Tammy Beaumont and Nat Sciver put on 88 together, and batted more than half the innings, but they also batted more than half the inning to make 88. Yes, you can argue that they had to just stick around because look at how sharply everything else fell away after they got out trying to lift the tempo. A counterpoint is that Beaumont and Sciver batted so slowly that the rest of the order was left in a desperate position by the time they got out. There could still be twists in the tail - Australia lost five wickets chasing 129 in the last outing. But it’s unlikely. 49.3 overs: England 163-10 (Dean 18) Nearly made it to the finish line, did England. But if your moral victory is merely batting out 50 overs, you’ve got problems. That’s it. Jonassen just bowls straight at middle stump, Davies misses a pull shot, and England get bowled out once again. 49th over: England 162-9 (Dean 17, Davies 1) Sutherland can’t get a five-for, but her best ODI figures of 4 for 31 nonetheless. Anotherland for Sutherland. She has 4 for 28 at the moment with eight balls of the match left to bowl. Outside off, a push from the left-handed Farrant to find a run, finds the gloves of the keeper instead. 48th over: England 156-8 (Dean 14, Farrant 6) Dean flicks Schutt away square, looks like four with fine leg further around, but Perry puts in a huge sprint and dive to save two. Entirely unnecessary in a one-sided game, for a player who has had injuries in the field before, but that’s Ellyse Perry. 47th over: England 151-8 (Dean 10, Farrant 5) Sutherland to Farrant, attempted loft down the ground, and dropped. Tahlia McGrath nearly let the Wyatt catch slip out earlier, and now she comes in too far and has to lunge backwards when she realises her mistake. Looking up into the sun, probably couldn’t spot the ball very well. Can’t hang on going backwards. 46th over: England 147-8 (Dean 8, Farrant 3) Bit of liquorice allsorts in that over: wides, leg byes, singles from Schutt, but little damage done. Notably good strike rotation from Farrant. 45th over: England 142-8 (Dean 7, Farrant 1) Tash Farrant gets going first ball, on the hip of the left-hander for a glanced single. Feel sorry for her and Davies, asked to come in and play amongst this mess. That was a really nice shot from Shrubsole. Square drive, scorched off the bat, but the left-handed Haynes diving across to her right takes the catch at point. 44th over: England 137-7 (Dean 5, Shrubsole 1) Initially the least dignified part of this over is Charlie Dean trying a ramp shot to Schutt and falling over backwards in the process, crawling to her feet to scramble a single. But then Jones is clean bowled. Anya Shrubsole joins Dean, with Farrant and Davies to come. That’s ugly. Just a straight ball from Schutt, and Jones has an almighty swing of the sort where her eyes were probably closed. An exercise in extremes: block or slog. Nowhere near it. 43rd over: England 135-6 (Jones 4, Dean 4) It’s been a poor series with the bat for Dean so far. She gets a slashed shot away for a run behind point. Jones tries a ramp but gets a yorker from Sutherland, and can only get a bit of toe on it for one run. Then Dean chops one more into the ground towards point. 42nd over: England 132-6 (Jones 3, Dean 2) Charlie Dean heaves at a pull shot from Schutt but can’t time it. Drives one off the outside edge. Then Schutt gets a cutter to leap, hitting Healy in the shoulder keeping up to the stumps. Four singles all up. 41st over: England 128-6 (Jones 1, Dean 0) So it’s Dean and Jones together again, fittingly for Melbourne. That pair didn’t make any in the previous match when they batted together. Can they today? Make that three wickets in three overs, and four in seven. Sutherland zeroes in on the base of off stump, and the yorker dips under Ecclestone’s bat to take the woodwork. The promotion doesn’t work. Innings slipping. 40th over: England 126-5 (Jones 0, Ecclestone 1) Two wickets in consecutive overs. Three wickets in six. Schutt 1 for 1 from that over. Another Australian review for a Megan Schutt not-out, and this one looks closer. Sciver trying to play off the back foot, missing as she clips across the line, and hit on the back leg. Reckon she’s out here. Gone! Smashing leg stump. That one came in on the angle, but looked like there was some swing that helped it straighten. Sciver 46 from 95 balls. 39th over: England 125-4 (Sciver 46, Jones 0) Two runs and a wicket from the over, Sutherland 1 for 11 from four. Job done. King gets taken off after that six, Lanning with so many bowling options. Sutherland gets the nod. Wyatt has played against her a heap in the Big Bash, crosstown rivals at Red Melbourne and Green Melbourne. But Sutherland wins the contest here! Wyatt skips down. Not sure if she was looking to flat-bat over mid off, or carve over point, but instead she gets it halfway between the two, out to deep cover where the sweeper takes the catch. 38th over: England 123-3 (Sciver 45, Wyatt 9) Sciver just hasn’t been able to time her cross-bat shots at her best today. The cuts, now a pull from Perry, not timed well enough to beat fielders. Singles, a leg bye. 37th over: England 119-3 (Sciver 43, Wyatt 8) Second six of the day, this time to Danni Wyatt! Five balls from King for one run, then Wyatt says, enough of this. A bit of drift for King towards leg stump, but Wyatt leaps outside that line and drives way over mid off. Top shot 36th over: England 112-3 (Sciver 42, Wyatt 2) Perry is back for her seventh over. Three singles from it, which makes for outstanding figures so far of 1 for 15. Perry on 156 ODI wickets, Brunt on 163, Shabnim Ismail on 164, and Anisa Mohammed on 174 - they should all be at the World Cup in a few weeks, racing to see who can be first to pass Catherine Fitzpatrick’s mark of 180. Jhulan Goswami, the all-time leader on 240, will be there too. 35th over: England 109-3 (Sciver 40, Wyatt 1) The run rate has crawled above 3 per over with those two big overs before drinks, then Beaumont falls. Danni Wyatt gets promoted to 5 to take the game on. Gets off the mark first ball, which is a start. Three singles from the over, and the wicket. Fifty and gone, from 101 balls. Beaumont wants to go larger once again, shuffles to attack King but means to hit it straighter than it goes. Instead it heads towards mid off, and McGrath is back on the edge of the circle and takes the catch. 34th over: England 106-2 (Beaumont 50, Sciver 38) Drinks break over, and Beaumont finds a single right away to raise her milestone. It’s been tough viewing at times but she’s starting to move. Lanning has turned to Megan Schutt to look for a wicket. Gets a chance at one, sent upstairs after an lbw appeal isn’t given, but that looks like it’s going down. Sciver kneeling to sweep, hit on the knee roll, a good step forward. DRS shows it possibly grazing the leg stump on umpire’s call. Schutt attacks the pad again and Sciver digs it out of there, to midwicket for a run. 33rd over: England 104-2 (Beaumont 49, Sciver 37) Nearly gets out, Beaumont, trying a little lap-sweep to King that almost sneaks into leg stump. Gets a top edge or a glove perhaps, and Healy is also in the frame but can’t get to it. Beaumont off strike next ball, as they trade four singles. Sciver pulls out her powerful low sweep shot but straight to the boundary rider. 32nd over: England 100-2 (Beaumont 47, Sciver 35) Tammy Beaumont! What have you done with the other Tammy Beaumont? The new version uses McGrath’s predictable length to play a ramp shot over the keeper for four. Then, assuming that McGrath will pull the length back, she steps away and really whips the wrists through a cut shot behind point for four more. Another 10-run over. 31st over: England 90-2 (Beaumont 39, Sciver 34) Jonassen slows up a delivery, drawing Beaumont down the pitch and nearly chipping a catch back. Beaumont waits a couple of balls and then forays out again, this time going through with it. Six! Six! After 29 from 86 balls, Beaumont has hit a six. She celebrates by going back, stepping away, and lashing the cut shot through cover for four! 30th over: England 80-2 (Beaumont 29, Sciver 34) Sciver gets a reprieve! McGrath zips one through, beats the outside edge and clips the back thigh in front of the off stump. Then hits Healy’s gloves and thigh. Three noises, confusion. Umpire gives the lbw. Sciver reviews and finds that it was going over the off bail. Celebrates the reprieve by laying into a cut shot, but the sweeper stops it. Beaumont drives one to the same spot. Two singles. 29th over: England 78-2 (Beaumont 28, Sciver 33) Jonassen gets through another over, four singles this time. 28th over: England 74-2 (Beaumont 26, Sciver 31) Tahlia McGrath is back. Three times, the English batters find a way to use her line to push into the off side for runs. 27th over: England 71-2 (Beaumont 24, Sciver 30) Jonassen to Beaumont, who takes three balls to find a gap for a single, and Sciver, who takes three balls to find the fielder three times. 26th over: England 70-2 (Beaumont 23, Sciver 30) Carey bowls on the hip, Sciver glances fine. Two singles and a leg bye. The 50 partnership comes up from 104 balls. No comment. 25th over: England 67-2 (Beaumont 22, Sciver 29) Jess Jonassen’s first over, left-arm spin, four singles result. After 25 overs last time out, England were 67 for 6. Today they are 67 for 2. Which is... better, obviously. But that run total after half the innings is atrocious. It really is. Ok, England are crawling, we all know it, I’ll stop banging on it about it now and will just describe the crawl. 24th over: England 63-2 (Beaumont 20, Sciver 27) Carey tries to help the run rate along with a couple of wides as well as the obligatory couple of singles. 23rd over: England 59-2 (Beaumont 19, Sciver 26) Beaumont advances to King but doesn’t go big, gets an inside edge through midwicket for a run. Has not played a shot in anger all day. 22nd over: England 57-2 (Beaumont 18, Sciver 25) Singles! Four of them! And a wide! The heady heights of five runs from the Carey over. 21st over: England 52-2 (Beaumont 16, Sciver 23) This time it’s Sciver becalmed for five balls against King, though at least she’s trying to play a few shots, she just keeps finding the field. 20th over: England 51-2 (Beaumont 15, Sciver 23) Nicola Carey gets a bowl with her right-arm mediums, and wouldn’t you know, she hits her length right away and concedes two singles. 19th over: England 49-2 (Beaumont 14, Sciver 22) Outside edge for Sciver against Alana King to start the over, and because King can’t field to herself at deep third, it costs three runs. Brings Beaumont onto strike, who blocks out five balls on the forward stretch. Again... see the post below. 18th over: England 46-2 (Beaumont 14, Sciver 19) Another Sutherland over for two singles. According to the comms, going at 2.5 an over is fine actually because you can keep wickets in hand to attack at the end. I would counter that attacking at the end is not going to be easy in tricky batting conditions, especially for new players, and that scoring singles more regularly at the start and in the middle means there is less ground to make up late. Of course England’s players want to score, but there’s a lack of adaptability to turn good bowling into a few runs instead of dot after dot after dot. 17th over: England 44-2 (Beaumont 13, Sciver 18) Trying to push the pace a bit is Sciver, backing away and cutting King through extra cover in the end, splitting the field there and going for four. A couple of singles as well from the over. Drinks on the field. 16th over: England 38-2 (Beaumont 12, Sciver 13) Width to Sciver, would have pitched outside the tram tracks, but she reaches out and makes contact just before the ball hits the ground, driving it behind point. Follows with a single. Beaumont can’t score. Both in the specific and the general. She finishes the over with 12 from 48 balls. I understand that she’s trying to do a job for the team, but... that’s not the job. 15th over: England 33-2 (Beaumont 12, Sciver 8) Spin for the first time today, Alana King flighting her leg-breaks and landing them well enough, bowling quite full and dipping the ball into the blockhole at times. Doesn’t turn much, three singles. 14th over: England 30-2 (Beaumont 11, Sciver 6) Now it’s Annabel Sutherland to bowl, and there is no respite for England. She hits the line and length right away, testing the batters outside off stump. Two singles only. 13th over: England 28-2 (Beaumont 10, Sciver 5) An attempt to get going from Sciver, cutting McGrath from not too short a length over backward point. Alana King has been Selley’s No More Gaps at deep third, saved lots of runs there in the last match and again makes four into two with a tumbling stop here. The only scoring shot from the over. 12th over: England 26-2 (Beaumont 10, Sciver 3) Perry’s sixth over, more blocking and leaving, a couple of singles. England going nowhere and making a slow job of doing it. 11th over: England 24-2 (Beaumont 9, Sciver 2) Sciver off the mark driving down the ground, Beaumont another single, and McGrath bowls another wide. 10th over: England 20-2 (Beaumont 8, Sciver 0) Perry rolls on into her fifth over. Beaumont leaving, eventually taking a run to the leg side before Sciver is beaten. That concludes a truly parlous opening ten overs for England. Just like last time, they have gone nowhere and lost wickets in the process. 9th over: England 19-2 (Beaumont 7) Knight out from the last ball of the over. The golden season for Tahlia McGrath continues. Comes on to bowl, a couple of wides, a leg bye, nothing doing. But the last ball of her over, her first ball to Heather Knight, after bowling length for the previous seven deliveries, she throws in a yorker. Spot on. Knight is surprised by the length, expects the line to tail in at the stumps a bit, and instead it goes on straighter, misses the bat on middle, and hits off stump. Pew pew. 8th over: England 16-1 (Beaumont 7, Knight 9) Quite the battle! Knight gets forward and drives Perry on the up through cover for four, lovely shot. So Perry goes shot, and Knight under-edges into her stomach, very hard. Knocks the wind out of her, and she takes a minute on her haunches and gets a physio check. Alyssa Healy wanders up and suggests that the problem is Knight is too fit - needs more stomach for protection, says Healy while patting her own tummy. When the game resumes, Perry beats the outside edge twice. 7th over: England 12-1 (Beaumont 7, Knight 5) Dicey second run! Beaumont flicks behind square again, the field is more stacked in that area now and there’s no second run to Gardner, I think it was, charging around. But Beaumont goes anyway, and gets lucky with Gardner throwing wide of the stumps. Knight going to the other end hesitated, and might have been in strife had the throw gone that way too. Beaumont calms down, and follows with a single wide of mid on. 6th over: England 8-1 (Beaumont 4, Knight 4) Beaumont again goes drive and run, this time more safely to the left of Jonassen, and that’s the first run from Perry’s bowling. Knight follows it with four, leaning over a straight ball to drive through midwicket. She’s always the classiest strokeplayer in this England team. Gets beaten on the outside edge by Perry to follow. 5th over: England 3-1 (Beaumont 3, Knight 0) Beaumont remains pinned down by Schutt, but at least is looking for a way off the corkboard. Walks at the bowler to try to make room on the leg side, then shifts away to hit to mid off and run. That was a desperation single, could have been strife had Jonassen picked up cleanly, but she rolls her ankle a bit and ends up hobbling. Says she’s fine to carry on. 4th over: England 2-1 (Beaumont 2, Knight 0) If the idea of England batting first here was to learn from mistakes, they’re not so far. Knight faces out an over from Perry, defending. Three overs in a row without a run. You can’t just let Australia bowl at you like this, same as England did last time around. 3rd over: England 2-1 (Beaumont 2, Knight 0) Six dot balls from Schutt to Beaumont, the batter just blocking her way through to make sure nothing further goes wrong. 2nd over: England 2-1 (Beaumont 2, Knight 0) Captain to the middle early, Knight with a job to do as ever. Made a first-baller in the first ODI in Canberra. No Darcie Brown to face here though. She gets through four balls from Perry, including a good one that just sneaks past the edge. Oh dear. Emma Lamb’s first ball in ODIs is a comfortable one, able to leave on width from Perry. Her second ball comes in at the stumps, seams away just a touch, and Lamb exacerbates that movement by playing too much across the ball. Misses it, bowled off stump. 1st over: England 2-0 (Beaumont 2, Lamb 0) Tammy Beaumont takes the first ball, Megan Schutt as ever piloting it like a remote-controlled aeroplane from a wide line in towards the stumps. Falls over a bit trying to work the first three balls to leg, straight to the field, but finds that shot from the fourth to clip two runs behind square. Play is about to start at the Junction. Lamb and Beaumont to the middle. News in: Hannah Darlington has pulled out of the World Cup squad, “citing mental health and wellbeing reasons.” She’s only 20 years old, captained the Thunder in the Big Bash this year, and is highly rated. She was the travelling reserve in that squad though, so spending two months in intense biosecure environments while almost certainly not playing might not be as appealing as a tour might usually be. Heather Graham is replacing Darlington in that spot. Three changes for England - and why not? The series is gone. Emma Lamb comes in at the top for Lauren Winfield-Hill (no jokes about where lambs are proverbially led, please). Tash Farrant and Freya Davies come in to bowl seam. Katherine Brunt was already out, seamer Kate Cross goes out, then they make space for the other bowler by dropping middle-order bat Sophia Dunkley, moving Danni Wyatt up to six, and spinner Sophie Ecclestone to seven. Long tail, but might as well give everyone a shot. Dunkley is firmly in the World Cup plans, Wyatt is still a maybe. For Australia? No changes. The luxury of winning. Beth Mooney and Darcie Brown played the first ODI but got rested for the second, and stay rested ahead of the World Cup. Seven all-rounders and a keeper who opens the batting.  Pretty handy team.  England Tammy Beaumont Emma Lamb Heather Knight * Natalie Sciver Amy Ellen Jones + Danielle Wyatt Sophie Ecclestone Charlotte Dean Anya Shrubsole Natasha Farrant Freya Davies Australia Alyssa Healy + Rachael Haynes Meg Lanning * Ellyse Perry Tahlia McGrath Ashleigh Gardner Annabel Sutherland Nicola Carey Jess Jonassen Alana King Megan Schutt This is interesting. Each team won one toss in the first two games, and chose to chase. But England were embarrassed while batting first in the second match, all out for 129 in 45 overs. Against some decent bowling but still a horrible display. Heather Knight is a staunch character: is this her way of saying, we put this right and we do it now? Same venue at Melbourne’s Junction Oval, same start time at 10am locally, as England opt for take two. One game to go! And you might offer forgiveness if someone, just a random imaginary person, were to feel a little bit flat about this given the dominance with which Australia grabbed the series and the corresponding way that England folded in the previous two outings. That was not consistent with the multiformat series beforehand. England launched into the first T20, getting beaten by a masterful performance but giving a good account. Had the next two T20s rained off, but then produced one of the best women’s Test matches while going all out to win. Ended up with a draw, thanks to a batting collapse. Sign of things to come. In the two one-dayers so far, it has been all batting collapse, no batting. But the 50-over World Cup is around the corner, so there is still a strong incentive for England to put things right, and for Australia to keep the foot to the floor. Away we go once more.PFAS are a family of thousands of human-made substances – nicknamed “forever chemicals” because they do not break down in the environment – that have been widely used since the 1940s in a huge range of everyday consumer products and industrial processes. Valued for their nonstick and stain-repellent properties, they can be found in food packaging, cosmetics, cookware, waterproof clothing, carpets, mattresses, electronics and fire-fighting foams. In industry, they are used in processes such as metal finishing and plating, hydraulic fluids and semiconductor manufacturing. Uses of just two of the substances – PFOS and PFOA – have been banned or restricted because of their toxic, persistent and bioaccumulative effects, but there are concerns about others on which there is less toxicity evidence available because they have been less studied. The chemicals have a relatively low profile in the UK, but in the US PFAS has become a household term. The devastating impacts of PFOA was first exposed by US lawyer Rob Bilott who has been fighting for decades on behalf of people exposed to the chemicals. His David and Goliath struggle to prove that DuPont, which was using PFOA in the manufacture of Teflon, had poisoned drinking water with PFOA, and that PFOA manufacturers had long known about its toxic effects, was portrayed by Mark Ruffalo in the 2019 film Dark Waters. Bilott’s work led to an enormous epidemiological study of 69,000 people, which linked PFOA to a range of diseases, including kidney and testicular cancer. His class actions have led to settlements of about $753m to date and have spawned similar legal cases across the world, including in Australia where PFOS from firefighting foam used at defence bases has made it into water used by a number of towns. No longer able to ignore the issue, in the US, the Environmental Protection Agency has created a list of more than 120,000 locations where people may be exposed to PFAS. In Europe, Germany, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden have signalled their intention to ban the manufacture of PFAS, most of their uses and their placement on the EU market.The Elizabeth line must be “flawless” before it can officially launch this year, London’s transport chief told a press tour on Monday, amid speculation that the £18.9bn Crossrail project’s opening could be moved to the spring – before the Queen’s jubilee celebrations. On the first media trip to see the line in action, riding on spacious trains along the tunnels winding from Paddington to Liverpool Street, flaws appeared conspicuously absent. Twelve trains an hour are now running in the central section excavated under the capital, with an official deadline for opening at the end of June. Andy Byford, the transport commissioner, said the opening would be “a massive fillip to London’s morale and confidence” after the capital was drained of so much life during the pandemic. “When people arrive, day one, they will be blown away by the scale and by how quiet and smooth the train ride is.” On the concourse below the glass roof of Paddington’s Elizabeth line station, Byford’s words seemed no exaggeration, with trains arriving barely audibly behind the screens sealing the track from the platforms. Mark Wild, the chief executive of Crossrail, said it was “epic, a beautiful outcome”. Most of the volumes of the newly built stations, such as the control rooms, aren’t even visible, he said: “The Shard would fit in here quite comfortably.” For passengers, there is little “clutter”, as he puts it: upgraded information screens are above the automatic doors on platforms; all the trains are fully accessible. On board, it is hard to imagine the trains crowded – each carries up to 1,500 people – but they are wide and high enough to contain two rows of straps for any who do stand, and none should have to crick their neck beside a door. The scale is such that to walk to the cab for a driver’s eye view takes a good couple of minutes; at Liverpool Street, where the platform curves into the distance, one end comes out at Moorgate, a whole other stop on the tube till now. The project is in its final trial operations phase, when volunteers are encouraged to dawdle, block the doors and get in the way, to see how it stands up to routine use. Bigger exercises with 1,000 people are due to be carried out, including staged emergencies ranging from fires to gun attacks – complete with huge cans of soup to simulate, for example, the vomit of a fainting passenger. Bond Street, whose construction fell 18 months behind schedule, has been “clawed back”, said Byford, although it will not open with the rest of the line. It will instead be ready in late 2022, when direct through-trains from the west and east sections that run to Reading or Shenfield respectively will also start running under central London. Scepticism over Crossrail has grown after previous management promised it was “on time and on budget” until just a few months before the official opening planned for December 2018 was aborted. Now, though, it is tantalisingly close. However, Byford said he would not give the go-ahead until entirely satisfied: “It has to be flawless. Better to take an extra couple of weeks, after how long Londoners have had to wait, than have people loving the surroundings but disappointed by the reliability,” he said. “Some days it is 98% on time, but some days have been 80%, and that’s not good enough.”It is hard to imagine a Tory government even five years ago promising to “end the geographical inequality that is such a striking feature of the UK”. In Philip Hammond’s 2016 “northern powerhouse” strategy, the word “inequality” did not appear once. But there it is in the government’s levelling-up paper, released last week, mentioned no less than 35 times. Buried in the 300 pages, we find an argument that “market forces” cannot simply be “left to their own devices”, and even an admission that the “wrenching structural changes” of the Margaret Thatcher years “caused large and lasting economic damage to significant parts of the UK”. But old habits die hard. The paper acknowledges – implicitly and occasionally explicitly – that the UK’s growth model is broken, failing to spread prosperity evenly among people and places. Yet it fails to pursue this reasoning to its logical conclusion, and is thus left trying to solve these problems using the same thinking that created them in the first place. Apparently, levelling up is “about growing the economic pie, everywhere and for everyone, not re-slicing it”. Or, in other words, about having our pie and eating it too. The prescription for areas that are “lagging behind” London and the south-east is depressingly familiar; it’s the same prescription that has shaped cities such as Manchester, where I live, over the past decade. In brief, the government will attract inward investment by private capital in leading-edge, hi-tech sectors and upgraded infrastructure. This will create growth and boost productivity, generating plenty of high-skill jobs and triggering a “virtuous circle” of agglomeration. There’s just one problem with this: it doesn’t boost living standards “everywhere and for everyone”. It doesn’t work for exactly the same reason that soaring GDP in London hasn’t benefited the rest of the country, or even most Londoners. It doesn’t work because great wealth in a few hands does not trickle down. Hi-tech sectors such as life sciences and advanced materials have helped drive gentrification in Manchester city centre, while outlying towns such as Bolton and Wigan continue to be hollowed out. Meanwhile, neither the jobs created in these sectors nor the shiny flats that have popped up around them are accessible to people in deprived inner-city areas such as Moss Side. To its credit, Greater Manchester Combined Authority (GMCA) has recognised the problem, creating an independent inequalities commission to tackle it. The commission recommended that GMCA refocus its economic strategy on achieving “good lives for all”, not just growth and productivity. But, despite announcing a dizzying array of new “missions”, central government doesn’t seem to have got the memo. The levelling-up white paper ponders “why measures of quality of life are often lowest in otherwise well-performing areas of the UK, such as London”, but doesn’t pause to ask what on earth it can possibly mean for an area to be “well performing”, if it is not about better lives for the people who call it home. The answer, of course, is that “well performing” simply means that someone, somewhere is making a lot of money. In London, this is largely driven by an oversized financial sector and an overheated property market – both of which have been shown to have adverse effects on the wider economy. The idea that it is either possible or desirable for every part of the country to be “levelled up” to the status of London is pie in the sky. But the very phrase “levelling up” is based on precisely this fallacy. It soothingly reassures Conservative donors that their wealth and power will not be threatened by this agenda. Instead, we will simply raise everyone else up to the same dizzying heights. In reality, we can’t all be billionaires. This leaves the government with little to say to underpaid workers in “everyday economy” sectors such as retail, hospitality and care. This is perhaps not surprising, since most of the things required to improve these workers’ incomes are anathema to the Tories: securing workplace rights, properly funding childcare and social care, and tackling the extractive ownership models which suck billions out of the system every year. Much easier to repeat tired platitudes about higher productivity being a surefire route to higher wages – a claim that the New Economics Foundation debunked last week. These workers are not failing to prosper because they are not productive enough: the problem is that they are not powerful enough. At the other end of the scale, the notion that we can all be economic winners conveniently ignores the fact that some of our economy’s biggest winners are gaining at the direct expense of somebody else. They are, as geographer Brett Christophers has pointed out, “rentiers”. Like landlords, they extract rents by controlling valuable assets, be that homes, essential infrastructure, or natural resources like oil and gas. They are not outstandingly wealthy because they are outstandingly productive, but because the value of their assets keeps on climbing – contributing to rising costs of living for the rest of us. London is the death star of this model of capitalism, which is etched in the skyline of Canary Wharf’s skyscrapers and Kensington’s luxury flats. It has been propped up through the pandemic by measures such as quantitative easing and stamp duty holidays. Once again, the white paper seems more apt to replicate this model than to challenge it. We are promised “transformational developments” of housing, shops and businesses in 20 towns and cities, but nothing is said about who will own these developments or who will benefit. If the government was serious about doing things differently, it might have looked to Preston, whose much-celebrated “community wealth building” model was sparked by the collapse of just such a development. Instead, it simply promises to repatriate government spending to UK firms – reducing community wealth-building to a sort of performative nationalism. It might even have looked to inspiring experiments in London itself, such as the proposed community-led redevelopment of the Latin Village in Seven Sisters, north London – recently endorsed by the council after a major developer pulled out – for fresh thinking on how to build “beautiful new neighbourhoods” that empower people rather than exclude them. If “levelling up” is to mean anything, it has to be the start of a national debate about who does well in the UK economy and how we can rewire it to spread prosperity more fairly. Without this, all that will be levelled up are the profit margins of a select few. Christine Berry is a writer and researcher based in ManchesterThe first sight of Alecky Blythe’s new play, Our Generation, comes via a trailer on YouTube, which seems apt for a drama that aspires to take the pulse of today’s teenagers. Out it pours in the words of 12 young people from across the UK, whose comic ups and touching downs have been meticulously recorded over five years, with every stumble and repetition left intact. “I’m an only child, it’s just me, my mum, my cat, my dog and my deceased chicken,” explains one girl. Another frets: “I have a really itchy roof of my mouth. I think I have hay fever. I’ve gotta be at 100% health so I can watch Love Island.” Yet another bubbles: “I wanna go hajj so bad. And Australia. I wanna get a tan.” A play by Blythe has become a bit of an event – ever since, weary of trying to find an agent, the home counties-born actor turned to writing in an attempt to jump-start her stalled career. She specialises in verbatim pieces, created from recorded interviews, applying the same listening skills to scenarios as wildly various as the 2011 London riots, a talent contest in Stoke-on-Trent and a brothel for mature women in Bournemouth. “I got to a stage where I wasn’t getting much acting work, and I fell in love with [writing verbatim plays], because, well, you couldn’t make it up,” she says. “As an actor, I found real joy in the fact that you could play parts that maybe you wouldn’t normally play. It really opens up your range. And I discovered that I could do it.” For Our Generation, which opens at the National Theatre in London this month, she and a team of other “collectors” with voice recorders gathered nearly 600 hours of testimony from interviewees in London, Birmingham, Northamptonshire, Anglesey, Glasgow and Belfast. They set out expecting the dramatic shape of the piece to follow that of the secondary school years, with its familiar waypoints of success or failure in exams. But they were ambushed by the pandemic, with the fortuitous result that its 254 scenes reveal how a generation has coped with prolonged stress. Seven weeks into rehearsals, Blythe and director Daniel Evans bustle into an interview room at the top of the National with the sort of adrenalised energy that comes from keeping a rehearsal schedule going on a road littered with the tintacks of positive Covid tests. The first three previews have been cancelled, and the 15-strong cast have only this morning started to rehearse without earphones. They don’t work from scripts but learn everything by copying the original speakers, piped directly into their ears, with Evans finding the dramatic shape while Blythe is ready to pounce every time they forget an “um” or fumble an “err”. It sounds like a form of torture to me, but they insist that even actors who are at first terrified usually come to love it. Perhaps surprisingly for a connoisseur of those unintentional wrinkles in conversation that reveal so much, Blythe’s own speech is as crisp and smooth as a freshly ironed sheet, unfolding in eloquent paragraphs as Evans sits quietly listening. There are two traditions of verbatim theatre: one, pioneered at Kilburn’s Tricycle theatre (now Kiln theatre) in London, uses pre-existing transcripts of trials or inquiries. Blythe, working in a tradition pioneered by the US actor Anna Deavere Smith and the British teacher/director Mark Wing-Davey, takes all her material from face-to-face interviews. When Blythe first started writing, her plays were performed with earphones still on: actors repeated, in real time, speech that was being piped directly into their ears. Her first play, premiered in 2003, was about a 15-day police siege in Hackney, east London, that ended with the death of 32-year-old Jamaican gangster Eli Hall. Pushing her way to the front of a police cordon, she picked up her title – Come Out Eli – from the chant of the people crowding outside, some of whom she went on to interview. Some reviewers felt uncomfortable about how exposed the method left her interviewees (“The technique of recreating the voices of the witnesses often makes people – whether absurdly posh or desperately inarticulate – just sound stupid,” grumbled one). But many more recognised that she had found a new way of giving a voice to one of London’s most diverse communities. “That play ended up being quite successful, and I got a literary agent off the back of it,” says Blythe. “So I went in a different direction. And for a little while, I was both writing them and performing in them.” That changed with her brothel play, The Girlfriend Experience, which ran in 2008 at the Royal Court. “The style changed slightly in that I was casting it more to type, and I wasn’t really the right type for any of the parts. It was the first time I stepped back and was just the writer. I really enjoyed it because I could commit to it a lot more.” She made a return to the stage for Little Revolution, though, a snapshot of the 2011 London riots, in which she played herself in a dramatised scary encounter with a group of looters, who had spotted her taking photographs. The situation could have been disastrous but, after checking her camera for incriminating images, they had let her go. Our Generation marks Blythe’s first return to the National Theatre since 2011, when she pushed her work into a new musical dimension with the award-winning London Road. It was only when then NT director Nicholas Hytner said he wouldn’t produce a play with actors using earphones that she took the leap of abandoning them midway through rehearsals. Dealing with the aftermath of a string of serial killings in the Ipswich area in the 00s, this collaboration with composer Adam Cork was later made into a film. It worked the hesitations into astonishingly effective repeating choruses: “Everyone is very very nervous … UM … and very unsure of everything … BASICALLY.” The Guardian’s Michael Billington was among those who saluted London Road as fresh and revelatory. “Conventional musicals, even at their best, take us into a world of fantasy,” he wrote. “This miraculously innovative show finds a new way of representing reality.” Though Our Generation isn’t a musical, Evans was chosen to direct it because of his musicality. He is also artistic director of Chichester Festival theatre, which became a partner in the production, and will stage the show immediately after the NT. What was it that piqued his interest? “Well, I’ve been in some musicals, and I’ve directed some musicals,” he says, with an understatement that sends Blythe into a peal of laughter. As an actor, he is one of the UK’s most successful Sondheim specialists, winning Oliviers for his roles in both Merrily We Roll Along and Sunday in the Park With George. As a director, he has demonstrated a populist flair, with award-winning productions ranging from Oliver! and My Fair Lady to The Full Monty. “And I’m Welsh,” he says. “I think the Welsh bit is important. People always bang on about the tune of our accent, so I grew up with an awareness of how I sound, and this has taken it to a whole new level.” He takes a particular pride in some of the language the play’s two characters from north Wales come up with. “What, you mean the ‘My nails are longer than my future’ line?” asks Blythe. “Well there’s that,” replies Evans, before soaring off into a sentence so gloriously filthy it’s unprintable. “It’s just how language is relished unconsciously by people,” he says. “It’s very, very sensuous, I think, without them even knowing that they’re being sensuous.” Their vivacity, Evans points out, is all the more impressive from a generation growing up after decades of cuts, which mean they wouldn’t have the chance he had, as a talented child actor from the south Wales valleys, to have music and drama classes financed by the local authority. “There’s a character towards the end of the play,” he adds, sadly, “who says, ‘We’ve been left in the rubble.’” Blythe is acutely aware of her responsibilities to her young interviewees, who were all invited with their families to a taster preview on the understanding that anything they felt uncomfortable with would get the chop. “It’s really important to make sure that we are representing them as truthfully as possible, because they’ve been so generous as to give us a portion of their lives,” she says. It says something about the rapport developed between interviewees and collectors that only one interviewee dropped out over the five years, even though some of them found themselves dealing with disappointments and traumas they could never have anticipated. But it’s not all hardship. “There are others who are succeeding in sports and in academia in an immense way,” points out Evans. “Plus there’s romance,” adds Blythe. “You know, falling in love, falling out of love. Sex. Yeah. Drugs. Yes. What is remarkable about this group of people is that, despite everything, they still have hope.” • Our Generation is at the National Theatre, London, 14 February to 9 April and at Chichester Festival theatre 22 April to 14 May.Water from a supply containing high levels of toxic chemicals has been pumped into the homes of more than 1,000 people, the Guardian can reveal. Cambridge Water has admitted it removed a supply containing four times the regulatory limit of perfluorooctane sulphonate (PFOS), which was being blended with other supplies to provide water to the homes of customers in south Cambridgeshire, in June last year. But the 1,080 customers living in Stapleford and Great Shelford were never informed that they had been exposed. The company has not revealed how long the water had been tainted. PFOS is a man-made chemical that has been associated with increased cholesterol, low birthweight and suppressed immune response. The chemical was widely used in firefighting foams from the late 1960s until the early 2000s in large quantities at airfields and firefighting training centres. Dubbed “forever chemicals” because they are designed never to break down in the environment, the substances can percolate through the ground for years, reaching drinking water aquifers. The aquifer supplying the affected houses, close to Duxford airfield, was found to have PFOS levels at almost 400 nanograms per litre (ng/l) of water – four times the Drinking Water Inspectorate’s limit. Cambridge Water said it removed the contaminated water from its supply in June and the exposure was under investigation. It admitted it had not told the community, but said it had blended the water with that from other sources before it reached households. It said it was “unable to guarantee a blend below 100ng/l for our customers at all times and … previous samples taken from the same area have shown PFOS levels below 100ng/l”. Jamie DeWitt, professor of pharmacology and toxicology at East Carolina University in the US, said: “People who have been consistently consuming water at [these levels] will have increased risk of certain types of diseases that have been linked to epidemiological studies … including changes in cholesterol … [and] reduced vaccine antibody responses, which is concerning because we really need our immune system to be working really well right now.” She said other chemicals in the wider polyfluoroalkyl substances family – known as PFAS – “have been linked to kidney and testicular cancer and those in utero or very young are at risk of developing health problems”. The people of the affected villages remain in the dark. Malcolm Watson, the chair of Great Shelford parish council, said: “We’ve heard nothing at all from Cambridge Water … they’ve been very backward at coming forward.” Belinda Irons, the clerk of Stapleford parish council, said the organisation “had no knowledge” of the contamination. Great Shelford is home to about 5,000 people and Stapleford about 2,000, according to Watson, who said he would be surprised if the larger village of Sawston, which lies between Duxford airfield and Great Shelford, had escaped contamination. Tony Fletcher, associate professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, described levels seen in Duxford as “clearly grossly exceeding anybody’s recommended limit for drinking water”. He said PFOS accumulates in the body, with a half-life of about three to five years. “Once you get them in your body it takes a long time for you to leach them out because of the process of active reabsorption,” he said. Cambridge Water will not say how long the villages had been drinking water containing the contaminated supply, only that previous modelling and sampling undertaken in 2020 suggested the levels were previously below 100ng/l, although it would not give an exact concentration level. A spokesperson for Cambridge Water said it has a monitoring plan in place for 47 substances, as required by the Drinking Water Inspectorate, “using a laboratory that will have an accredited analytical method very soon”. It said “public health is our top priority and we will ensure all of our PFAS risk assessments are kept under continual review”. The UK has one of the highest acceptable PFOS thresholds in the world. Philippe Grandjean, of the University of Southern Denmark and adjunct professor of environmental health at Harvard, said acceptable concentrations would be reduced as more evidence appeared. “It’s similar to what happened with asbestos and lead. In the beginning people didn’t believe it was that bad.” The more of this class of chemical that is absorbed into the body, the greater the risk of adverse effects, Grandjean said. “You’re not going to get poisoned but the exposure will add to your risk of non-communicable disease, such as endocrine disruption, like thyroid gland problems – there may be problems with a host of diseases, like you’re at a greater risk of developing type 2 diabetes and obesity. “In regard to reproductive health, there’s a lesser chance of actually achieving pregnancy, and once a woman gets pregnant then there’s a greater likelihood of preterm birth and child that is low birthweight or lower than expected.” Duxford airfield’s spokesperson said no banned substances “are knowingly used anywhere across our estate” and that it no longer uses firefighting foam “and haven’t for years, as we are aware of the sensitivity of the aquifer that Duxford sits on top of”. There has been little testing of drinking water in the UK compared with other countries, but in October the Drinking Water Inspectorate told water companies to check their supplies for 47 types of PFAS. Defra, the Drinking Water Inspectorate and the Environment Agency declined to comment. • This article was amended on 8 February 2022 to make clearer that the 400ng/l levels of PFOS were found in the supply of water from near Duxford airfield, and that this was blended with other supplies before it reached affected households. Also, the limits are set by the regulator, rather than in law; a link to the relevant guidance has been added.No one is better at playing idiotic egomaniacs than Will Arnett, and I mean that as the highest of compliments. From his malevolent ice skating champion in Blades of Glory, to the nefarious TV executive Devon Banks in 30 Rock, to most famously, Gob (pronounced, biblically, “Job”) Bluth, the inept eldest son on Arrested Development, Arnett has cornered the market on fools who brag about themselves to compensate for how little they have to brag about. “Like the guy in the $4,000 suit is holding the elevator for the guy who doesn’t make that in three months. Come on!” Gob shouts at his employees. So it is extremely pleasing that when we connect by video chat, and Arnett appears on my screen from his home in Los Angeles, that he is sitting in front of a clutch of awards. Like the actor with a shelf of awards is going to talk to the journalist with nothing. Come on! “Oh man. I just figured out that I probably shouldn’t be sitting here,” Arnett says when I ask about the metalware behind him. “It’s embarrassing because it’s like: ‘Hey man, we can all curate what we have in our background – and you choose to have that!’ I’ve gotten a lot of shit from friends on Zoom calls about it. But honestly, I didn’t put them there, I just moved house …” As well as moving house, Arnett, 52, had a baby over lockdown, Alexander, known as Denny, with his girlfriend Alessandra Brawn. He also has two older sons with his ex-wife, Amy Poehler. How has having his third baby in his 50s compared with having his first in his 30s? “Well, when you already have kids, you know how long the road is. Like, this morning, just getting my two older boys out of the house and to school took a couple hours and by the time I’m home it’s 8.30 and I’m three hours into the day already and I’m like: ‘Oh my god. I’m in this for A WHILE,’” he says, rubbing his eyes. Arnett looks far better than anyone with a 20-month-old baby has any right to, but his handsome appearance always did undercut his loser persona (or maybe that should be the other way around). So he’s not planning the fourth and fifth babies? He fixes his face into an exaggerated grin with wide-open, terrified eyes. “No. I am absolutely not doing that.” The awards are for his work on the superlative animated Netflix series BoJack Horseman, which ran from 2014 to 2020, because as well as being the go-to guy for malevolent doofuses, Arnett is the man to call if you’re making an animated film or TV show and you need a deep and scratchy voice that audiences adore. Name a blockbuster animated film of the past 20 years and Arnett was probably involved: Ratatouille, Despicable Me, the Lego films – in which he played a hilariously arrogant Batman. “I think the first thing I did was … I want to say Ice Age 2? Maybe? But don’t get me wrong, I’m not one of those actors who are like: ‘Actually I’ve done so many, I can’t remember which one it is.’ It’s purely bad memory,” he adds quickly. Liza Minnelli swooned to his baritone on Arrested Development and I ask when he realised he had such a great voice and whether he does anything to take care of it. He laughs at the very thought. “Never and no. It wasn’t until I moved to New York that people mentioned my voice to me. Maybe in Canada people don’t really compliment each other. Actually, a member of my extended family said to me: ‘People PAY you for that voice?!’” Unlike his characters, Arnett, who grew up in Toronto, is cursed with a very Canadian sense of self-awareness and self-mockery. “I hope I’m not being too earnest,” he frets at one point. “I just get so worried when I talk about my life.” And yet Arnett has been famous now for decades. He didn’t breakthrough until he was almost 33, when Mitch Hurwitz, the creator of Arrested Development, cast him as Gob after years of false starts. “From the moment I met Mitch, my life changed. I learned so much about the world from him, and I’m a better person because of my friendship with him. You’re not going to get me crying,” he says, tears suddenly welling in his eyes. Arnett was one of the breakout stars of Arrested Development, going from a complete unknown to being cast in movie comedies such as Blades of Glory, Hot Rod and Semi-Pro, playing characters not a million miles from Gob. “I like characters who are really cocky and really dumb. That always seems to be a really great cocktail for me,” he says. And yet, over the past decade, he seemed to have enough of that cocktail. BoJack Horseman and Flaked, the Netflix series he created, wrote and starred in 2016, about a man struggling to maintain his sobriety, were melancholic rather than farce. “It’s a new phase,” he told interviewers at the time. Arnett was always a good actor, having studied at the Lee Strasberg Institute, rather than taking the usual route to comedy through sketch shows. The dramatic background helped his comedy: his idiots are endearing because he balances the silliness with epiphanic moments of bleak self-awareness, most obviously with Gob. As a result, we Arrested fans laughed at Gob, but we also wanted to things to work out for him. Arnett was especially excellent on BoJack Horseman, as the destructive has-been actor who knows how awful he is. Yet he had always been so winning at playing losers, it was hard not to feel that, in jettisoning his signature character, something had been lost. So it’s a joy to see him in his latest Netflix series, Murderville, a US take on BBC Three’s Murder in Successville, in which he plays a cop named Terry Seattle – “and no, I’ve never been there,” Seattle growls. In each episode, Seattle has to solve a murder with a different celebrity trainee – Sharon Stone, Conan O’Brien, Annie Murphy, Ken Jeong, Marshawn Lynch and Kumail Nanjiani all take turns in the role – and the celebrity has no script. Yes, it’s the improv celebrity cop show you didn’t know you needed in your life. I was a little sceptical when I heard about the concept, and I have seen Arnett in too many short-lived shows. But I ended up bingeing it and, at times, especially with Nanjiani’s episode, I cried with laughter. It’s shamelessly silly, and watching Arnett try to control the storyline, while also bouncing off the bemused celebrity guest and still maintain his persona as the moronic cop feels like a glimpse of sunshine after a long winter: you can’t help but grin. But why isn’t Arnett’s Arrested co-star – and off-screen best friend – Jason Bateman in the show? “He was supposed to be! But because of the scheduling of his other Netflix show [Ozark], he couldn’t. What happened was a bummer because – well, wait,” he says, correcting himself. “Here’s the good news: I actually ended up making the show with a bunch of people I didn’t know, which was amazing. Because I’m lazy, I love doing stuff with my friends, but everyone was working. But actually, we ended up getting so many amazing people.” It works to the show’s advantage to have Arnett trying to manage people he clearly isn’t best buddies with, as it makes proceedings feel less chummy. Stone is an obvious example. “She’s so confident and smart, I felt like her assistant,” he says, and this comes across very satisfyingly on screen. But the real joy of Murderville is that, after the existential angst of BoJack, it’s nice to see Arnett enjoying himself again. “You know, the last couple years have been so weird for me, and this was just about having fun,” he says. The weird years began in 2012 when Arnett and Poehler announced, after nine years of marriage, that they were separating; they divorced in 2016. They had often worked together and Mindy Kaling, in her bestselling memoir, Is Everyone Hanging Out Without Me?, cites their relationship as the ideal, a sentiment echoed by fans. So their split sparked an enormous amount of online commentary. What’s it like going through a divorce when the outside world is so invested in you as a couple? “People talk about you like they know you and they talk about your relationship as if they know what’s going on. So imagine how weird that is. It’s brutal with any relationship, and we have kids, and without getting into specifics, you then see stuff online, like, this one journalist wrote: ‘I’m Team Amy.’ I’m like: ‘You’re a grown person. What are you talking about? This is a breakup. This is a family. This isn’t some game.’” I tell him that my favourite part of Poehler’s 2014 memoir, Yes Please, is her chapter in which she imagines hypothetical books to help people through a divorce. One is called I Want a Divorce! See You Tomorrow! – to help divorced parents with young children “have a knock-down, drag-out fight and still attend a kid’s birthday party together on the same day”. He makes a small smile. “Yeah, you get on with it. It’s been almost 10 years and my kids are so lucky that Amy is their mother and I’m so lucky that we’re such a huge part of each other’s lives, even more so than we were five years ago,” he says. At the time of the separation, Arnett was making season four of Arrested Development, when Netflix revived the show in 2013 after Fox abruptly ended it in 2006. He was thrilled to be back with the cast, but the shoot was, he says “almost excruciating … Just brutal, brutal, brutal. I was driving to the set one day and I pulled over to the side of the road and cried for an hour.” At least he was working with Hurwitz at the time, who, he says, helped him to turn his pain into something “hilarious and cathartic” on the show. That pain directly fed into BoJack Horseman and Flaked. His self-loathing, narcissistic character on the latter was, he says, “an amalgamation of characteristics that I didn’t like about other people and other stuff about me that I didn’t like. Yeah, what a weird thing to do. But it was kind of the only thing I knew how to do. It was a painful couple of years, but I had to go through it, I guess.” At the time of making Flaked, Arnett, who had been sober for well over a decade, said he was struggling with alcohol again. He winces when I bring that up. “I don’t know. I think we all go through things in our lives, and when we’re in it, we talk very honestly about it. I don’t regret [saying it], but that was six or seven years ago. You know what I mean?” Arnett then went back to Arrested to make the fifth series. It is by now largely agreed among the fans that the fourth and fifth seasons aren’t a patch on the original three. Did it feel different making them? “You know, I think there were a lot of things in those seasons that did not work. We weren’t all together, for a start,” he says, referring to the scheduling difficulties that made it impossible to get the actors all together at the same time. “But there were moments when we were together and I was crying with laughter, and it was worth it for that. Maybe it was like a very expensive reunion for all of us.” Another problem was that Jeffrey Tambor, who plays twins George and Oscar Bluth, had recently been fired from another TV show, Transparent, after allegations, which he denied, of sexual misconduct. It then emerged that while filming Arrested he had yelled at Jessica Walter, who played his onscreen wife, Lucille, and who died last year. An awkward interview with the cast in the New York Times in 2018 about all this did little to help, especially against the background of the #MeToo movement. Tambor has been little seen since. Is Arnett in touch with him? “Yeah, no comment. It’s just a bummer all round,” he says carefully. Other shows of Arnett’s have also come in for criticism, including BoJack (for having a white actor voice an Asian character) and 30 Rock (for featuring multiple occurrences of blackface; the show’s creator and star, Tina Fey, has apologised and removed those episodes from streaming platforms). Is it harder to make comedy these days now that people are more socially aware? “I don’t know. Sure? I guess? There are more ways for people to voice their displeasure these days. But then, when we made Murderville, we had a lot of laughs,” he shrugs. We go back to talking about the “weird years”, and where he is now, no longer a lost, divorced man, but a happy new father with joyful new comedy. “It is crazy to me how much my whole life has shifted in five years in such a dramatic way. Isn’t that wild?” he says happily. We Arrested fans never confused Arnett with Gob, but, as with Gob, we did always want things to work out for him. Murderville is on Netflix. If you’d like to hear this piece narrated, listen to The Guardian’s brand new podcast, Weekend. Subscribe on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts.Record women’s sport viewing figures for 2021 have been boosted by the 11 million new viewers that tuned into the Women’s Hundred and Women’s Super League, according to a new report. The Women’s Sport Trust’s “visibility uncovered” study has found that the audience for domestic women’s sport has bucked the trend of declining TV viewing hours generally and amassed a total audience of almost 32.9 million people last year, with football and cricket the biggest drivers of the newer audience. Tammy Parlour, chief executive and co-founder of the WST, highlighted the importance of free-to-air broadcast deals alongside those that are subscription-based and said that their impact on women’s sports “should not be underestimated,” with free-to-air bringing in 19 million new viewers. Of the total number of women’s sport’s viewers, 41% of viewing hours went to cricket, while football contributed 39%, albeit with the new broadcast deal with BBC Sport and Sky Sports beginning with the new season in September. The report also found that the 5.9 million new viewers for the WSL had not watched any other sport in 2021 before the start of the season. Of the 4.9 million new viewers of the Hundred, 71% had gone on to watch other women’s sport, with tennis and football the biggest beneficiaries. Meanwhile 25% of those who watched the Women’s Hundred or England women’s cricket did not watch any men’s cricket in 2021. In football 6.2 million people watched live WSL games in 2021 without watching a Premier League game on TV, while 1.5 million people watched live W Series coverage without watching live F1. “Domestic competitions such as the Hundred and the Women’s Super League are the perfect gateway to viewing more women’s sport and I look forward to seeing the impact other major international events this year will have on future future viewing figures,” said Parlour. “We know how important these major events are in growing viewership figures but we want this growth to be sustainable, driving greater habits amongst audiences, to ensure women’s sport continues to be visible, viable and unstoppable.” In addition, the study highlighted the importance of major mixed events in attracting a female audience with Wimbledon and the Tokyo Paralympics both having the highest percentage of female viewers from major events, with 57%.This Is Going to Hurt 9pm, BBC One A screaming maelstrom of patients swirls around Ben Whishaw, as he lies atop a moving gurney, battling to save a patient’s baby. En route, he has leapt from a lift, shouted at a trainee doctor and not even had time to change into his scrubs to start his shift. “Welcome to the NHS,” he sighs to camera. This seven-part adaptation of obstetrician-turned-comedy writer Adam Kay’s bestselling book sees Whishaw on captivating form as a doctor on the brink, who relies on wisecracks instead of tears to get through long shifts while also trying to maintain his personal relationships. It is a stellar comedy drama that’s full of dry humour, heroism, and, occasionally, tearjerking tragedy. Alexi Duggins Cheaters 9.50pm, BBC One “No one knows their neighbours now.” So says lead character Josh in the first of this zippy, well-acted, 18-part comedy drama told in 10-minute episodes (it’s a triple bill tonight). He has a point, given that he headed to Finland and ended up downing shots with a Lonely Planet writer and cheating on his partner with her – later discovering that they live over the road from each other in London. The humour’s enjoyably dry, the premise is great, and it’s set to get even better. AD AstraZeneca: A Vaccine for the World 9pm, BBC Two The AstraZeneca jab was a source of national pride when it arrived in late 2020, seeming to herald an end to the pandemic. But the scientists who developed it had a greater ambition: to see it distributed around the world. In this documentary, Fergus Walsh tracks that noble aspiration. Phil Harrison The Gilded Age 9pm, Sky Atlantic Julian Fellowes’ starry, silly period drama canters on. George suffers some bad luck that puts the new railway station in jeopardy, while Agnes bears the ultimate indignity: not being heeded, as her headstrong niece Marian refuses to steer clear of Mr Raikes. Jack Seale Toast of Tinseltown 10pm, BBC Two It’s the series finale and thus finally time for Steven Toast’s long-awaited appearance in the new Star Wars movie. And no one’s happier than Clem Fandango and Danny Bear. Although given Toast’s track record, their celebration may prove premature. AD Mel Giedroyc: Unforgivable 10pm, Dave Cannabis theft, Nazi waxworks and cheating at Street Fighter are among the topics for the return of this gameshow. Tonight’s confessors of outrageous antics include Sarah Millican, Jamali Maddix and Chris McCausland. ADThe worsening cost of living crisis has focused attention on the cost of the weekly shop. Households already grappling with rising energy bills, petrol prices, tax, mortgage payments and rent can also expect to pay more for groceries this year. At the weekend, the chair of the UK’s biggest supermarket chain, Tesco, warned “the worst is yet to come” for food price inflation, forecasting it would soon hit 5%. Supermarkets are managing their own inflationary pressures, facing soaring bills for basic commodities, from coffee beans to milk and wheat, alongside rising packaging, transport, energy and staff costs. Yet in the fiercely competitive UK grocery sector, if they do not do all they can to keep a lid on price rises, they risk losing customers to rivals, including the fast-growing discounters Aldi and Lidl. So what kind of ammunition do supermarkets have to fight this price war, and what are they doing to limit increases on popular items while protecting profits? Cutting staff costs Payroll costs are in the spotlight. Brexit and the pandemic have disrupted the UK employment market, forcing retailers to offer wage incentives to fill vacancies. The legal minimum wage for those aged 23 or older also rises 6.6% to £9.50 in April. Tesco announced more than 1,600 job cuts last week, cutting back on night shifts and closing more deli and meat counters to concentrate staff on other, more profitable, shopfloor jobs. Sainsbury’s and Asda have also cut back on fresh food counters. Management roles, which like night shifts offer higher wages, are also being axed, along with staff benefits such as paid breaks and extra pay for Sundays or bank holidays. Other tactics to reduce staff costs include more automation, with self-service checkouts extended to shoppers with large trolleys in some stores, and incentivising shoppers to switch to self-scanning systems such as Sainsbury’s SmartShop or Tesco’s Scan as you Shop. Asda is testing automated facial recognition at self checkouts to judge shoppers’ age for purchases of restricted products such as alcohol. Behind the scenes, retailers are also looking at more automation in warehouses and stock rooms. Tesco is planning at least 25 robot-aided online grocery packing sites in the back of stores, while Ocado is developing a robotic system that will reduce the need for humans to pack bags or stack crates of groceries ready for delivery vans. Squeezing suppliers The regular battles between supermarkets and those providing their produce have stepped up this year as manufacturers and farmers try to pass on rising costs. The groceries code adjudicator, Mark White, who oversees relations between the big supermarkets and their suppliers, has warned retailers against demanding that manufacturers give them fixed notice of price changes or other unfair practices. In a tough market, Ged Futter of the consultancy The Retail Mind, which advises many suppliers, says he has seen numerous foodmakers temporarily stop supply to nearly all the supermarkets as battles over price rises have escalated. Until recently he had only seen isolated instances of such practice. “They have got to a point where they have had to stop the trucks as they cannot afford to manufacture at those prices because the level of cost increases is so high. One of my clients’ packaging costs have gone up by 60%,” Futter said. “I’ve been training suppliers for seven years and working in grocery retail for 22 years and there has never been a time like this. The level of inflation is above 10%, it’s unprecedented.” Shrinkflation and mitigation Watch out for supermarkets cutting the size of your ready meal, packet of mushrooms or bag of apples as they try to offset cost increases by providing a little less for the same price. Their suppliers are also adopting shrinkflation tactics. Walkers has cut two bags of crisps from its 24-bag multipacks while the price stayed at £3.50. KP peanuts are now 225g instead of 250g for £2.50. Bryan Roberts, a retail analyst at the consultancy Shopfloor Insights, says own-label goods are likely to be a prime candidate for changes because they are not easy to compare with the previous week or to rival stores. “You have to be a very diligent shopper, or journalist, to monitor different lasagnes,” he said. Removing more expensiveingredients – such as butter – from pre-prepared food and reducing the size of packaging are also cost-cutting options. Other tactics include reducing the frequency of store deliveries and changing how or where food is produced or ingredients sourced in order to save costs. Cutting the extras Retailers are focusing their resources on keeping prices low on key items and ditching less profitable or popular lines. Tesco last week removed CDs and DVDs from stores, after a similar move by Sainsbury’s, while Waitrose is stopping handing out free newspapers to its loyalty card holders, offering discounts on their favourite items instead. Efficiency, efficiency When staff costs are high, retailers look at ways to reduce the time it takes to do work in the store so that they don’t require such a large workforce. Look out for more shelf-ready packaging and gravity-fed shelving, with which goods are fed in at the back and move forward on tilted rollers when an item is removed. Shifting to electric vehicles, cargo bikes and trains – as already done by Tesco – is also likely to become more common as retailers try to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and HGV drivers, while also meeting carbon reduction targets. Stopping the shrinkage As pressure on household budgets increases, retailers say anecdotally they have seen a rise in shoplifting, known in the business as “shrinkage”. Experts have already spotted new measures to counteract stock loss including putting vulnerable products – even chocolate bars – in locked plastic boxes and only displaying cardboard cutouts or empty boxes of goods that tend to be targeted by thieves so that the real thing must be collected at the till.At around midnight one night last week, Sgt Matthew Jacobsen of the Portland police bureau in Oregon saw a man and a woman standing next to a silver Dodge Charger on a street corner. The trunk was open and Jacobsen said he saw a tactical vest with “DEA POLICE” written across it. The sergeant also saw red and blue police lights on the rear license plate and in the front exterior on the headliner. Upon further investigation, Jacobsen found holsters, handcuffs, badges, credentials and an AR-15 style rifle – later identified as a BB gun. The man, identified as Robert Edward Golden, told Jacobsen that he and the woman were “feds” and that he was a federal agent working in Portland. The problem was, neither of them were. That same night, Jacobsen took the pair into the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) Portland office, where Golden was arrested. In a criminal complaint filed last Thursday in the US district court of Oregon, first reported by the Daily Beast, federal prosecutors alleged that Golden had been impersonating a DEA special agent and had for the past year tricked the unsuspecting woman into believing that she was “training to be a DEA agent”. Golden allegedly told authorities that he and the woman “were into ‘cosplay’ (costume play) and that is why they had the police tactical vests with DEA/Police patches, fake guns and handcuffs.” He reportedly went on to reveal that he bought the fake badges and credentials from various websites, including Amazon, eBay and Wish. However, according to the complaint, in addition to providing the unnamed woman with a fake DEA badge, Golden took her on nightly fake ride-alongs for surveillance purposes and to practice shooting. He also took her to “speak with homeless individuals to develop ‘CIs’ (confidential informants) for future use in case ‘something happened’ to Golden and he was no longer around to take care of her”. The woman, who said she attended school for criminal justice and was given credentials by Golden, said that Golden also spoke of DEA agents named Anderson, Luis, Garcia and Bennett. According to her, Golden told her she would soon be training with other agents. The complaint states there are no agents in the DEA Portland division with those names. The agency also does not provide ride-alongs, the document said. “I believe Golden has been falsely personating a DEA agent to gain credibility as a federal agent by displaying false identification and badges to gain information from unsuspecting residents, and utilizing red and blue code-3 lighting to traverse through traffic,” wrote Morgan T Barr, DEA special agent, in the affidavit. The complaint said the woman had been “tricked” by Golden into believing that she was a trainee for the DEA. She is not thought to be facing any charges. Golden has since been released to await trial on a number of conditions, including needing to secure and maintain a full-time job or attend school or both, limit travel to Oregon unless granted permission otherwise, submit to random drug tests and participate in mental health evaluations. Golden’s lawyer did not immediately respond to requests for comment from multiple media outlets. If convicted, Golden could face up to three years in prison and a maximum fine of $250,000, according to Greg Nyhus, assistant US attorney.Images that tell the story of war and conflict over more than 100 years are to go on display for the first time next year in new Imperial War Museum galleries. A multimillion-pound donation from the Blavatnik Family Foundation has enabled the museum to build art, film and photographic galleries at its London base. Acquisitions will be displayed alongside works from the museum’s existing collection, which dates from the first world war to the present day. Among the works visitors will be able to see are Walter Sickert’s 1914 painting Tipperary, which the IWM recently bought with support from the Art Fund and the National Heritage Memorial Fund. Sickert painted several versions of Tipperary, but this is the only version that includes a soldier. Other artworks include John Singer Sargent’s six-metre-long 1919 painting Gassed, which brought home to audiences the reality of first world war fighting, and paintings by Paul Nash, Laura Knight and Steve McQueen. The galleries will include images from the IWM’s collection of more than 11m photographs, including ones by Cecil Beaton, Olive Edis, and the last picture by Tim Hetherington, taken on the day he was killed by shrapnel during the 2011 civil war in Libya. A highlight of the IWM’s 23,000 hours of film footage is Peter Jackson’s award-winning 2018 film They Shall Not Grow Old marking the centenary of the end of the first world war. Helen Mavin, the head of photographs at the IWM, said the images included ones taken by people involved in conflict, such as soldiers or medics, who happened to have access to cameras or felt compelled to record their experiences. “Across the chronological period we’re covering, you see a lot of the same themes coming up – comradeship, hardship, new things they’re experiencing. These are wonderful records of the individual experience of war; not all atrocity images, some of them are much more intimate, and engaging and compelling,” she said. “People have found a need throughout history to visually record their experiences. These are records that are very emotional, and it’s worth remembering that there’s always someone behind the camera making choices about what is seen and what’s not seen.” The Blavatnik Family Foundation is headed by Sir Len Blavatnik, an oil and media magnate who also owns Warner Music. Last year Blavatnik was named as the UK’s richest person, with a fortune of £23bn. The Ukrainian-born businessman, who made his fortune in Russia, said: “I have long taken a special personal interest in the history of conflict, and the experience of war.” The IWM’s new exhibition space, the Blavatnik Art, Film and Photography Galleries, will open to the public in late 2023. • This article was amended on 8 February 2022. Tipperary was bought with the help of the National Heritage Memorial Fund, not the National Heritage Lottery Fund as stated in an earlier version.An electric shock might be just the thing to persuade a cloud to produce some rain. New research suggests that supercharging a cloud could increase the attractive forces between droplets and help raindrops to grow. Have we finally found the recipe for making rain? Electric charge is all around us. Thunderclouds literally crackle with it, but even the air we breathe has some charged aerosols and droplets in it. Giles Harrison, a meteorologist at the University of Reading, and colleagues have been investigating the electric charge of drops in non-thunderstorm clouds. In calculations led by Maarten Ambaum and published in Proceedings of the Royal Society A, they show that the greater the variation in charges, the stronger the attraction between droplets. “This advances our understanding of how charge influences drop growth and brings a new aspect to answering the age-old question: why does it rain?” says Harrison. Last year Harrison and his colleagues, who have been funded by the United Arab Emirates to research rain enhancement, flew drones equipped with ionisers into clouds and experimented with releasing positive and negative charges into the air. The new results will help them fine-tune these experiments, potentially to find ways to hasten the formation of rain where it is needed.An employee at a Home Depot in Arizona has scammed the company out of hundreds of thousands of dollars since 2018, by swapping out cash from the registers for fake $100 bills, according to a criminal complaint. Adrian Jean Pineda, who used to be in charge of counting the money in Home Depot registers in Tempe, allegedly siphoned $387,500 over four years through this scheme, the New York Times reported. Pineda was tasked to bag the cash from the registers, put it in sealed bags and move it to an account at a Wells Fargo Bank, an access that allowed him to evade “the first layer of counterfeit detection – the cashier”, Frank Boudreaux Jr of the Secret Service told the Times. During this time, Pineda lived a lifestyle far beyond his means, according to Boudreaux, including buying a new car and hiring a personal trainer. In security footage, Pineda was reportedly seen stuffing bundles of real money into his pocket, and replacing the original notes with fake ones after cashiers brought him the registers’ bills. Boudreaux said investigators subpoenaed Pineda’s Amazon records – and the value of the fake bills he purchased mirrored the amount that Home Depot was reporting as their loss. After a manager confronted Pineda, he admitted to trading out the bills, the complaint said. Boudreaux said Pineda had agreed to pay restitution. Fake dollar bills are not hard to get online, and the ones Pineda allegedly used to scam his employers had “PLAYMONEY” written in place of serial numbers. On Amazon, there are scores of “prop money” listings from numerous sellers, most of them with high reviews. An Amazon search for “prop money” generates suggestions for more specific searches such as “prop money 100 dollar bills realistic”. For about $8, buyers can purchase 150 “pieces” that include bills and coins. The products on Amazon are advertised as “pretend play” for children or for “educational” purposes. And they seem to be a favorite for parents as well. “If you do not feel it, or read the small print, you will totally believe it is real money,” reads a review of one such product that received 4.5 stars. In a statement to the Times, Amazon said company policy bars fake currency “that is not prominently and permanently marked ‘COPY”. While there are clear indicators of real money, such as cotton and linen texture, Boudreaux said the fake notes still caused a lot of damage.Australia’s women finished a clean sweep of the one-day matches concluding the multiformat Ashes series, winning the third ODI by eight wickets to ensure that England finished winless on tour. A total of 163 was passed by Australia in 36.2 overs, with the old firm of Meg Lanning and Ellyse Perry unbeaten after 90 runs together. In a final series points tally of 12-4, England’s points came from two 20-over matches that were rained off and Canberra’s last-gasp Test match draw. England attempted a shake-up, leaving out opener Lauren Winfield-Hill, middle-order bat Sophia Dunkley, and in-form bowler Kate Cross to make room for squad players Emma Lamb, Tash Farrant and Freya Davies, with Danni Wyatt moving up from No7 to accommodate the latter two bowlers. Given her team’s previous innings of 129 after being sent in, there was boldness in Heather Knight’s decision to bat first. On the same Junction Oval surface in Melbourne, at the same 10am, she looked like a captain determined to make her charges take on a challenge and rectify their mistakes. What followed instead was a collective resiling from that. Asked to open the batting on her one-day debut in the last match of a lost tour, Lamb was led in proverbial style to her quick dispatching by Ellyse Perry. Tammy Beaumont, Knight, and Natalie Sciver proceeded to play with ovine timidity. Three scoreless overs followed the Lamb dismissal, then as soon as Knight stroked a couple of boundaries she was yorked by Tahlia McGrath. The score at ten overs was 20 for 2. On went Beaumont and Sciver, blocking straight back down the pitch. Perry bowled a good spell of six overs straight, backed up by Megan Schutt, McGrath, and Annabel Sutherland. It was a tricky surface where attacking shots were hard to time, and there was the pressure of a long tail with Sophie Ecclestone batting at seven. But whether through shortcomings in technique or confidence, there was very little attempt to work singles around, turning good balls into chances to dart between the wickets. In that vacuum of action, the Australians just kept hitting a good length and racking up the dots. After 25 overs in England’s previous debacle on Sunday, the score was 67 for 6. After 25 overs in this episode, it was 67 for 2. If anything, the relative lack of wickets lost made the second score the more egregious. There was no plan, just a thought bubble that survival meant something would magically happen. Phase one was bat all day, phase three was profit, but nobody could remember what was supposed to happen in phase two. With Beaumont on 29 from 86 balls, she finally came to life in the 31st over, lofting six down the ground from spinner Jess Jonassen before hitting three fours in her next five balls. But few players can switch from scoring no runs to scoring all of them, so she soon hit leg-spinner Alana King to mid off for an even 50 from 101 balls. Wyatt walked in feeling pressure to explode, hit one six, then was caught at deep cover from Sutherland. Schutt returned the ball, bowled the next over and trapped Sciver lbw on review for 46 off 95 balls. From 125 for 5 with a little more than ten overs to go, the rest slipped away, Amy Jones playing a slog to rival her effort in the Canberra Test for pointlessness, Sutherland finishing with a career-best 4 for 31. Six of Australia’s seven bowlers went at less than four per over. Nor did the disparity improve in the field, with Alyssa Healy and Rachael Haynes clattering boundaries in a 74-run opening stand. Apparently it was possible to bat on that pitch after all. Wicketkeeper Jones dropped Healy from Davies’ first ball of the match, wrongfooting herself to a routine take, and while Davies eventually got Healy for 42, with Haynes following from Ecclestone, Lanning and Perry finished it off with 57 and 31 respectively. As the sides look ahead to the World Cup, departing for New Zealand in the next few days, the distinction could not more stark. England, defending champions from five long years ago, bowled out in seven of their last nine starts in the format, and looking freshly bewildered by it. Australia, batting down to number ten, eight bowling options in any given team, just off a world-record 26-match winning streak, unbeaten in a one-day series since 2013. First match for both teams in the World Cup is: Australia versus England.A bushy pathway leads to the crossing points along the Limpopo River that are the most treacherous part of the journey for Zimbabweans seeking a better life in South Africa. The river has flooded after weeks of incessant rain, resulting in three drownings of “border jumpers” last month alone. A few kilometres away, where the roar of the river can still be heard, men and women clutching small bags of belongings trudge along a different dusty track near Malindi Transit Shed. At 9am on a Friday morning in February, the route to the bridge connecting South Africa and Zimbabwe is already heavily patrolled by soldiers clasping rifles. The journey to Beitbridge on the Zimbabwean side is punctuated by five security checkpoints, with a bribe of 50 rand (£2.40) required by the soldiers and police at each stop. “Where are you going? Come here!” shouts a soldier at a woman in a black tracksuit. After questioning her, he allows the woman to pass. The path continues to the old Alfred Beit Bridge, where the road crosses the Limpopo between Musina in South Africa and Beitbridge in Zimbabwe. Here, border-jumping guides, known as magumaguma, are ready to assist in illegal crossings. It is a steady stream, as Zimbabweans fleeing economic turmoil seek opportunities in South Africa, a more stable economy. Rising inflation, unemployment and poverty drives most Zimbabweans to make the journey. Those who can afford the bribes take the bridge. Others try their luck in the fast-flowing waters, where crocodiles swim. The risks are high: about 100 Zimbabweans are deported daily, according to South Africa’s Department of Home Affairs. But Zimbabweans with little left at home are still making the journey in their droves. “You just pay 20 or 50 rand and they will let you pass. But at every stop, you have to part with something. This is the price one pays to gain safe passage,” says Gain Murambiwa*, 38, a taxi driver. Another driver says it is more expensive in South Africa, where security has been stepped up. “Anyone serious about crossing should at least part with 600 rand, because it is more expensive in South Africa. I normally do five or six trips because many people want to jump the border and we are here to help. There is brisk business when the border is closed like this,” he says. Moud Mbedzi*, 39, is hoping to join her husband, who left for South Africa before the pandemic. Holding a small bag of clothes, she says: “I have already communicated with someone on the other side who will help me get past security into South Africa.” She has left her two children in the care of her mother. “Luckily, my husband found a job and if I get one also, we will get enough money to take care of our children. It’s sad to leave them but I have to go,” she says. Another hopeful traveller is Bright Ntepe*, 30, an engineering graduate. “There is nothing here for me. I have tried everything. Maybe there is a better life for me in South Africa. I know it is not going to be easy but I will try,” Ntepe says. The high river levels are undoubtedly deterring some. At Spillway, a once-popular illegal crossing about a mile from Beitbridge, the men fishing say the river is too dangerous to cross. “We hardly see anyone coming to cross because the waters are too deep. It is very quiet these days,” says 30-year-old Arnold Muzemba*. But at other spots the risky crossings continue. Farther along the river, a group of men are repairing a broken wooden boat at one of the few illegal crossing points still in use since the river started rising. Moses Mbedzi*, 40, transports both people and goods across the river. His raft is big enough to carry 12 people at a time, plus a refrigerator or other home appliances. Smugglers also pay large sums to move contraband across. Driving home a nail as he tries to finish the work before the rain comes, he says three of his boats have been destroyed by the authorities in recent weeks, so he is making another one. “This is the only job I know. How do I feed my family without helping people to cross? I know it is a dangerous job but I have to do it,” Mbedzi says. “The day before yesterday, they [the security forces] destroyed my raft, but luckily they left the rope that we use to control the raft so that it is not swept away by the current. “This is a dangerous undertaking, but I cannot sit at home and do nothing.” The Limpopo runs for about 160 miles (260km) along the border, and the police have just eight bases, 20 miles apart, making it difficult to control. “These people are adamant. We always take their boats but you will see them the next day with a new one. They even tried to create a wooden bridge years ago but it was destroyed by our South African counterparts,” a Zimbabwean soldier says. Zimbabweans who succeed in breaching the border still have to get past dozens of roadblocks on the other side. According to South Africa’s home affairs minister, Aaron Motsoaledi, 13,387 people were arrested at roadblocks between 10 December and 31 December last year for border jumping and smuggling-related offences. The pandemic has exacerbated smuggling between the two countries, with the South African Police Service (SAPS) saying smuggled goods include cigarettes, explosives and stolen vehicles. “The South African Police Service is working together with other stakeholders in the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security cluster at the borders as well as on the border line to curb illegal crossings of persons and the smuggling of items,” says its spokesperson, Col Athlenda Mathe. “On a weekly basis, there are undocumented persons who are mostly job-seekers that are apprehended by the SAPS and handed over to Zimbabwean authorities through a repatriation process which is dealt with by the Department of Home Affairs,” says Mathe. But even as the authorities in both countries try to stem the flow across the border, the economic crisis in Zimbabwe shows no sign of easing and the number of people prepared to risk the crossing for a better life is only rising. * Names have been changed to protect their identityA former comrade of ex-soldier Ben Roberts-Smith has been forced to defend his service record and court evidence during a cross-examination where he was accused of being jealous and throwing Roberts-Smith “under a bus”. The anonymous SAS soldier known as Person 14 served eight deployments in Afghanistan including missions alongside Roberts-Smith. Earlier in his evidence, Person 14 refused to answer questions about whether he had been a source for journalists and media reports. On Tuesday, the judge hearing the defamation case, justice Anthony Besanko, did not compel him to answer. In his evidence last week, Person 14 told the court that in April 2009 he helped form a protective cordon around the compound Whiskey 108 – a known insurgent base in the village of Kakarak. He told the court he saw in fading light a soldier carrying a Minimi machine gun – and wearing the distinctive face paint only worn by Roberts-Smith’s five-man patrol – throw a “dark figure” to the ground outside the compound before firing a one-second burst of machine-gun fire into the figure. Person 14 later examined the slain body who had a prosthetic leg. He said later on that mission he saw Roberts-Smith carrying a Minimi machine gun – a distinctive and unusual weapon. Person 14 also said that, in 2012, he witnessed Roberts-Smith order a member of the Afghan national army, through an interpreter, to murder a captive and unarmed man. The killing was carried out. Under cross-examination, Person 14 defended his evidence, debating with barrister Arthur Moses SC, acting for Roberts-Smith, over his recollections of missions in Afghanistan. Moses and Person 14 debated whether a figure thrown to the ground and shot during a raid on a village in 2009 was wearing “dark” or “black” clothing and whether the prosthetic leg was “beige” or “white”. Roberts-Smith earlier told the court he killed the man with the prosthetic leg but he was an insurgent running outside the compound and carrying a weapon – and was, therefore, a legitimate target killed within the laws of war. Moses said Person 14’s version of events was a fiction: “It didn’t happen did it?” “It 100% happened,” Person 14 said. “You have come here to throw Mr Roberts-Smith under the bus any way you can, haven’t you?” Moses said. “No,” was the reply. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Person 14 conceded he had drunk alcohol from the prosthetic leg after it was souvenired by another member of the SAS and taken to the soldiers’ on-base bar called the Fat Ladies Arms. Asked why he drank from the leg, Person 14 told the court: “It helped me decompress, let off steam, bond … [it is a] high-tempo life, you never know when your last day is coming.” Person 14 was also forced to defend his own service record over an alleged fight with a female US officer in Afghanistan during a party at the allied forces Tarin Kowt base. He told the court he had been officially reprimanded and prevented from going on a deployment to Afghanistan over a hard drive containing photos from his Afghanistan service that he said was stolen from his house by his estranged wife. He had been in the middle of a divorce, he told the court, when his wife had allegedly broken into his home and stolen the hard drive. Person 14 alleged in court his wife tried to blackmail him for $50,000 – threatening to leak the photographs to the media. Person 14 reported the loss of the hard drive to his superiors and a senior officer had to “negotiate” for the return of the files, the court heard. He later accepted a charge of disobeying a lawful general order. This charge meant he was not allowed to tour Afghanistan in 2010. On that mission, during a battle at Tizak, Roberts-Smith stormed machine gun posts for which he was later awarded the Victoria Cross, Australia’s highest military honour. Person 14 was asked whether he resented “the fact that Mr Roberts-Smith was awarded a VC?” “No,” he said. Pressed again on whether he resented Roberts-Smith being awarded a VC for actions on a tour he wasn’t allowed to go on, Person 14 replied: “No.” “But you were upset about not being able to go on that tour?” the barrister asked. The soldier replied: “100%.” Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies all wrongdoing. In his evidence, Roberts-Smith told the court that winning the VC had made him a target for rumours, hostility and spiteful undermining from other soldiers. The medal, he said, “put a target on my back”. Person 14 said he had not undermined Roberts-Smith and had a solid working relationship with him. He “had his doubts” about the veracity of Roberts-Smith’s citation for the VC but he kept them to himself. On Monday, Person 14 declined to answer questions about whether he had spoken to journalists about his military service or whether he was a source for media reporting. He sought a certificate protecting him against self-incrimination. But the judge ruled he would not be compelled to answer those questions. Moses had argued that while journalists were protected from identifying sources, witnesses were not entitled to the same protection. The trial continues.Top story: No 10’s new PR ‘lobbied for Huawei’ Hello, I’m Warren Murray, and I hope this will help you feel more on top of things. MPs from all sides have accused Boris Johnson of whipping up political poison after the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, was set upon by protesters who accused him of protecting the paedophile Jimmy Savile. Starmer and the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, had to be bundled into a police car after anti-vax protesters surrounded him near parliament with shouts of “traitor” and “Jimmy Savile”. The former chief whip Julian Smith described the events as appalling and said the prime minister’s false Savile slurs must be “withdrawn in full”. Johnson said the behaviour directed at Starmer was “absolutely disgraceful” and “completely unacceptable” but once again stopped short of apologising. Johnson is expected to reshuffle his team today including possibly sacking the chief whip, Mark Spencer. The prime minister will also continue a No 10 overhaul after recruiting Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, as his chief of staff, and Guto Harri, his former spokesperson, as his new director of communications. Harri has drawn criticism from Labour over his previous job for a lobbying firm that worked for Huawei, the company linked to the Chinese Communist party that has been banned from the UK’s 5G mobile network. * * * Diplomacy but no detente – Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin had nothing in the way of a breakthrough to show for five hours of talks at the Kremlin on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. Macron, the French president, is due today in Kyiv to hold talks with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has met with Joe Biden at the White House. Biden insisted the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany would be shut down if Russia attacked, but Scholz would not be so specific. Biden said of Putin: “I know that he’s in a position now to be able to invade, almost assuming that the ground is frozen above Kyiv. He has the capacity to do that. What he’s going to do I don’t know.” The president advised US civilians to leave Ukraine, saying: “I don’t want them to get caught in the crossfire.” As the Russian build-up continues, Britain has agreed to send a further 350 troops to Poland. * * * Over-18 checks on porn sites – British users of pornography websites would have to provide credit card or passport details to prove they are over 18 under revived plans. Ministers have said the forthcoming online safety bill will cover commercial porn sites, updating draft legislation that now applies to providers of user-generated pornography such as OnlyFans. More than a third of the British population are estimated to watch online pornography, according to estimates by the age verification industry, meaning age checking could be both an enormous technical challenge and potentially big business. * * * High street faces hit – Britain’s biggest retailers have warned the cost of living crisis will mean consumers tightening their purse strings over the coming months. Households already grappling with rising energy bills, petrol prices, tax, mortgage payments and rent can also expect to pay more for groceries this year. Supermarkets are responding by cutting back on staff costs; squeezing farmers and other suppliers not to increase their prices; “shrinkflation” tactics such as reducing the amount in a pack of peanuts while keeping the price the same; and cutting out unnecessary product lines. And while it won’t solve the energy price crunch, thousands of homes could soon be paid to halve their electricity usage during high-demand times. Octopus Energy and the National Grid are to trial the scheme. * * * Toxins in tap water – Drinking water containing dangerously high levels of toxic chemicals known as PFOS was piped into the homes of more than 1,000 people in south Cambridgeshire, the Guardian can reveal. The aquifer supplying the affected houses, close to Duxford airfield, was found to have PFOS levels at almost 400 nanograms per litre (ng/l) of water – four times the Drinking Water Inspectorate’s limit. Cambridge Water has admitted it removed the supply in June last year and said the exposure was under investigation. It admitted it had not told the community but said it had blended the water with another source. It would not say how long the villages had been drinking the contaminated supply, only that modelling and sampling undertaken in 2020 suggested the levels were previously below 100ng/l. PFOS has been associated with increased cholesterol, low birthweight and suppressed immune response. In the past it was used in firefighting foams, including at airfields. Defra, the Drinking Water Inspectorate and the Environment Agency declined to comment. * * * Runs like it’s on rails – The Elizabeth line must be “flawless” before it can officially launch this year, London’s transport chief has said, amid speculation that the £18.9bn Crossrail project’s opening could be moved to the spring – before the Queen’s jubilee celebrations. As trials continue, Gwyn Topham, the Guardian’s transport correspondent, has taken a trip on the line, riding on spacious trains along the tunnels winding from Paddington to Liverpool Street. The official deadline for opening is the end of June. Andy Byford, the transport commissioner, said he would not give the go-ahead until entirely satisfied: “Better to take an extra couple of weeks, after how long Londoners have had to wait, than have people loving the surroundings but disappointed by the reliability. Some days it is 98% on time, but some days have been 80%, and that’s not good enough.” Today in Focus podcast: Hooked on crypto With endorsements from celebrities and ads on TikTok, cryptocurrency has gone mainstream. But not everyone gets rich. Rob Davies reports on how crypto apps encourage addictive, high-risk trading habits. Lunchtime read: Confessions of an alcoholic doctor “I’m 29 years old, writing notes in a sloppy felt-tip pen (no ballpoints are allowed), trying to understand how I went from being a newly minted doctor in a psychiatry residency programme at Columbia University in New York to a psychiatric patient at Bellevue, the city’s notorious public hospital.” Drinking and drug use pushed Carl Erik Fisher over the edge into a complete breakdown. Then a stint in rehab made him question how much we really understand about addiction. Sport At the Winter Olympics so far this morning, Kirsty Muir of Team GB has finished fifth in the women’s big air. US-born Eileen Gu won the gold for China. The curling mixed doubles bronze-medal game between Sweden and Team GB will be starting soon. Follow the action at our live blog. England slumped to an eight-wicket defeat in the third one-day international as Australia brought down the curtain on the Women’s Ashes series with another thumping win. Max Verstappen, the Formula One world champion, has spoken to the Guardian about the final-lap drama in Abu Dhabi that secured him a first world title – that he “really deserved” – at the expense of his fierce rival Lewis Hamilton. After confirming the appointment of Paul Collingwood as interim head coach on Monday England’s extensive post-Ashes overhaul turns next to the playing staff. Nike has terminated its endorsement agreement with the Manchester United and England striker Mason Greenwood, the sportswear firm has announced. Chelsea have settled a high court case brought by four former youth-team players over alleged historical racist abuse. Business The Indian coal tycoon Gautam Adani has become Asia’s richest man after his big bet on solar energy propelled his fortune to $88.5bn. Adani, whose company is pursuing one of the world’s largest coal projects in Australia, passed fellow Indian mogul Mukesh Ambani and also entered the top 10 of the world’s richest people. The FTSE100 is set to nudge up 0.1% this morning while the pound is on $1.353 and €1.184. The papers The Guardian leads with “Angry MPs blame Johnson ‘poison’ after anti-vaxxers set upon Starmer”. A Mirror front-page photo of the scene is overlaid with: “This is why words matter … this is why truth matters”. Its splash though, is “Waiting shame”, about the backlog of six million NHS patients on waiting lists. The number one story in the Times is “Britain will not flinch over Ukraine, says PM” – the mobbing of Keir Starmer runs across the top of the page. The Metro has the latter as “Keir flees hate mob” and the i has something similar, appended with “… as PM faces crunch 48 hours”. The Telegraph reports “North Sea oil fired up amid net zero row” – it says new drilling is set to be approved. “A licence to clean up the web” – that’s the Mail on over-18 ID requirements for porn sites. The Express has “Boris: Rishi is loyal and we’re united on problems”. In a puff box below the masthead it has “Disgraceful: Starmer is mobbed by anti-vaxxers”. The Sun leads with a footballer being filmed kicking a cat. And the top story in the Financial Times is “ECB rate expectations force up Greek and Italian borrowing costs” – as investors adjust to signs that the European Central Bank could raise interest rates as soon as this year. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendFirst your children idolise you, then they see through you, then they forgive you. That’s how the parenting cliche goes. I remember when I first read it. The kids were really small, and I’d stolen 25 seconds from the ceaselessness to look at Twitter, which was all I ever looked at then. Before long, two sentences came to represent the absolute outer limit of my concentration span, and that, I’m afraid, is still true. The end of idolisation can’t come soon enough, I thought. Roll on seeing through me, bring forth scornful self-reliance. Sure, it will be sad when the magic of childhood is replaced by the cynicism of adolescence, but on the plus side, at least they’ll be able to travel unaided to the toilet. I maybe didn’t give enough thought to what the process of being seen through would entail. It starts with the systematic, real-time dismantling of all authority. These are all the things I’m no longer to be trusted on, as of this weekend: what length hair should be; where to play badminton; which of geography and history is more interesting; categories of skin type (“oily” and “combination” are no longer in use, in the 21st century); anything to do with vegetarianism, or Ukraine, or animal husbandry; computers and phones; how to cross a road; the world of work; and the identification of insects. I didn’t even realise how much casual authority I had until it was all stripped away. I think I debased the currency by having too many strong opinions. Now I could have a full wheelbarrow of views and it wouldn’t buy me even a single slice of credibility. I suggested we all take a new approach, work on the assumption that I’m ignorant of almost everything, and only mention the subjects on which I am still a trusted source. “The 1960s,” said one. “I wasn’t alive in the 1960s!” “OK, boomer,” said the other. “I’m not a boomer! I’m generation X!” “Boomer is more of a vibe,” said the first. “Being surprised by completely predictable things,” said the second. “I completely trust you to be amazed by things that aren’t amazing.” It came at me quite fast, this shift from “oracle” to “person who is wrong about almost everything”, but I’m developing some adaptive strategies, such as “being wrong on purpose, to comic effect” and “not completely listening”. Much harder to process is the cast change: for years, in the drama that is any household, the parents are the main characters, and the children have supporting roles, bringing cute moments and weird allergies to give texture to the narrative arc of the leads. Then, wham! One night, there you are, watching TV, perhaps you fall asleep a little earlier than you planned, perhaps the next generation stays up chatting past midnight. However they managed to orchestrate this, it has happened: they are now the heroes. If anyone were to make a poster of us all, their names would be bigger. The process must have been incremental, so how did I not see it coming? Did it start when one was suddenly taller? Or when one of the short ones started having a bath of their own free will? Economists say that the individual’s contract with capitalism is premised on seeing one’s children do better than oneself, and I always think: doesn’t that depend on the baseline? If you were rich already, would you necessarily long for your children to be richer? Could this be one of those things that economists are wrong about? To see your children become the protagonist, on the other hand – to become, yourself, a footnote to their story, a stub in their Wikipedia entry, this was definitely the whole point. It’s the natural order of things. You sure as hell wouldn’t want it the other way round. So why is it so incredibly surprising? Oh right, I forgot: being surprised by completely predictable things – that’s my specialist subject. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistHe is a prolific political publisher, whose books and websites have caused toe-curling embarrassment for prime ministers – and now for one political spouse. But for Michael Ashcroft, the billionaire businessman and Tory donor, his books on the major political players are all about influence. Before the revelations this week from a forthcoming book, First Lady, about Carrie Johnson, Ashcroft’s most famous revelation was David Cameron’s “pig-gate” scandal in his book Call Me Dave. That was widely accused of being a personal hatchet job after his relationship with the then-prime minister deteriorated. Since then, Ashcroft has published exposés on the UK’s faltering defence and health service, as well as a number of political biographies. Those are not always intended as takedowns – he published warm biographies of Rishi Sunak and Jacob Rees-Mogg when their political careers were in the ascendancy. His quest for political influence is not limited to books: he has a controlling stake in the influential ConservativeHome website and is the largest shareholder in Dods, a parliamentary website that publishes PoliticsHome and the House magazine and subscription services read widely in Westminster and Whitehall. There is certainly some significant editorial freedom; on Monday ConHome’s editor Paul Goodman publicly questioned whether Carrie Johnson was fair game. “Whether the charge is true or not, it deflects from the main point. Which is that the prime minister himself, not his spouse, bears responsibility for his decisions,” he wrote. First Lady’s publication is understood to have been brought forward after Johnson’s premiership was imperilled by partygate. The book makes a number of significant – and disputed – allegations, including that Carrie Johnson messaged staff from the prime minister’s phone, interfered in significant political decisions and arranged to have staff members hired or dismissed, depending on who was in favour. Ashcroft does not publish to make money; his net worth is an estimated $2.1bn, the bulk of which comes from the sale of home security company ADT. He is a citizen of Belize, where he is a major investor. “These books and websites are not about making money, it’s about being a player, being part of the political conversation and making headlines,” one former associate said. “He doesn’t micromanage, but he knows the books need a spicy anecdote to get serialisations.” Ashcroft employs writers and researchers for his books, usually a lead author with a small team. They are a select, trusted few, including the former Sunday Times political editor Isabel Oakeshott and the ex-Mail on Sunday journalist Miles Goslett. Those who have worked with Ashcroft say he is as keen to spot, cultivate and endorse upcoming talent as he is to turn the spotlight on those who have slighted him. Ashcroft has been open about his “beef” with Cameron, despite a previous closeness, after Cameron did not offer him a significant government job in 2010. Cameron blamed the Liberal Democrats, who were in coalition government, and offered Ashcroft a junior Foreign Office post. “It would have been better had Cameron offered me nothing at all,” Ashcroft wrote. “After ploughing some £8m into the party, I regarded this as a declinable offer.” Craig Oliver, Cameron’s spin doctor, said that Ashcroft’s methods needed to be scrutinised. He wrote in the Spectator that the claims made by Ashcroft and his co-author Isabel Oakeshott about Cameron’s alleged fellatio with a pig head had no verifiable sourcing but blew up into a big story regardless. “The claim was deeply cynical, because those behind it knew that even though there was no proof, it would be toxic anyway,” he wrote. “Any attempt to say the story wasn’t true would result in ‘PM denies pig sex claim’ headlines, leading some to believe there is no smoke without fire. In the end, all I could advise was that we say nothing, starving the story of any extra energy.” Oliver said he detected something similar in one of the more explosive claims in the book about Carrie Johnson, that she used the prime minister’s phone to give directions to staffers. “The anonymous source is merely guessing about what had gone on, with no solid evidence to back up their assertion,” he wrote. “I have no idea if the story is true or not – but readers deserve higher standards of proof than this for it to be simply thrown into the public domain.” One source who knows Cameron said he had made peace with the book. He is known to have at least two copies on his bookshelves at his family home. Ashcroft has rarely made forays into senior Labour figures, but in August last year he published Red Knight, an unauthorised biography of Keir Starmer. It was in this book where the seeds of Johnson’s attack against Starmer for allegedly not prosecuting Jimmy Savile were planted in many Tories’ minds, though it makes clear Starmer was not personally involved in the decision. In fact, the book argues Starmer should be held responsible for Operation Midland, the police investigation of false accusations of sexual abuse levelled at several public figures. Ashcroft claims that in the wake of the failure to prosecute the paedophile Jimmy Savile, which happened while Starmer was director of public prosecutions – though it did not involve him personally – he embraced an “ideology” that said victims’ testimony should be believed, which became widely influential. Ashcroft seeks to draw a line from that to the credibility police lent the alleged victim, “Nick”, who was subsequently convicted of perverting the course of justice. Ashcroft claims the case continues to “haunt” Starmer, as much as it does the Met. But there was little that troubled Starmer’s team. One team member said they had adopted a rigid non-cooperation policy, which Ashcroft acknowledges in the book, and its authors had found it very difficult to find disaffected or wronged former associates of Starmer – even among his ex-girlfriends. Very few of Starmer’s friends, colleagues, associates or teachers were prepared to be interviewed at all. For Carrie Johnson, there is no shortage of anonymous, aggrieved former colleagues, Downing Street staffers, Tory aides and ex-friends. The motivation for Ashcroft to dig into the private life and influence of the prime minister’s wife is less transparent than his feud with Cameron. Goodman speculated it was about maintaining political intrigue and relevance: “Our proprietor likes to make news and get talked about.” The charge against Ashcroft from Johnson’s supporters is that she is not an elected politician, with no ability to publicly defend herself. One Tory friend called the book a “witch-hunt” and said there was a consensus that in publishing the book, Ashcroft had gone “a step too far”. The friend pointed to Ashcroft’s ownership of Dods, which produces an annual women in leadership event, calling it “duplicitous” that “Ashcroft is making money out of a conference to help women and at the same time publishing a book which is deeply misogynistic and sexist.” But Ashcroft insists that scrutiny of Johnson is in the public interest. “The evidence I have gathered suggests his wife’s behaviour is preventing him from leading Britain as effectively as the voters deserve,” he wrote.‘Thessaloniki is Greece’s de facto ‘food city’,” says Diane Kochilas, a Greek-American TV chef with countless books on Greek and Mediterranean cuisine under her belt. The United Nations agrees, with Unesco designating Thessaloniki Greece’s first city of gastronomy in November 2021. To many, it’s no surprise to see Thessaloniki’s gastronomic culture recognised in this way: “Basically, Unesco confirmed what we have known for ages,” says local expert Chantal Jaspers of Epiculiar, a tour company that gives visitors the inside track on the city’s foodie scene. A journey through the history of this important trading port is an encounter with empires – Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman – and vibrant communities, each of which has left their mark on the city’s cuisine. “Thessaloniki is also the heart of Macedonia, one of Greece’s foremost agricultural areas,” Kochilas says. Walk through the central Modiano and Kapani markets to find juicy Naoussa peaches, Halkidiki olives and bright-red Florina peppers – this rich, regional produce takes its place in Greek, Jewish, Balkan and Turkish-influenced recipes. The result? A uniquely Thessalonian culinary repertoire, best enjoyed with a generous glass of local wine. In addition to well-loved Greek classics such as tzatziki, souvlaki and feta-topped Greek salad, make a beeline for these local specialities on your trip to Thessaloniki: Bougatsa Whether you’re a cheese fiend or have a sweet tooth, bougatsa is the ultimate Thessaloniki breakfast. Now a northern Greek classic, bougatsa has its origins in Byzantine Constantinople. The layered filo pastry pie arrived in the city of Serres (about 70km from Thessaloniki) when Greeks established communities there with the population exchange after the Greek-Turkish war of 1922. “If you’ve ever walked around early in the morning, you’ve definitely caught the aroma of freshly baked bougatsa,” says Jaspers. Today, you can tuck into the most popular varieties, stuffed with feta or sweet semolina custard (doused in icing sugar and cinnamon), at traditional bougatsa joints Serraikon or Bougatsa Bantis. For a late-night sugar hit, head to Bougatsa Giannis to sample their version with Nutella-esque Merenda, or pay a visit to brunch favourite Estrella, whose “bougatsan” combines a croissant with the custard cream of a traditional bougatsa. Soutzoukakia “Thessaloniki absorbed many of the Greek refugees from Asia Minor almost exactly a century ago, and their contribution to the city’s food history has been indelible,” says Kochilas. Among the most enduring of these contributions are soutzoukakia Smyrneika: oblong-shaped beef meatballs, brought from the city of Smyrna (now Izmir) by Greek refugees in 1922. Spiced with cumin, garlic and a touch of cinnamon, this comfort food is often served alongside a pile of spicy “boukovo” pepper flakes. While you’ll find soutzoukakia at many tavernas, Diavasi is hard to beat. This laid-back restaurant close to Thessaloniki’s White Tower has been grilling soutzoukakia since 1977. The key, according to chef Kostas Oustampasidis, is the “quality of the meat, and the age-old recipe” – though he’s keeping the exact formula under wraps for now. Other top spots include Diagonios and Nostos. Koulouria Though you’ll find sellers of these sesame-topped, bagel-esque snacks in the city’s main streets, for a more creative version of the Byzantine-era bread it’s worth seeking out one of Thessaloniki’s koulouria specialists. Pop into Mon Kulur for a koulouri filled with olive tapenade, cream cheese and turkey or a sweeter option with tahini and dark-chocolate chips worked into the dough. Sephardic cuisine Unbeknown to many visitors, Thessaloniki was once home to Europe’s biggest Jewish community. Sephardic Jews arrived in the city following their expulsion from Spain in 1492, with their influence so significant that Thessaloniki would be nicknamed “La madre de Israel” (The mother of Israel) in the Judeo-Spanish language Ladino. Inspired by A Taste of Sephardic Thessaloniki, a book of family recipes by Nina Benroubi (one of the city’s few Holocaust survivors), chef Kostas Markou of local restaurant Akadimia decided to introduce Sephardic dishes onto his menu. “The Sephardic cuisine is fascinating, with deep roots,” Markou says. “The ingredients used are those we also find in Greek cuisine, but the story they carry is special.” Among the dishes on offer at Akadimia, set in a former Jewish neighbourhood, are borrekitas de meredjéna, pies stuffed with aubergine; nogada, meatballs with walnut sauce; and huevos haminados, slow-cooked eggs marbled with coffee grounds. Be sure to check ahead, as Akadimia’s menu regularly changes. Local wine Long famed (not necessarily positively) for its penchant for retsina – white wine infused with pine resin – Greece is making a name for itself as a wine destination. In addition to international varieties, the vineyards surrounding Thessaloniki are home to native grape varieties including the white Malagousia and Assyrtiko, and red Xinomavro, Mavroudi and Limnio. Three of Thessaloniki’s best wineries are within a 15-minute drive of each other in the countryside southwest of the city. Top of the list for local wine expert Theodore Nathanailidis, who is sommelier at hip wine bar Chilai, is Ktima Gerovassiliou. “It’s the most beautiful winery in the area, with spectacular views of the vineyards. It’s open for visitors and has a wonderful corkscrew museum!” he enthuses. He also recommends seeking out his “hidden gem wine” from the nearby Voulgari winery: “Try the Grenache Rouge. From this small, traditional vineyard we have a modern red, with plenty of red-fruit flavour.” Complete the trifecta by popping into boutique winemaker Domaine Florian for a tasting with vistas across the vines and the Thermaic gulf. Bougiourdi “In Thessaloniki, dishes are often just a bit more spicy than in the rest of Greece,” says Jaspers. This legacy of the 1920s arrivals is perhaps best exemplified in bougiourdi: baked feta with tomato, fresh hot peppers and chilli flakes, laced with oregano and olive oil. To fully embrace the spicy cheese theme, make sure the hot feta dip htipiti (also known as tirokafteri) forms part of your meze spread. Some of the best examples of these Thessaloniki taverna staples can be found at The Rouga, Ergon Agora and Igglis. Trigona Filo once again shows itself to be king of the pastries, but this time in the form of golden, syrup-soaked cones, filled with a velvety custard. Trigona Panoramatos, to use their full title, come from the Thessaloniki suburb of Panorama, but thankfully legendary Panorama patisserie Elenidis have opened a branch in the town centre. “Thessaloniki is often called ‘sweet mother’,” says Kochilas. With a trigono in hand, it’s easy to see why. Mussels With the Thermaic Gulf Greece’s main mussel-producing region, it would be remiss to visit Thessaloniki without tucking into a plate or two. Move over paella: head to Ouzo Ston Pinaka to sample Thessaloniki mussel pilaf (midopilafo Thessalonikis), packed with the bold flavours of peppers, fresh onion, dill and lemon. Want to get straight to the main event? Dispense with the rice and sit down to fried mussels or mussels saganaki at colourful Bazagiazi. Frappé Few can turn down a frothy frappé on a hot summer’s day. The iconic iced-coffee drink was accidentally invented in 1957 at the Thessaloniki International Fair, when Nestlé representative Giannis Dritsas found himself without hot water for his usual coffee break. Instead, he put the coffee with cold water and ice in a shaker. The rest, as they say, is history, with the frappé reigning supreme until the advent of the freddo espresso and freddo cappuccino. Enjoy this piece of Thessaloniki history at one of the city’s many cafes – the most per capita of any European city, it’s said. Top coffee spots include minimalist Ypsilon and the more traditional Loux, overlooking the Roman forum.Few people read books about philosophy nowadays, if they ever did, but there is a larger audience for books about philosophers. One of the more successful examples in this flourishing genre was David Edmonds’s and John Eidinow’s Wittgenstein’s Poker, published in 2001, which examined a brief and tense meeting between Ludwig Wittgenstein and Karl Popper that took place in Cambridge in 1946. Metaphysical Animals bears some resemblance to that book insofar as it has two authors – the philosophers Clare Mac Cumhaill and Rachael Wiseman – and concerns roughly the same period. It even features an influential walk-on part for Wittgenstein. The big difference is that it looks at four philosophers, all of whom are women, and it is spread out over a number of years. By focusing on a disputed encounter of just a few minutes, Edmonds and Eidinow gave themselves a tight structure that offered a tidy means of exploring deeper questions of philosophy. The trick in this kind of work is to be able to move from scene-setting to difficult intellectual questions without losing the reader. Metaphysical Animals lacks the narrative discipline of Wittgenstein’s Poker, and as a result is a baggier and less clearly defined book. It’s really tied together by its subtitle: How Four Women Brought Philosophy Back to Life. The quartet in question are Elizabeth Anscombe, Iris Murdoch, Mary Midgley and Philippa Foot, all of whom studied philosophy at Oxford in the late 1930s and early 1940s. In the late 1930s, British philosophy, at least at Oxford, was dominated by AJ Ayer, whose groundbreaking book Language, Truth and Logic was published in 1936. Ayer was the chief promoter of logical positivism, a school of thought that aimed to clean up philosophy by ruling out large areas of the field as unverifiable and therefore not fit for logical discussion. In a sense, it sought to rid philosophy of metaphysics, those abstract questions of being and knowing that students have traditionally liked to explore late at night after one too many stimulants. It also rendered much of moral philosophy as little more than an expression of emotional preferences. Anscombe, Murdoch, Midgley and Foot were not fans of logical positivism dogmatism or conclusions. Fortunately for them, if not for the world, the second world war intervened in their studies, removing Ayer and his acolytes from Oxford, and bringing a large influx of European émigré philosophers. Suddenly metaphysics was back in fashion, or at least no longer frowned upon. The four women all committed to establishing themselves as philosophers, and sought to refute Ayer and his ilk. Mac Cumhaill and Wiseman do attempt to explain how they did this, but too often the arguments are lost under a welter of descriptions of daily life in Oxford, with all its strange academic rituals, arcane language and general sense of inwardness, as well a great deal of incidental detail. If you want to know what colour of silk cushions and bedspread Foot had in her rooms near Somerville College, then this is the book to read. Similarly, if your thing is the extended social connections of the Oxford intelligentsia, it’s a handy resource. But the general reader interested in the subject may wish that it devoted the same care to dealing with philosophical definitions, or where Wittgenstein stood in relation to the debates around logical positivism, as it does in bringing to life the rarefied milieu of Boars Hill. The problem, of course, with philosophy is: where do you start and where do you end? It’s an overarching discipline in which people write whole books on strictly limited concepts. What level of knowledge should be assumed of the reader? Even within its own defined terms, Metaphysical Animals isn’t entirely convincing in making its case. It’s hard to get an objective sense of where these four women stood in terms of influence in the greater scheme of philosophy, either as individuals or as a group. Indeed, it’s not entirely clear whether they ever amounted to a group beyond being friends. That they played an active part in challenging the rigid materialism of prewar British philosophy is beyond doubt. But as the authors note, it was the war itself, and the many atrocities it engendered, that gave urgent impetus to a new moral philosophy. Anscombe, for example, wanted to establish an ethical basis on which it could be established that the Nazis were objectively wrong. She is said to have coined the term “consequentialism” – the notion that it is the consequences rather than the intentions by which your conduct should be judged. She was arguably the most eminent of the four in terms of philosophy, though of course Murdoch made a larger impact as a novelist. Late in her life I interviewed Midgley, who still spoke in dismissive terms of Ayer, though she claimed he had renounced his views (which was not entirely true). She spoke of a “life force” and was scathing about what she called the “scientism” of her new bete noire, Richard Dawkins. She was enormously engaging, but lurking around the edges of her thought was something mystical and celebratory that left her excluded from mainstream philosophy. A similar tone sometimes informs the pages of this book. It would be wrong to call it religious, though Anscombe, a practising Catholic, speaks seriously about the “divine”. Perhaps it’s nothing more, nor less, than the profound excitement experienced by four young women shaking off the suffocating orthodoxies of male domination. • Metaphysical Animals: How Four Women Brought Philosophy Back to Life by Clare Mac Cumhaill and Rachael Wiseman is published by Chatto &amp; Windus (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyI bought a three-year, £70 senior railcard from Trainline, but this has to be stored on my phone as an app, as there is now no paper option. But when I tried to download it on to my iPhone, an error message appeared saying that I couldn’t, as it needed an iOS operating system of 13.4 or above. The one on my phone is 12.5. As I had already booked some rail tickets with a senior railcard deduction I was forced to buy a one-year £30 paper senior railcard at the local station. Trainline initially said it would refund this, but is now refusing to on the basis that I must have used their railcard. I explained again what had happened and that I had had to buy a paper one, and sent a copy, but still it won’t refund me my £70. JK, by email I am amazed that I had to get involved in this case given that you had sent the copy of the second railcard. Trainline told me that the three-year deal is digital-only, and that its website does set out which devices are compatible. However, it did agree to repay you. “We appreciate that JK did not feel this was made clear enough, and so we’re happy to provide him with a full refund as a gesture of goodwill, which is now on its way,” it says. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsEvidence of “collusive behaviour” between police and loyalist paramilitary groups related to murders during the Troubles have been uncovered by a watchdog investigation. Marie Anderson, the police ombudsman for Northern Ireland, said she was “deeply concerned” by the “significant failures” she had uncovered in her investigation into murders and attempted murders carried out by the Ulster Defence Association (UDA) in south Belfast in the 1990s. Eight loyalist attacks attributed to the UDA or its Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF) cover name were examined in the ombudsman’s 344-page report published on Tuesday. Eleven people were murdered in the attacks, including five who lost their lives in the attack at the Sean Graham bookmaker in February 1992. Among her findings, Anderson said Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) files relating to the bookmaker massacre had been deliberately destroyed. She also said the use by RUC special branch of informants who had been involved in murders was “totally unacceptable”. Although there was no evidence that police had received information that would have allowed them to prevent the attacks, the ombudsman questioned why no such intelligence was received, given that special branch had a network of informants within the UDA/UFF. An appeal court judgment in 2020 has limited the scope of the ombudsman to accuse former officers of the criminal offence of collusion with paramilitaries. Acknowledging this limitation, Anderson said she had identified conduct within the RUC that amounted to “collusive behaviours”. She said the long-held concerns of bereaved families and survivors about RUC conduct, including complaints of collusion with paramilitaries, were “legitimate and justified”. Anderson said “collusive behaviours” identified in her report included: Intelligence and surveillance failings that led to loyalist paramilitaries obtaining military-grade weaponry in a 1987 arms shipment A failure to warn two men of threats to their lives A failure to retain records and the deliberate destruction of files relating to the attack at Sean Graham bookmaker The failure to maintain records about the deactivation of weapons, “indicating a desire to avoid accountability for these sensitive and contentious activities” The failure of police to exploit all evidential opportunities Failures by special branch to disseminate intelligence to murder investigation teams Absence of control and oversight in the recruitment and management of informants Unjustifiable and continued use by special branch of informants involved in serious criminality, including murder and “turning a blind eye” to such activities. A senior PSNI officer said the report made “uncomfortable reading” and apologised to the families of those killed and injured. The murders and attempted murders were carried out between 1990 and 1998. All the victims were Catholic. Christy Doherty, Jack Duffin, Peter Magee, Willie McManus and 15-year-old James Kennedy all died in the betting shop attack. The report also covered the murders of Harry Conlon and Aidan Wallace in 1991, Michael Gilbride in 1992, Martin Moran in 1993, Theresa Clinton in 1994 and Larry Brennan in 1998, as well as the attempted murder of Samuel Caskey in 1990. The families of the victims welcomed the ombudsman’s findings. A statement by Relatives for Justice and KRW Law said families felt vindicated by Anderson’s conclusions. “The report finds that 11 murdered citizens and their families were systemically failed by the British state in life and in death. “It is a damning report that is undiluted evidence of the policy of collusion as it was practiced in south Belfast, and across the north.” Niall Murphy, a solicitor at KRW, said the report made a huge difference to families. “The report is empowering … Their worst fears, their worst nightmares have been validated by an organ of the state,” he told the BBC. “The police ombudsman is an office which is set up in accordance with the Police Act of 1988. So this is a state-validated report, which confirms that the murder of their loved ones was afflicted by an overarching state policy of collusion,” he added.British farmers must reduce their production of meat and dairy by a third in the next 10 years if scientific advice on limiting greenhouse gas emissions is to be met, the conservation charity WWF has said. Even greater cuts may be needed to the UK’s pig herds and poultry flocks, because of the imported feed they eat, and people will need to eat much less meat than they do today, the charity warned. But the result would be lower greenhouse gas emissions, a countryside with more wildlife and flourishing nature, and better health, according to the report. Tanya Steele, chief executive of WWF, said: “If we are serious about tackling the twin threats of climate change and nature loss, farming and land use can’t be an afterthought. Many UK farmers are already using their skills and expertise to produce food as sustainably as possible, but they won’t be able to fix a broken system on their own.” Livestock are a major source of greenhouse gas emissions, from the methane they produce and through the carbon associated with the feed they eat. WWF said the UK’s imports of soy for animal feed must be cut by about a fifth by 2030, as it is associated with deforestation and the overuse of fertiliser overseas. Livestock are also associated with air pollution, from the ammonia that comes from their manure, which the government has vowed to tackle. Farmers defended the UK’s livestock production as lower carbon than overseas alternatives, however. Stuart Roberts, deputy president of the National Farmers’ Union, said: “Our farmers can deliver the necessary environmental and climate benefits while maintaining domestic food production, including the production of nutritious meat and dairy, and it’s important that we do so. With more than 90% of UK households still wanting to buy high quality red meat and dairy, British products are often the most sustainable options.” He said the UK’s climate was well suited to the production of beef and dairy products, and emissions from meat and dairy in the UK were less than half the global average. “If we reduced sustainable production here, it would only export our carbon footprint to countries which don’t meet our own high environmental standards, and risk seeing food imports reduced to standards that would be illegal here,” he added. George Dunn, chief executive of the Tenant Farmers Association, rejected the need for drastic cuts to UK meat and dairy production: “Of the UK’s CO2e emissions, only 10% are emitted by UK agriculture. The bulk of UK emissions come from transport and energy, accounting for nearly half of total emissions. With UK agriculture accounting for over two-thirds of the UK landmass, its carbon emissions are already incredibly low by comparison to other land uses. If 70% of the landmass produces 10% of the emissions it must mean that the remaining 30% produces 90% of the emissions. Every acre of land in agriculture is already less polluting by a factor of 20 in comparison to every acre of land in another sector.” He added: “The vast majority of farmers understand the responsibility on them to both produce great food and as custodians of the environment. Our livestock farmers manage carbon in their soils on our behalf every day of the week and deserve our support, not our criticism. In fact, we should be eating more meat and dairy products from UK sources to offset what we import to reduce our carbon footprint.” Rob Percival, head of food and policy at the Soil Association, said British households should reduce their meat consumption but buy higher quality meat. “Nature-friendly, agroecological farming can feed a growing population, but only if we eat less and better meat, ensuring what we do eat is high welfare, so that we can eliminate intensive animal farming and all the risks it poses to animal welfare, habitats for wildlife, and human health,” he said. He added that grazing cattle could support healthy soils and nature, but that big reductions in the intensive production of poultry were needed, as cheap chicken production was driving river pollution in the UK, as well as deforestation in South America through imported soy. He called for an end to post-Brexit trade deals that would open the door to low-welfare food with a high carbon footprint. Vicki Hird, head of sustainable farming at the campaigning organisation Sustain, said the government must take a lead in making British farming more sustainable, by taking a “less but better” approach to meat. “The government could help by incentivising the production of sustainable, pasture-fed beef and only choosing less but better meat and more plants in public procurement contracts. The government spends £2bn a year on food and could be a lot smarter and do a lot more good with what it buys.” Food waste is also a major problem, and needs to be halved by 2030, according to the WWF report. Efforts to cut food waste in households appeared to bear fruit during the Covid-19 lockdowns, but supermarkets and their rejection of “imperfect” but edible food are still major causes of waste. The report also called for big reductions in the use of artificial fertiliser, through using precision techniques and ending the use of nitrogen fertiliser where possible, in favour of natural alternatives. Fertiliser prices have risen strongly in recent months, owing to high energy prices. • This article was amended on 21 February 2022 to correct a quote saying that transport and energy account for over half of UK emissions; this should have said “nearly half”.Emily Paterson was finally feeling able to relax. Her two sons were now fully vaccinated, and with mask policies in place at their school in northern Virginia she felt safe sending them every day, even as the Omicron variant surged. Then Virginia’s new governor, Glenn Youngkin, took office on 15 January of this year – and, with his second executive action, he made masks in schools optional. A Virginia judge has blocked Youngkin’s order for now, allowing school districts to continue to enforce mask mandates in schools. But the decision “immediately threw the whole state into an uproar”, Paterson said. “It felt really like a slap in the face. We felt really happy that this year wasn’t virtual, and that we could rely on our kids going back to school in person and being safe. So it was pretty shocking.” Virginia isn’t alone in attempting to roll back precautions against Covid, as Omicron cases begin to fall in parts of the US and public backlash continues against public health measures. Kansas stopped contact tracing after many of those contacted refused to participate, and a Florida’ health official has said it’s time to “unwind” the “testing psychology”. In other places, however, the premature abandonment of restrictions is being met with its own opposition. The Fairfax county school board, which is Paterson’s home district and the largest in Virginia, quickly announced it would continue requiring masks for all students, and a week later Fairfax joined six other school districts in a lawsuit against the executive order. Parents in Chesapeake, Virginia, filed a separate lawsuit. Both suits argue that Virginia law requires schools to follow guidance from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), which recommends masks for everyone in schools with very rare exceptions. Parents of children with disabilities filed another lawsuit last week against the order, arguing that it makes schools an unsafe learning environment; yet another lawsuit, filed by parents against Loudoun county’s continued mandate, would support the governor’s order, however. The turmoil illustrates the fraught atmosphere in schools around removing precautions and the confusion surrounding increasingly complicated decisions in the third year of the pandemic. Most families in Virginia support precautions such as masks in schools. “He keeps saying things about, ‘Oh, it’s parent choice,’ but he’s actually going against the majority of parents,” Paterson said of Youngkin. Two-thirds of Virginia parents with students in public schools supported mask mandates in a September 2021 poll – slightly higher than the 61% of Americans nationally who supported the mandates in a November survey. Both surveys were conducted before the highest rise in Covid cases so far seen in the pandemic. “I would think the Omicron wave made people more nervous, not less,” said Neal McCluskey, an education analyst at the Cato Institute. The majority of Virginia schools have already been disregarding Youngkin’s executive order in favor of following the law on CDC guidance, according to an analysis from the Washington Post. Governor Ralph Northam mandated masks for K-12 schools in August, and a vocal minority criticized the rule. Youngkin’s reversal likely comes as a response to those objections, McCluskey said. “And I think that it’s fair to say those parents, as a group, have been much louder” – in part because the families in favor of masks didn’t feel the urge to speak up while a mandate was in place, he said. “You can sort of understand, if the parents I’m hearing from want a certain thing, and I’m not hearing from the others, maybe this group represents a whole lot of parents,” McCluskey said. Masks significantly reduce outbreaks in schools, research from the CDC shows. Schools without mask mandates are three times more likely to have outbreaks, and counties with mask requirements in schools had markedly less spread. There is no evidence that masks negatively affect children’s social, behavioral or linguistic development. “It’s too soon to roll back protections, full stop,” said Emily Smith, an assistant professor at the George Washington University’s School of Public Health. “We are still seeing massive outbreaks of infection. We’re still seeing health systems overloaded. And that’s because we haven’t come to this state of the world where transmission is predictable.” Covid is still very disruptive, causing shortages of staff and goods in many industries, she said. “Now is not a time to roll back protections. Now is the time to get the pandemic under control and plan for the next surge.” Experts have suggested that precautions such as masks be tied to local factors, such as rates of vaccination, cases, hospitalizations and the overall health profile of a community – including the number of at-risk adults and children. “We can make it very local – we can make it down to your school district,” Smith said. A small group of physicians and scientists has called for the removal of precautions including masks by 15 February, in order to get back to “normal”. Others say a return to normal can only happen once the virus is controlled. “It’s inconceivable to talk about removing mitigation measures at the height of a surge,” said Anne Sosin, a public policy fellow at Dartmouth College. The decisions should be based on “data, not dates”. “We don’t need endless restrictions, but we are simply not at a place to be talking about that,” she said of a deadline. “Maintaining rigorous school mitigation measures buys us more time to deliver vaccines and boosters.” About four out of five children between five and 11 years old are still unvaccinated and at risk for Covid. Sharp inequities persist among marginalized groups, Sosin said. “Vaccine availability doesn’t equal vaccine access, and we’ve seen persistent racial, income and rural disparities in vaccination,” she said. “Earlier, we saw that with significant outreach we can overcome many of those barriers, but we haven’t seen the mobilization of resources to ensure equity in vaccination in children.” Advocates for optional masking say children and staff are somewhat protected by their own masks, should they choose to wear them. Widespread masking is more effective, though. Not all children are able to wear masks; some students with special needs encounter sensory problems that make it difficult to wear them consistently: masking all students and teachers during a surge helps protect them. “It’s an inconvenience, but if it could possibly just keep one person safe, or keep one kid from having to be homeschooled, why wouldn’t we do it?” said Cori, a high-school theater teacher who asked to use a pseudonym. The masks also help keep students and staff from developing Covid complications that can arise even from mild cases, she said. “Having my children mask as a preventive measure to protect them from possibly having a lifelong health issue that could be avoidable – why would I not do that?” The ambiguity is an additional pandemic stress, Cori said. “Every room you go into, every hallway, there’s a counselor with a kid who’s having a panic attack, and I never saw that before,” she said. Some of the kids are worried about the virus; none of the students she knows worry about the masks themselves. “Growing minds depend on structure, so they can feel comfortable,” she said. “Their parents are fighting with their teacher, they hear a politician saying one thing, a news reporter saying another … I think that’s terrifying to them.” The new rule on masks “threw everyone into turmoil when the current system had been working pretty well – everyone felt there was some consistency, everyone was used to it,” Paterson said. “One of the difficulties of the pandemic is the fact that the situation is always changing. As human beings, I think it’s really hard to understand and interpret what the immediate threat level is,” she said. She suggested Virginia and other states adopt a “traffic light” system similar to New Zealand’s, where each district’s statistics are distilled into red, yellow and green codes that would then guide their use of precautions. “It’s not like the pandemic is ever going away in the near future, so we have to adapt by reacting intelligently to the most recent data,” she said. “I totally get that everyone is just so tired of it. But it seems like magical thinking to have that be a reason you just give up entirely on any kind of protections.” McCluskey believes the decision should be left to school districts. “You have to take into account what other measures the schools are using for safety,” including air filtration, vaccine mandates and other precautions, McCluskey said. “That’s what we should want, to tailor the policies as best we can to the needs of actual people, rather than saying, well, one size is going to have to fit everyone.” The mask situation is one more stressor for educators feeling the weight of the past two years. “This debate, which didn’t need to be politicized, is affecting the educational system, which was already broken,” Cori said. “It’s hard to teach kids when their parents are telling them that you are the enemy.” Masks and other precautions help keep schools open, Sosin said. Taking them away when vaccinations rates among children are still low and cases are still high is like “building schools on floodplains, thinking the water is not going to come”.The hosiery did not begin as a fashion statement. John “Long Socks” McLaren, the caddie famed for his flamboyant on-course attire, had a practical reason to stand out from the crowd. “It started in a fire,” McLaren explains. “I couldn’t expose my legs to the sun after that. I would have been 24/25 at a house and there was a fire, we were chucking debris on it to clear stuff. There was a methane pocket in it and it blew up to burn my legs from the knees down when I was wearing shorts. “I had to wear long socks playing tennis at that point under doctor’s orders and ended up just sticking with it. I started caddying in the US and everyone had shorts on; they told me to pull the socks down but I was only ever pulling them up.” For at least the time being, McLaren has hung up his bib. After 30 seasons, 18 wins and a dozen players, the popular 55-year-old has decided to step back from caddie duties. The Saudi International, alongside Paul Casey, marked McLaren’s final event as he reverts to family duties in Surrey. Had coronavirus not struck, McLaren estimates he would continue working for another three years. “My children are eight and nine,” says McLaren. “My son broke his arm during the last Ryder Cup and I wasn’t there. My daughter was born during Lytham in 2012 and because of the Open, I have never really been there for her birthday. “Covid travel became so much more difficult. I have no mental health issues but I understand that there are a lot around because of this climate. I am mentally more tired because of travel and anxiety of testing positive after a two- or three-week trip then being stuck in a country when I have young kids. Similarly, I go home and they are in school and I worried about not being able to get back out to work. That created a lot of uncertainty I’d rather not have to deal with.” McLaren will be missed, including by Casey on account of his career rejuvenation after turning to the experienced bag man in 2015. “We didn’t know each other very well when we started. It was a business relationship and we’ve become best mates,” Casey says. McLaren believes Casey utilised his services as “more of a mentor or father figure”. McLaren in many ways represents the old-school caddie. He is, though, keen to point out the deep use of analysis and statistics that have made him so valuable in the current era. The role and profile of the caddie have changed; but for the better? “I don’t know about that, necessarily. I have always argued that you should take the most professional caddie if you are as ambitious as you say you are. Personally, I don’t see how a mate can necessarily be the most ambitious way of getting the best out of yourself. It needs someone to challenge you, someone to bring something that is different.” McLaren cites the “unbelievable experience” of the Rio Olympics, with Casey, as a career highlight. He was with Luke Donald for the 2012 Miracle of Medinah. “Luke was at the pinnacle of his powers,” McLaren recalls. “I had a great sense of knowing what to do for him at that point. There was great security there. “I will miss aspects of this. The camaraderie, the competition. I can’t say I haven’t got an ego because there’s enough of that in there to still make me want to be better than everybody else at this job. It rubs your ego when you do well. I will miss people like [the coach] Jamie Gough, a friend I have had for a long time. People like Ian Poulter. I think the world of Ian and I wouldn’t have had that without Ryder Cups.” McLaren refuses to rule out a return to the fairways, albeit after a decent rest. He will not quite speak of retirement. “Firstly, I am going to do school runs,” he adds. “I will be on the touchline for kids’ games at school. I will be back on my bike training like I used to. I’ll play a bit more social golf. I know for the next six to eight months there is pretty much no chance I’ll be back out here unless a world No 1 to 8 calls and says they would like my help to be better. For the foreseeable future, I will be at home.” Which is golf’s loss.New Zealand’s justice ministry has launched an investigation into whether a crime scene cleaning company broke the law by posting images to its social media pages of cleanup sites – including, allegedly, images of suspected suicide sites and of human remains. The story was first reported by RNZ, which found Christchurch company Crime Scene Cleaners had posted images to its Facebook and Instagram accounts – including graphic images of decomposing human remains, and images of cleanup work in the aftermath of suspected suicides. New Zealand laws restrict the publication of details relating to suspected or confirmed suicides that suggest the method of death. A death may not be referred to as a suicide until the coroner has made that determination after a coronial investigation. Crime Scene Cleaners general manager, Carl Loader, told the Guardian he and the company were “deeply upset that our social media pages have caused the reaction that they have today. We sincerely apologise to anyone that has been offended by them. “We had thought that by sharing some of the images from our work, we would raise awareness of some important social issues, and what our company do[es],” he said. “As the manager, I should have kept a close eye on the content that was being shared.” Loader said the company had taken down all social media pages, and would be “reviewing our future on social media”. Speaking to RNZ, some customers who had employed the service after the death of a family member said that homes were clearly identifiable in some of the images posted, with a variety of identifying objects. RNZ reported that in one photo posted to social media, a smiling staff member held a piece of human bone, after working to clean a train that had hit and killed the person. Other photos of human remains were published with casual or degrading captions, RNZ reported. Some of the images or captions allegedly indicated how the person had died. The photos in question have now been removed. The company’s website says it specialises in crime scene and trauma cleanup. “We understand your requirements for the highest level of discretion and have highly trained professional technicians in biological forensic decontamination &amp; remediation ready to tackle your issue,” it says. “The aftermath of a self-inflicted death or homicide can be disturbing and leave scenes that can cause additional emotional trauma. Cleaning these scenes is best left to trained professionals who are not personally involved with the family.” A coronial spokesperson at New Zealand’s ministry of justice said “The behaviour in question that may have breached the Coroners Act includes Crime Scene Cleaners publishing photos and comments on social media that mention the method of suicide. “The office of the chief coroner is considering whether any breaches … have occurred,” they said. “The Coroners Act also enables a coroner to prohibit the making public of any evidence given at any part of a coronial inquiry, in the interests of justice, decency, public order, or personal privacy.” In New Zealand the Suicide Crisis Helpline is 0508 828 865 (0508 TAUTOKO). You can also call Lifeline on 0800 543 354 (0800 LIFELINE) or free text 4357 (HELP), or the Samaritans on 0800 726 666. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgOn 13 August last year, a villager in Ostrówka, in the east of central Poland, posted two pictures on Facebook featuring groups of men, women and children walking through the cornfields with bags on their backs. They were families from Syria, Afghanistan and Iraqi Kurdistan, and they were among the first asylum seekers to enter the country from Belarus. The post was accompanied by the following short text: “In the heat of day through wheat, at night through corn, they sneak through, they wander, just to get to the west. Great politics and slight refugees leave their print on the fields near Ostrówka.” Few could have imagined that those people were the prelude to a border crisis that would result in dozens of deaths. The makeshift shelter of a Syrian family with small children in the forest near Narewka, Poland The Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, had just started to organise the movement of asylum seekers with the promise of a safe passage to Europe, apparently in reprisal for sanctions that Brussels had imposed on his regime. A new migration route to the EU had opened. The humanitarian emergency reached its peak in November, when the Belarusian security forces escorted thousands of asylum seekers to the Polish border in an escalation of the crisis. Witnesses told the Guardian how Belarusian troops gathered groups of up to 50 people and cut the barbed wire to allow them to cross. Most of the asylum seekers were caught, and illegally and violently pushed back to Belarus by Poland’s border guards. But hundreds managed to escape into the forests. Trapped between the violence of the Polish authorities and false promises from the Belarusians, families lived in small tents, trying to keep warm in damp sleeping bags as night-time temperatures fell below zero. Polish border guards at a checkpoint near the border with Belarus and with a family who were hiding in the forest In response to the Belarusian threats, Poland’s hard-right government quadrupled the presence of border guards and troops in the area and created a two-mile-deep militarised zone ringed with razor-wire. It was a show of force not seen in the country since the end of the cold war. Dozens of checkpoints punctuate the perimeter of this so-called red zone, which is inaccessible to aid workers and journalists. The soldiers stop and search every car as police vehicles and helicopters monitor the area. Top, a family from Duhok, Iraq, in Narewka, Poland, after crossing from Belarus. Above left, an Iraqi woman and her baby are taken to safety by aid workers before certain capture by Polish border guards Every night in the forests, there is a race between border guards and aid workers to reach the asylum seekers hidden among the trees. If the Polish police arrive before the volunteers and doctors, they will probably send the migrants back to Belarus, with the risk that their health may deteriorate. Many of those found in the woods can barely walk after travelling long distances on foot. Some have not eaten in days. The children often have signs of hypothermia. The graves of asylum seekers in the Polish village of Bohoniki. Most of the people known to have died since the start of the border standoff were killed by the cold At least 19 people have died since the beginning of the border standoff between Poland and Belarus. Most of them froze to death. Some were buried in the village of Bohoniki, near the Polish town of Sokółka, in the heart of the forest that claimed their lives. People told the Guardian they found the bodies of refugees torn apart by animals. A family of asylum seekers said they had to bury their mother, covering her with leaves. “In the area of forest where migrants normally camp, you can smell an intense stench of decay,” says one resident. Some Polish families have been hiding desperate asylum seekers in their homes. In the attics of the cottages scattered in the forests along the border, Iraqi Kurds and Syrians tremble with cold and fear, while border guards search for them outside. If found, the Polish families who have offered them shelter risk being charged with aiding illegal immigration. Kamil Syller, a lawyer, top, and his wife, Maria Przyszychowska, with their daughter, above left. The green light in their home in Hajnówka, near the border, right, is a welcome sign for refugees Kamil Syller and his wife, Maria Przyszychowska, started a network of residents and activists who put green lights in their windows to show that their home is a temporary safe space for refugees. “We are trying to protect asylum seekers and now our activity has become a form of resistance,” says Kamil. “But we don’t want to be heroes and it’s becoming really frustrating.” The green lights have also come to the attention of the Polish authorities. For weeks, Maria and Kamil’s home has been under surveillance. Border guards patrol the streets around their home and lie in wait for people to come out of the forest so they can capture them and push them back into Belarus. A young Iraqi Kurd hides in a small attic. Border guards entered Syller’s house to take away two Syrians. The Polish lawyer filed papers with the European court of human rights in an effort to stop them being deported to Belarus According to data from Grupa Granica, a Polish network of human rights organisations, about 10,000 asylum seekers reached Germany from Belarus via Poland by December. Many others were transferred to migrant camps near the Belarus border. The Guardian spoke to dozens of asylum applicants in the Polish city of Białystok. All said they had arrived in Minsk by buying packages from travel agencies, which, according to the refugees, appeared to be closely connected to the Belarusian authorities. Despite promises from Turkish and Belarusian airlines to limit these flights, the crisis appears to be far from over. Thousands of asylum seekers remain in Belarus. Inside a customs warehouse in Bruzgi, Belarus, which now houses about 1,000 asylum seekers Asylum seekers washing outside in Bruzgi, where temperatures can fall to -12C, left. Alima Skandar, 40, right, from Iraqi Kurdistan, who was separated from her three children in November as they tried to cross the Polish border As temperatures plummeted at the end of November, the Belarusian authorities began to move the asylum seekers to a customs warehouse in the village of Bruzgi, which has been turned into a dormitory for refugees. In this 10,000 sq metre space, patrolled by dozens of armed soldiers, about 1,000 asylum seekers are sleeping in makeshift cots made from planks and cardboard on shelving units once used for merchandise. There are dozens of children and elderly people, many in need of medical help. Outside, people sit around and heat up food on a wood-burning stove. There are showers but no hot water. Winter temperatures in Bruzgi can fall to -12C. Scraps of clothing hang from barbed wire at the checkpoint in Kuźnica as a reminder of those who tried to cross Asylum seekers stranded in Bruzgi are clinging to the hope that Europe will rescue them, sooner or later. But their hopes were dealt a blow when Poland announced it had started building a €353m (£293m) wall along its frontier with Belarus aimed at preventing refugees from entering the country. Little remains of the migrants who camped at the border for months – just a pile of rags and bottles. Scraps of clothing hang from the barbed wire, a bleak reminder of those who tried to make it to the other side.Wayne Rooney was, by his own admission, never all that interested in school. But one subject intrigued him more than others: religious studies. The young Rooney was raised as a Catholic, attended a local primary called Our Lady and St Swithin’s in Croxteth, said his prayers most evenings and still considers himself a man of devout faith. “Wayne’s recall of stories about the life of Jesus is quite detailed,” read an early school report. In late 2010 Rooney was in turmoil. His frustration at Manchester United had bubbled over into a sensational transfer request. Immediately, however, he was overcome by guilt and self-reproach. “My mind goes into another spin,” he writes in his autobiography. “I feel gutted at what I’ve done. How stupid are you, Wayne? What are you doing?” As it turned out, his desperation for forgiveness – to absolve his wrongs – would provide the fuel for his last great season as a player. Rooney’s career lends itself to all kinds of different themes but perhaps the most powerful is this idea of guilt and redemption. Many footballers have erred like Rooney but few repent quite like him. When he was sent off in a crucial World Cup qualifier in 2011, he insisted on writing a personal letter of apology to Uefa. There is an anguished, almost childlike penitence there, one that in our current age of faux-emoting and corporate non-apologies feels almost refreshing. Rooney does not just request forgiveness; he supplicates and begs for it, almost as if the pain of sinning is worse than the punishment. Take, by way of further example, an interview Rooney conducted to promote his new Amazon documentary. Most of the media coverage centred on his admissions of alcohol misuse at the height of his fame: not a new revelation but one that allowed lots of websites to put the words “Rooney” and “booze” next to each other in a headline. But one of the more revealing snippets was his guilt at going to the 2006 World Cup despite not being fully fit. “To this day, I feel terrible for Jermain Defoe,” he discloses. “I literally took his spot at the World Cup and took his dream away.” Never mind that even a half-fit Rooney was probably worth the gamble, given his talent and form. Never mind that Defoe’s omission owed more to Sven-Göran Eriksson’s bizarre decision to pick the uncapped teenager Theo Walcott. Somehow – almost 16 years later – Rooney still feels a sense of personal remorse, a regret that eats away at him, to the point where he feels the need to unburden himself publicly. What else is locked away in there? The reason for dredging all this up now is Derby County. It is just over a year since Rooney took on his first managerial role, a job that has since turned into a particularly undignified form of masochism. Administration – which Rooney found out about on Sky Sports News – was followed by a 21-point deduction and almost certain relegation to League One. Liquidation remains a distinct possibility. At the start of the January transfer window Rooney was assured by the administrators that no player sales would be required. Nine players ended up leaving. Meanwhile it is down to Rooney to salvage the wreckage left by the former owner, Mel Morris. Training equipment and away travel have been paid out of his own pocket. At times the strain and workload have forced Rooney to sleep in his office. And remember, this is perhaps the most famous English footballer of his generation, a man who could walk away tomorrow with his reputation enhanced and a clutch of superior job offers on the table. What, exactly, is he still doing there? The uncharitable view – because this is modern football and there must always be an ulterior motive – is that Rooney is sticking around out of self-interest, to make himself look good. It’s a free hit, a dire situation that absolves him of any blame for failure. I don’t buy that. Nobody willingly puts a relegation on their CV for the kudos. But there also seems to be something more complex going on here than simple species loyalty. For all Rooney’s many qualities as a footballer, when it came to career decisions he was often ruthlessly pragmatic. He did not hesitate to leave Everton when United came calling or to hand in a transfer request when he felt United’s ambitions no longer matched his. For this he was frequently demonised and patronised, held up as an exemplar of the modern footballer’s entitlement and moral degeneracy. And yet, nobody could ever be more reproachful of Rooney than Rooney himself. “I wouldn’t forgive myself if I walked out [at Derby],” he has said. “What kind of person would I be if I went and laid on a beach for two weeks?” This is the Rooney guilt complex at work again: a decision borne not of ego but of duty, not out of positive incentives but of a mortal fear of judgment. It is the decision, in other words, of a man who has long equated suffering with salvation, who learned from the earliest age that every choice must ultimately be weighed and accounted for. Watch him the next time he’s standing in the dugout. He doesn’t look thrilled to be there. He’s not doing it for plaudits or slaps on the back or a shot at the United job. He’s just a man who has endured enough long nights of the soul to know that the alternative is far, far worse.I grew up in a household where we all voted Conservative. I live in a constituency that has voted Tory for the past decade. And if you’d said to me a few years ago that I’d be voting for another party, or perhaps not voting at all, I wouldn’t have believed you. But here I am. Because after seeing how the Conservatives have handled this pandemic, I will never vote for anyone associated with this government. As for the Tory party: our 31-year relationship is over. Like many people, growing up I took my political cues from my dad. On 11 August last year, at 3.03pm, he passed away after a short battle against Covid, a disease that lasted a mere 11 days from when he first tested positive. He was one of the millions of shielders in the UK who were given a stark choice on “freedom day” last July: stay a prisoner in your own home or risk your life when venturing out. He was 76 and double vaccinated, with an underlying condition for which he took immunosuppressants. But he was full of life and vigour and hope. He wanted to live out his retirement safely and peacefully. And then came freedom day on 19 July. This was a politically charged decision to pretend Covid wasn’t a danger any more. My dad was as cautious as he could be. All he did was go to the shops to buy food and attend his medical appointments. Yet even that was enough to kill him. He was utterly let down by those in power, who he had trusted to make the right decisions and protect vulnerable people. Tragically, we’re living through the whole process again, as the plan B restrictions introduced to fight the Omicron variant are lifted in England – despite the fact that there are still hundreds of people dying every day. I can’t tell you how painful it is to think of other families going through the same trauma as mine, all because the same mistakes are being repeated in Westminster. Of course, any restrictions the government introduces in the future if we face new, more dangerous variants will probably be pointless. Who will listen to rules from a government that couldn’t care less about obeying the rules themselves? My dad passed away from Covid-19 on his own, without his family at his side. We barely saw him during the previous 18 months, as we did everything we could to protect each other and our communities. We missed out on every family gathering. We couldn’t see my dad when he was sick with Covid. He was so poorly when he caught the virus that I couldn’t even speak to him. When he entered hospital we couldn’t be near him or help him. And once he was in the ICU, that was it. We spent hours trying to get someone to give us updates or find a doctor with whom we could discuss treatment options. But even when someone answered the phone you could hardly hear what they were saying through all the PPE. We couldn’t say goodbye. And that will live with me for ever. Meanwhile, politicians and their advisers in 10 Downing Street were apparently breaking their own laws, regularly and obnoxiously. Every news story about yet more Downing Street parties has been devastating for those who have lost loved ones to Covid. The pandemic has been unbelievably hard on so many people. But those who stuck to the rules can at least say we did everything to protect others. That’s something some of those working in Downing Street cannot say. Boris Johnson is a disgrace and an embarrassment. To hear him brag about his handling of a pandemic that has killed more than 175,000 people in Britain is nauseating. Several parties he allegedly attended are now under police investigation, after he repeatedly insisted all guidelines were followed. Just as bad are the Tory MPs who keep him in power. The prime minister has lost all credibility. He has become a walking public health hazard who puts lives at risk. But all the Conservatives seem to care about is how he affects their electoral fortunes. It’s painful to watch them try to defend his actions; they disgrace their country every time they do so. I would love to believe that the problem is just Johnson, but the pandemic has shown that the rot runs much deeper. It goes to the heart of the Conservative party. Why did they stick with the prime minister as his government stumbled from one pandemic disaster to the next? Why did they line up to defend Dominic Cummings when he broke lockdown rules, and do the same again for Johnson? Ask yourself: who will they replace him with? Rishi Sunak, who has remained notably quiet about the prime minister’s misconduct? Sajid Javid, who accused families like mine of “cowering” from the virus? A lifetime of voting habits die hard. And I know there are many Conservatives who will dismiss this piece, as I would have done a few years ago. But the Tories have shown that they’re not interested in protecting ordinary families. They seem more like a knock-off version of Donald Trump’s Republican party than that of Winston Churchill. I urge you not to vote for them. David Garfinkel is a spokesperson for Covid-19 Bereaved Families for JusticeScott Morrison has secured the support of the Coalition party room for amendments to the government’s religious discrimination bill that only partially protect gay students and overlook trans students entirely. The Liberal MP Bridget Archer said she would nevertheless oppose the bill, telling parliament on Tuesday evening she was “horrified” and “utterly distressed” the government amendments excluded children that identified as transgender. “After so much progress, how did we get back to a place where we ignore the harm we place on children when we tell them they are ‘other’, ‘less than’ and do not deserve rights and protections afforded to others? I fear it may risk lives,” Archer said. Olivia Stewart, a transgender student, told reporters in Canberra the lack of protection for trans students had “impacted my mental health” while other trans people noted it was “intensely distressing to see our basic rights up for debate”. The Coalition party room backed the controversial bill despite at least six Liberal MPs expressing their concerns. It endorsed limited changes to the religious bill and the Sex Discrimination Act during an extended meeting after question time. The Morrison government confirmed it proposed to protect gay students from expulsion – but not other forms of discrimination – without protecting trans students at the same time. Anna Brown, the chief executive of LGBTQ+ lobby group Equality Australia, said the government amendments were “completely inadequate” because they “fail to protect gay children” from suspension, detention and unfair treatment – and left behind the most vulnerable, being trans children. Stewart said she had been “directly discriminated against” by a school when she wanted to come out as trans in year 8. She said the school first warned her that she and her twin brother would be bullied and that revealing her gender identity would compromise her leadership potential. She was eventually invited to leave the school. The former swimming champion Ian Thorpe said on Tuesday that parliamentarians must do everything they could to protect trans youth, who were the “most marginalised” voices in the debate. Thorpe said the bill amounted to “state-sanctioned discrimination”. “When you look at some of the most marginalised and disadvantaged people in this country, this is a group of people that we should be protecting,” the LGBTQ+ advocate told reporters. “It becomes state-sanctioned discrimination to gain rights for one group of people, whilst excluding another group of people.” The shadow assistant treasurer, Stephen Jones, shared in parliament that his 15-year-old nephew, who he described as “gay” and “uncertain of his gender”, had killed himself last week. Jones implored the government to do more to protect LGBTQ+ youth for whom “love and acceptance of family and friends weren’t enough”. The prime minister stressed the need for government unity, telling the party room it otherwise risked losing the upcoming election. He warned any further amendments were not government policy unless endorsed by another meeting. Guardian Australia understands that the Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman expressly reserved his position, a procedural courtesy expected of members before they cross the floor, while others including Katie Allen are still negotiating with the attorney general and believe further amendments could be added. Archer, the member for Bass who told Guardian Australia on Friday she could not vote for the bill in its current form, confirmed in parliament she would oppose it. She cited concerns about overriding state laws on religious institutions’ ability to discriminate in hiring and firing and statements of religious belief. Fellow government MP Dave Sharma told parliament “it’s time we cracked on” and protected both teachers and students – on both sexuality and gender – but did not reveal if he would move an amendment. After years of waiting to see the final version of the bill, attention will now swing back to Labor, which is yet to decide its position. Qualified support from opposition MPs and senators in two parliamentary inquiries suggests Labor could provide a viable pathway for the Coalition to pass its bill. The Liberal MP Fiona Martin, a psychologist with 20 years’ experience, argued in the party room for broader protections and said children with gender identity issues were one of the most vulnerable cohorts. Martin noted there were higher rates of depression and suicidal ideation among young people with gender identity issues – although not all ended up requesting a gender transition. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, told the party room that preventing discrimination on the grounds of gender identity could harm the ability of religious schools to set their ethos and the Coalition should wait for the Australian Law Reform Commission review that would report back 12 months after the religious bill passed parliament. Zimmerman, Julian Simmonds and Warren Entsch also expressed concerns with the religious discrimination bill in the party room. Andrew Laming publicly warned preventing expulsion was “simply not enough”. Laming told parliament LGBTQ+ students “are usually not expelled … Too often they’re bullied out by a range of other tactics that allow the school to say they never expelled them.” Senator Andrew Bragg, in his additional comments to one of the inquiries and again in the party room, called for teachers to be protected and the statement of belief clause to be removed. With the limited amendments preventing expulsion on the grounds of sexuality, Morrison preserved the support of conservative Christian groups including the Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia. The Liberal MP Angie Bell was won over by the changes, although they fall short of a deal in December to prevent both sexuality and gender discrimination by religious schools and a commitment Morrison gave to Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, in writing on 1 December to prevent “any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of sexuality or gender identity”. On Tuesday morning, Morrison said the government had been “very clear that this was a bill that we wanted to see passed, so it will go to the parliament”. Even if the bill passes the lower house, the government may need Labor support to smooth its path in the Senate, where One Nation and Liberals Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic have vowed not to vote for government legislation in protest of its handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Several Labor MPs have spoken up about the failure to protect trans students but it is unclear whether that will translate to support for amendments or whether Labor will simply wave the bill through to avoid being wedged on religion ahead of the election. “There’s an opportunity to draw a line in the sand and have this behind us once and for all,” one Labor parliamentarian told Guardian Australia. “We need to stop talking about things the public don’t want us to talk about.” On Friday, Labor MPs and senators on two committees joined the government in calling for the bill to pass after a series of minor and technical changes, a sign it may not insist on stronger protections of LGBTQ+ students or seek to remove the religious bill’s most controversial clauses. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Tuesday, the Labor MP Graham Perrett, the deputy chair of one of the inquiries, criticised aspects of the bill including the statement of belief and employment practices clauses, but described the rest of it as “largely uncontroversial”. Perrett told parliament it was “utterly repugnant” for schools to be allowed to use contracts to discriminate against LGBTQ+ children. A spokesman for the Hindu Council of Australia said the bill allowed discrimination in hiring by religious institutions against members of small or new religious groups in Australia because they don’t have schools and hospitals. Staff face pressure to convert if they find a job at the institution of another religion, he said. The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said the Morrison government was “trying to ram through a Trojan horse for hate”. “[The] religious discrimination bill will mean more discrimination, not less, and Labor looks like it’s about to support it.” In Australia, support is available at Beyond Blue on 1300 22 4636 and Lifeline on 13 11 14With that, we will wrap up our live news coverage of the day. These were the day’s news developments: The Morrison government’s proposed religious discrimination bill dominated discussion on the first federal parliamentary sitting day of the year. Scott Morrison corralled the Coalition party room to support amendments that only partially protect gay students, despite at least six Liberal MPs expressing concern about the religious discrimination bill. Late on Tuesday, Liberal MP Bridget Archer announced she would not support the bill because she is concerned it could result in self harm or even suicide. Earlier on Tuesday, the prime minister issued a formal apology to people who have experience sexual harassment, assault or bullying while working at parliament. Morrison directly apologised to former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, who was in the public gallery for the statement. Nurses and other workers in aged care descended on Parliament House on Tuesday morning protesting dangerous staff shortages, underpayment, and a lack of personal protective equipment – issues that persist more than two years after the Covid-19 pandemic began and despite numerous inquiries into the aged care sector. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, has welcomed plans to reopen Australia’s border on 21 February but warned travellers may need a third Covid-19 vaccine dose in order to move freely about the state. Australian consular officials have been denied access to a dual Australian-Chinese citizen detained in Hong Kong for 11 months for alleged “subversion”. Thanks for following along, we’ll be back to do it all again tomorrow. Labor MP Stephen Jones has just shared a tragic personal story about his nephew taking his own life in debate about the religious discrimination bill. Jones said: Last week my family said farewell to my nephew Ollie. He was just 15 when he took his own life. No mother or father should have to endure this sight, no brother should have to clean up afterwards. He was a beautiful, creative, courageous young man. He was loved and accepted by his parents, family by his friends and community. His mum and dad are in anguish – we all are. He was gay, uncertain about his gender and struggled with his mental health. Now, he’s gone and we’re no longer going to be able to love and support him in his journey through life. Love and acceptance of family and friends weren’t enough.” Jones also shared his son’s gender non-conforming behaviour including a love for women’s clothing, and his fears his son will be attacked for doing so. Jones said the love of a family is not enough, because at some point they step out into the world, so parliamentarians must think about how they shape the world. Jones said: What message do we want parliament to send to these kids? Are they as loved and respected as other kids... Surely we can do better than to say it’s OK if you’re gay as long as you don’t show it.” Liberal MP Dave Sharma has told the lower house he supports prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion, but has concerns with the bill. Sharma took aim at Citipointe Christian College. He said: We should not allow people to be vilified on the basis of attributes of which they have no choice, that are intrinsic to who people are.” Sharma said that human rights are “equal and indivisible” and argued the government should amend the Sex Discrimination Act to protect both students and teachers, on grounds of both sexual orientation and gender. “It’s time we cracked on and did it,”he said, without confirming whether he would move an amendment to do so, nor how he intended to vote on the bill. Sharma said the statements of belief clause “causes me to ask a number of questions” and he is “still reconciling himself to it”. He said: All speech should deserve protection, it shouldn’t matter if it is grounded in faith or not. Political speech should enjoy the same protection, artistic speech, ideological speech. It concerns me we have a provision that privilege a certain kind of speech that others lack. As a federalist, [concerned with the] rights of states, I’m also a little uncomfortable overriding state laws ... That’s for the Tasmanian government to fix.” So - major concerns - position still unclear. Despite Scott Morrison asking MPs to make clear if they intended to reserve their position on the religious discrimination bill, a group of moderate Liberal MPs insist they are still negotiating with the attorney-general, and are signalling further possible changes. Dave Sharma told Network 10’s The Project: I will make my position clear when it comes time to vote on the bill. There are discussions internally and with my colleagues as well. I will continue to make sure I fight for communities, communities of faith but also the LGBTQI and the gay community to make sure their rights are protected in this.” Asked about why the government would allow discriminatory treatment of gay and trans youth, Sharma said: I don’t agree with that proposition and I don’t think it would meet community expectations. I think the vast majority of Australians would agree that children and teachers shouldn’t be discriminated against on the basis of their sexual orientation or gender identity.” Labor MP Matt Thistlethwaite told the Parliament that he supported the general concept of protections against religious discrimination, but focused his speech mostly on section 12 of the legislation - which goes to the contentious “statements of belief”. The proposed bill would make it so that voicing a genuinely-held religious belief “does not constitute discrimination”, as long as the statement isn’t “malicious” or would “threaten, intimidate, harass or vilify a person or group”. Thistlethwaite voiced five concerns on that section, including claiming it would take Australia “in the wrong direction about workplace culture and creating respectful and inclusive workplaces”. He also claimed it would create “a convoluted system of anti-discrimination law” and “promotes divisive religion”. Thistlethwaite, who spoke of his lifelong Catholic faith, said “this bill raises serious concerns because it’s been rushed.” Straight after, Coalition MP George Christensen rose to speak, calling the bill “weak” and “watered-down” - and, in stark contrast to Thistlethwaite, he said the statement of belief protection doesn’t go far enough. Christensen, who briefly considered becoming a priest, said he supports the bill because it will do “a little bit of good, but it won’t do much”. Christensen claimed Christians had been “drowned out”, complaining about “rampant secularism”. He said he wanted to see more protections for religious people who wanted to voice their own beliefs, citing reports of workers who’d lost their jobs after making religious comments. Christensen said: This is something I’m very sad has been watered down this much... it is the hill we should die on, This is the problem, this bill is religious discrimination. What we wanted was religious liberty.” Nurses and other workers in aged care descended on Parliament House on Tuesday morning protesting dangerous staff shortages, underpayment and a lack of personal protective equipment – issues that persist more than two years after the Covid-19 pandemic began and despite numerous inquiries into the aged care sector. Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation federal secretary, Annie Butler, addressed protesters and said nurses are “fed up with this government for abandoning aged care workers and residents”. She said: Our aged care workers and nurses are holding the system together as best they can but they have got virtually nothing left. This is a crisis that should never have been allowed to happen and we are saying directly, Mr [Scott] Morrison, you let this happen. She said the government had allowed a breakdown of privately run nursing homes, having failed to implement recommendations from last year’s aged care royal commission and numerous aged care inquiries that preceded it. The government’s own royal commission reports – that I can barely lift because of their depth – are all ignored ... It’s always too little too late. Read more: Liberal MP Bridget Archer in her forceful contribution was most scathing at the government’s decision not to protect trans children. Archer said: I’m horrified [the amendment] doesn’t extend to students that identify as transgender. More than horrified, I’m utterly distressed by this exclusion, and I can’t begin to think how kids and parents feel. After so much progress, how did we get back to a place where we ignore the harm we place on children when we tell them they are ‘other’, ‘less than’ and do not deserve the rights and protections afforded to others? I fear it may risk lives. The MP for the seat of Bass, Bridget Archer, will not support the religious discrimination bill, telling parliament that she is concerned it could result in self harm or even suicide. She said: The simple fact is this bill would allow for discrimination to happen. And while I support the desire to employ religious school leaders or teachers who share that religious ethos, I don’t think that anybody would want to do so if it might cause harm to others. I’m deeply concerned about the potential far reaching and unintended consequences of this bill. She said that while she believed that nobody should be discriminated against because of their religion, the bill “goes further and beyond protecting somebody of faith”. As an elected representative, my job’s to come here and vote on legislation that I believe will best serve my community. This bill is an overreach and I cannot use the role that I have here to endorse a bill that erodes the rights of so many in my community ... and may cause them harm. If the government wants to come back with a bill that protects people from religious discrimination without these other consequences then I would be supportive, but in its current form I cannot support this bill. Australian consular officials have been denied access to a dual Australian-Chinese citizen detained in Hong Kong for 11 months for alleged “subversion”. The Australian government – which has had an increasingly strained relationship with Beijing – renewed its concerns about “the erosion of basic freedoms and autonomy in Hong Kong” under the territory’s broadly worded national security law. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has disclosed new details about the case of a dual Australian-Chinese citizen detained in Hong Kong under that law, after officials had previously said the person was “subsequently released”. The man, born in Hong Kong, was first arrested on 6 January 2021 “for conspiring to subvert state power” and was released on bail the following day, Dfat said in a written response to a parliamentary question. On 28 February 2021 Hong Kong police advised the individual that he was to be charged for ‘subversion’ and was required to attend West Kowloon magistrates’ court on 1 March 2021, where he was again placed under arrest. The individual remains in detention.” Read more: Australia’s mean temperature last year was 0.56C warmer than the long-term average despite 2021 being the country’s coolest year in a decade. It was a year of contrasting weather and climate conditions, the Bureau of Meteorology said in its annual climate statement, with long-running heatwaves in northern Australia and widespread flooding in eastern states, in part due to a La Niña event. In the west, severe tropical cyclone Seroja was the southernmost tropical cyclone to make landfall since the 1950s. Averaged across the continent, last year was Australia’s 19th warmest year on record. Mean annual maximum and minimum temperatures were above average for most of northern Australia, Tasmania, and parts of the west coast, but temperatures were cooler than average for parts of inland New South Wales and central Australia. “Although 2021 was Australia’s coolest year since 2012, temperatures were still much warmer than the historical average,” said climatologist Jonathan Pollock. “In fact, of all the years on record prior to the year 2000, only five were warmer than 2021.” Read more: As the government seems set to leave trans students vulnerable to expulsion from religious schools in its amendments to the religious discrimination bill, it is worth noting that a government senator has made a submission to an inquiry into social media and online safety, in which she rails against the abuse copped online by those who argue for “sex-based rights”. She singles out the focus on British millionaire author, JK Rowling, who has been subject to criticism after tweets about gender-neutral language erasing the experience of women and the “reality of biological sex”. Liberal senator Claire Chandler has previously called for discrimination laws to be amended to allow trans people to be excluded from female-only sports, and her submission focused on a search for the Harry Potter author’s name on Twitter for some of the threats Rowling receives. Despite acknowledging Rowling is from the UK and not Australia, she said it is what she and other “sex-based rights” advocates receive for voicing their opinions online. She said: The committee could take the view that the threats directed to Rowling are not a matter for this Committee because Rowling is not Australian. Committee members will no doubt also be invited by segments of the political left to find that the abuse of Rowling is justified because Rowling tweets statements which they don’t like, such as pointing out the absurdity of a male rapist being classified by police as a woman. It would be a major error for the committee to take either of these views. The reach of social media and the internet is global, and so the treatment of Rowling online and on social media sets the standard for how Australian women advocating for women’s sex-based rights can expect to be treated. Chandler said she had also received abusive anonymous emails entitled “TERFs [trans-exclusionary radical feminists] eat shit and die”. Chandler doesn’t insist on any sort of crackdown on social media or new watchdogs, but says there should be more “high-quality free debate and expression” where “trolls and death threats are not part of the landscape”, including debate in media, universities and parliament. This is where at least some within the government are at. Police have confirmed they are investigating several Coalition MPs seen not wearing masks inside Victoria’s parliament. In a statement, Victoria police said: Victoria Police is currently assessing images circulating on social media of MP’s without a mask on in parliament on 8 February. As the incident is being reviewed by investigators, we will not be providing further comment at this stage. The MPs, including opposition leader Matthew Guy, were photographed not wearing masks while posing with Essendon legend Kevin Sheedy, who gave a motivational speech to the Liberal party room ahead of the 2022 state election. In October 2021, Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, was fined $400 for twice not wearing a mask outside parliament. Masks remain compulsory in Victoria in all indoor settings. Scott Morrison has corralled the Coalition party room to support amendments that only partially protect gay students, despite at least six Liberal MPs expressing concern about the religious discrimination bill. On Tuesday the Morrison government confirmed it proposes to protect gay students from expulsion – but not other forms of discrimination – without protecting trans students at the same time. The Coalition party room endorsed limited changes to the religious bill and Sex Discrimination Act in an extended meeting after question time. Guardian Australia understands that MPs who raised concerns with the bill or asked for further changes included Trent Zimmerman, Warren Entsch, Fiona Martin, Andrew Bragg, Julian Simmonds and Katie Allen. MPs Bridget Archer and Andrew Laming have also done so publicly, while Dave Sharma’s position is unclear as he didn’t speak in the meeting. Zimmerman expressly reserved his right NOT to vote for the bill but one account of the meeting said the others did not - we have contacted them to clarify if this means they will support the bill, although Archer has said publicly she cannot vote for the bill in its current form, so many think the government is already on notice. Speaking in favour of the bill were: Kevin Andrews, Eric Abetz, Julian Leeser and Matt Sullivan. Nationals senator Perrin Davey has played down the significance of the saga surrounding a text message in which the Nationals leader, Barnaby Joyce, called the prime minister, Scott Morrison, a hypocrite and a liar. Appearing on ABC TV, Davey said Joyce had apologised to the prime minister and to the party room: We move on, because we are actually focused on governing. Text messages, when I was out on the streets in my home community on the weekend, the only people who mention that story to me were saying what is this all about? Text messages? We don’t care, we want to know what your plan is for the future. Are you going to be the better government when I come to the ballot box in May? My answer is yes we will. We are focused on jobs. From my colleagues Michael McGowan and Tamsin Rose on the New South Wales reporting team: A controversial $252m NSW government grant program “lacked integrity” and did not use any consistent guidelines in awarding more than 95% of the money to local councils in Coalition state seats. A scathing report on the scandal-plagued Stronger Communities Fund, released by NSW auditor general, Margaret Crawford, on Tuesday revealed former premier Gladys Berejiklian and former deputy premier John Barilaro personally chose projects for the fund with “little or no information about the basis” for their selections. The auditor’s findings also confirmed the government had never published program guidelines and instead favoured local councils that had “worked constructively” with them in the past over council mergers. On the same day that Crawford’s report was released, the Sydney Morning Herald reported that more than 75% of a separate $100m gambling revenue grant program was given to Coalition-held and battleground seats over a decade. Responding to the Stronger Communities Fund grants made in 2019, in the lead-up to the state election, the auditor general found a lack of formal systems in place “prevent(ed) accountability and transparency over the government’s approach to selecting councils for funding”. Read more: My head is buzzing, and not in an entirely pleasant way. At this point I am going to hand you over to Elias Visontay, whose brain is likely to be much clearer. See you all tomorrow! The Coalition party room has reconvened to resume consideration of the religious discrimination bill. Liberal senator Andrew Bragg has made a contribution – echoing concerns he made in additional comments to the Senate inquiry that the bill “departs from orthodox anti-discrimination law by including a ‘statement of belief’ [clause]”. In that report, Bragg noted problems with the clause including that: it gives preference to religion over other attributes; employers are concerned it licenses discrimination in the workplace; it overrides state laws; and “the question of costs”, as no cost claims in state tribunals could be forced into federal courts by people raising a defence that allegedly discriminatory statements were statements of belief. Bragg recommended the statement of belief clause be removed in its entirety and the Sex Discrimination Act should be amended to “end discrimination against students and teachers”, noting the “deeply upsetting case studies” of teachers who were sacked for their sexuality. Liberal MP Julian Leeser has spoken in favour of the bill. The tone is respectful and the result is likely to be agreement to make limited changes that prevent gay students from expulsion, but do not address the concerns of half a dozen MPs who called for broader protections or changes (Bridget Archer, Trent Zimmerman, Warren Entsch, Fiona Martin, Katie Allen, and Andrew Laming). Dave Sharma is yet to speak. The delegation of protesters has now left Craig Kelly’s office. The group didn’t get a chance to meet Scott Morrison or Anthony Albanese, as they had hoped to, but claimed to have left a copy of their letter of demands. The list included asking federal politicians to drop all vaccine mandates (note: very few mandates are federal responsibility, most are from state governments) and to pass Kelly’s ‘No Vaccine Passport Bill’, which neither major party supports. The protesters also demanded politicians “reinstate and compensate” people who’d lost their jobs over refusing to get a vaccine. Demonstrators have another large protest planned at Parliament House on Saturday, claiming they want “one million Aussies” to arrive. The protests currently number a few thousand people. Protest leader Graham Hood, who was part of the group visiting Kelly, flagged further big protests at Parliament during budget week in March. Hood also recommended supporters go home and “regroup” after this weekend. Canberra residents, who’ve been annoyed by constant road closures and traffic through the protests, will likely celebrate that news. About 100 workers at the printing plant of West Australian Newspapers, which publishes the West Australian, have again been locked out of work as part of a long-running stoush with management, unions say. Management at WAN, which is part of the Kerry Stokes-controlled Seven West Media, previously locked the print workers, who are members of the AMWU, ETU and CFMEU, out of the plant in December. The long-running industrial barney is over an enterprise agreement to replace the one in force covering printers, which expired two years ago (EAs continue to operate past their expiry date until either replaced or cancelled.) Unions say the deal proposed by WAN would reduce conditions and take-home pay. WAN has previously said it wants a new deal that provides “sustainable employment conditions”. Seven West Media has been contacted for comment. Some more from Mike Bowers, from the first question time for the year: Western Australia has reported 65 new Covid cases – 13 local and 52 travel related. Some of the new local cases were infectious in the community, and contact tracers are working to identify potential exposure sites. All new cases are now in quarantine, WA Health says. After much argy-bargy, many divisions, ringing of the bells and locking of the doors, and emotions and motions, time has run out in 2022’s first question time. It got messy, stayed messy, and ended in a bit of a mess. And we’re going to do it all again tomorrow! Epilogue: Labor’s Chris Bowen has withdrawn an unparliamentary remark (no, I don’t know what it was). I’m going to break this up with a peek down the lens of Guardian Australia photographer, Mike Bowers. Albanese is now moving to suspend standing orders to bring on a debate about the following: That the house notes firstly in the third year of the pandemic, aged care remains in crisis, with almost 12,000 aged care residents and workers infected with Covid in more than 1100 facilities as of Friday, and over 600 deaths among aged care residents this year. Secondly, tens of thousands of aged care residents are still waiting for a booster dose, aged care facilities have been left without rapid antigen tests and PPE. Aged care residents have been left without food, water and medical care because the government’s surge workforce strategy was inaccurate, and despite aged care being in crisis, the minister for aged care services has declared this sector is performing exceptionally well, and therefore calls on the prime minister to immediately sack his minister for aged care services and secondly apologise to aged care residents and their families for his failure to listen and act on countless warnings about the continuing crisis in aged care. Back in question time, Burke is trying to make a point of order. He says Frydenberg is “completely inventing things that are not true”. The Speaker, Andrew Wallace, says Burke is not an arbiter of the truth. Dutton chimes in with: This chamber is a contest of ideas on a test of character, and if he [Albanese] doesn’t want his character tested, he should not be sticking his hand up for the job that he seeks. Albanese refers to the statement earlier – the apology for the toxic culture in parliament house and calls to lift standards – and asks what that means if people can just get up and “say anything at all”. Aaaaaaaand then Frydenberg is up again saying Albanese’s supporters were known as the Bolsheviks. Yeah, it’s messy. Interrupting question time briefly to bring you news of the protestors who are now in Parliament House. United Australia party leader, Craig Kelly, managed to get several representatives of the anti-mandate protests into Parliament House, signing them into the building under the watchful eye of security and police. Kelly brought in around 10 protesters at around 1pm on Tuesday afternoon, including anti-lockdown activist Simeon Boikov, who creates YouTube content under the name Aussie Cossack and protest spokesperson Graham Hood. A dozen police and security trailed them back to Kelly’s office, after checking their claims of having exemptions to Parliament’s rules requiring face masks be worn inside. Protesters claimed they wanted to meet Morrison and Albanese in order to present a list of “grievances” over vaccine mandates. But other parliament rules require visitors to be signed into the building directly by the offices they are visiting, meaning the protesters would not be able to simply drop-in on the PM or Labor leader. Security and police stood in the halls outside Kelly’s office, ready to direct the protesters back outside Parliament House once their meeting was over. Speaking to media inside Kelly’s office, the protesters denied they were “anti-vaxxers”, instead saying they opposed vaccination mandates. Hood has told supporters to remain peaceful and not confront police, but several protesters have been arrested and one was allegedly found with a gun in his car last week. At a small protest outside parliament on Monday, one speaker gave a speech saying, “we are coming for you... we are emptying this building,” and warning of a “mess”. Hood said “98% of the rallies were people just like us”, while other protesters claimed that “there’s crazy people working [in Parliament] too”. Hood also gave a speech at a rally on Saturday, where he called Parliament House a “satanic” building. He stood by that claim when asked by Guardian Australia, saying he wanted “to take it on” and that the vaccine debate was a “battle between good and evil”. “I’m a man of faith and all the other stuff that’s causing this doesn’t come from God,” Hood said. The protest group appears to still be in Kelly’s office. Albanese is again asking about aged care. Morrison is making a distinction (again) between those who’ve died “with” Covid and those who’ve died “of” Covid, which is technically correct but also appears to be diminishing the number of deaths in aged care. And Morrison says that the opposition is trying to pretend there are no pressures on the system. The Speaker dismisses Tony Burke, who says the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is talking “gibberish”. Frydenberg took a Dorothy Dixer and turned it into an attack on the opposition. The Speaker says Frydenberg’s comments are relevant. There’s a brouhaha. Labor’s Pat Conroy is booted. The government’s leader of the house, Peter Dutton, says the Speaker made “a very good ruling”. And Frydenberg is off again, claiming Albanese will introduce new taxes and won’t stand up to the unions. Albanese says: This is embarrassing. This is nothing to do with any policy, this is some rant about some alleged union I worked for or something, I don’t know what it is, an attempted personal character assassination which has nothing to do with the question that was asked. The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, is trying to get a question past the Speaker on the religious discrimination act. Bandt said the amendments would mean “a school can sack an unmarried teacher if she is pregnant if it is against their beliefs, a doctor can tell their patient their sickness is from God because they are gay and a student can be expelled because they are transgender”. Morrison is saying, as he did earlier, that the question does not go to his bill (it’s a little tricky, see Paul Karp’s story for the explanation). Morrison said: What I am introducing and what I introduced to this dispatch box was a set of positive laws which were about the sexual discrimination act, about positive laws that prevent discrimination against people of religious faith or who have no religious faith. The issues that are contained in that bill did not provide the powers to do the things that you talk about. Those powers exist in the law as it stands today, as was introduced by the Labor Party when they were last in government. He goes on to say: If those in this chamber want to speak about multiculturalism and how great a multicultural society it is, then they must acknowledge the role of faith and culture in this country, and if they want to support multiculturalism in this chamber, then I urge them to support the bill. Albanese to Morrison again: “Why does the prime minister reject good ideas then take actions that are too little, too late, and after a problem has become a crisis?” (He’s talking about sending in the ADF to support the health system). Morrison accuses Albanese of politicising the pandemic, then there’s some pandemonium, then Morrison says Albanese has been “snarling and growling” and has been negative during the pandemic. He said: [We] have come through this pandemic with the constant negativity, snarling and growling ... but the facts are these, on each occasion we have worked to address the situation that we have had before us. On each and every occasion, we have sought to apply the resources, whether they be the defence forces, indeed our own public service offices and those around the country to address the needs that have been required, and particularly in the aged care sector, where defence forces were applied in Victoria during the second wave and are now being used in a similar way with targeted interventions, not with the wholesale replacement of the aged care workforce. Labor’s Clare O’Neil has asked why the prime minister has not sacked the aged care services minister (that’s Richard Colbeck) for saying the aged care system was working “exceptionally well”. Morrison says Australia is not doing as badly as other countries, and points to a bonus payment being made to aged care staff – a payment that has been heavily criticised. Morrison says that payment, along with changes to the close contact rules, are helping the sector deal with the challenges of Omicron. And he says, again, that it is misleading to pretend the pandemic would have no effect on the vulnerable. (Again, no one has said that). The health and aged care minister, Greg Hunt, added: In terms of the specific response to support the aged care sector, which I would hope is the real concern of every person in this house, masks 14.8m units, gloves, 17.5m units, gowns, 25.9m units, all of these are real actions that have been taken to support that sector. In addition to that, the changed [furloughing arrangements] were fundamental in ensuring the continuity of workforce in terms of the definition of close contact but also the capacity and critical sectors such as aged care for asymptomatic close contacts to work. That has been backed up by 80,000 shifts which have been put in place by the government and in addition the support for workforce retention and now the Australian defence force [which is also supporting the aged care workforce]. Labor MP Tim Watts was asked to withdraw an unparliamentary comment. Watts said: “I said the prime minister was a fraud and I do not believe that is unparliamentary”. Morrison went on to say it would be “naive and misleading and ... false” to pretend the pandemic would not impact the most vulnerable people in the community. (I am not sure anyone is, in fact, saying that.) Morrison said: Our government will continue to do everything we can to support those in residential aged care facilities and those working with them ... we work to try and provide support to those who are most vulnerable. Albanese goes into question time with a question on the aged care crisis, and asks whether the prime minister, Scott Morrison, will take responsibility for the deaths. Morrison said: The pandemic takes a heavy toll in this country, as it has over the course of this pandemic ... since the beginning of this year, it is true that in aged care facilities, 587 people as of the 7 February have died with Covid. I note also that since the 1 January of this year up until the 28 January, some 4141 people who were in aged care have passed away. Since the onset of Omicron, some 682 people have died in aged care facilities ... and some 9141 people who have been residents in aged care have passed away. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, is now adding his congratulations to Queen Elizabeth II on her platinum jubilee. He said she “has been a rare, constant, and enduring, inspiring presence of calm, decency and strength”: No jubilee, no matter how happy, is without a tinge of sadness. This is her first without Prince Philip. Half of a partnership so close that the tenderness could be glimpsed between the layers of formality and tradition. It is also a celebration of a reign that began with the premature death of her adored father, George VI. When he died, the young Princess Elizabeth was in Kenya, en route to Australia. The relatively carefree life they had envisioned for themselves in those early years of marriage was over. Princess Elizabeth returned to England as Queen. The responsibilities of the throne on one shoulder, the sudden absence of her father on the other. She had to find the strength amidst her grief to measure up to the expectations of a nation and the great weight of the institution into which she was born. He went on to say: You can be a republican, as I am, and still have the deepest respect for the Queen. She has done her duty with fidelity, integrity, humanity, and as she sometimes let slip with a sly sense of humour. Back to Morrison’s tribute to Queen Elizabeth II. He has peppered it with pop culture references, including James Bond and the Crown. He finished with: “God save the Queen”. In between, he said: In past jubilees, silver, diamond, gold, there has been unbridled joy, a celebration of a life of service, a reminder of the ties that bind, an expression of the affectionate history we share. In the midst of these celebrations, we know that our Queen will stand alone, as she did during the service that farewelled her loved husband of some 73 years. On that day, we all truly saw her, stoic and strong, yet human and frail and vulnerable. Dignity in the midst of suffering. Even if it is her own. In that moment, we realised that ... even monarchs face the frailties of the body and the sunsets that beckoned us all. But still, at 95, Her Majesty continues to serve, and passionately so. As a constitutional monarch, she lived out her belief that monarchy must be above politics, and the Queen played no role in that [republican referendum] campaign, pledging to respect and accept the result. And after that debate had passed, she said: ‘I shall continue to faithfully serve as Queen of Australia under the constitution to the very best of my ability, as I have tried to do for these past 48 years, as my duty to seek to remain true to the interests of Australia and all Australians as we enter into the 21st century’, and so she has done. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 55 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: 1 Cases: 495 In hospital: 55 (with one person in ICU) NSW Deaths: 18 Cases: 9,690 In hospital: 2,068 (with 132 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,092 In hospital: 178 (with 5 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 12 Cases: 5,178 In hospital: 700 (with 22 people in ICU) SA Deaths: 4 Cases: 1,296 In hospital: 204 (with 15 people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 20 Cases: 9,785 In hospital: 575 (with 72 people in ICU) WA Deaths: 0 Cases: 65 (13 local, 52 travel-related) In hospital: 1 Liberal MP Andrew Laming, has used his 90 second statement before question time to argue that the Morrison government amendments to prohibit expulsion of [same-sex attracted] students “is simply not enough”. Laming said: These students are usually not expelled. Too often they’re bullied out by a range of other tactics, that allow the school to say they never expelled them. Laming said schools are not just about delivering faith, but delivering education, and students who are “there for the right reasons” deserve to complete their education. Laming wants broader protection of LGBTQ+ students – we will clarify what that means for his vote on the religious discrimination bill. We are barrelling towards question time, but first the prime minister, Scott Morrison, is congratulating Queen Elizabeth II on being the Queen for seventy years: We express our respect to the dedication you have displayed in the service of the commonwealth [and] deep and abiding commitment to Australia and its people. Princess Elizabeth was on her way to Australia 70 years ago. The world as she knew it changed forever. Her beloved father had died. A young princess in her 20s in the first years of her marriage with two young children became Queen of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in a Commonwealth of Nations that spanned the globe. The Queen has never celebrated this day, and understandably so. I am sure she would have preferred to enjoy her father’s love, an example for many more years before she was called upon to wear that heavy crown. A reminder that no matter who we are, events happen in life, events out of our control that require more of us than we think sometimes we may be able. In a moment of immense sadness, and with the tremendous grace and poise and dignity and strength for which she has become known all around the world, and particularly here in Australia, Her Majesty commenced her duties as our Queen. Her life is one of dedication of duty and devotion, of service over self, of stead and unflinching adherence to the ideals and the responsibility of constitutional monarchy. The National Women’s Safety Alliance has responded to today’s statement. Chief executive, Dr Renee Hamilton, said it was “an important step in changing culture and practices” but that gender equality needed to be tackled: Safety is everyone’s business and the Australian parliament – just like all workplaces – has an obligation to provide a safe work environment. But we cannot make real change in any workplace unless we address the main driver of violence against women: gender inequality. As the government implements all 28 recommendations, people with lived experience and experts in gender-based violence need to have a seat at the table. Words are important, especially when they are spoken from Australia’s seat of power. But genuine action based on equality and respect must be what happens next. Christian Schools Australia, which is one of the groups that threatened to withdraw support for the religious discrimination bill if it prevented discrimination against LGBTQ+ students, has given its seal of approval to the more limited amendments that prevent expulsion of gay students. CSA director of public policy, Mark Spencer, said: As we have made very clear over many years, Christian schools have never expelled students simply on the basis of sexual orientation. That “simply” should send a shiver down the spine – because one must remember that schools can still discriminate against teachers and students for their views. For example, they might decide to punish someone who thinks that being a practising gay person and Christian can be compatible. Spencer said: We welcome these targeted amendments to address the fears created by activists and once and for all settle that expulsion of students simply on the basis of their sexual orientation is not lawful. We support the review by the ALRC of the far more complicated issues regarding other protected attributes, including gender identity ... Supporting gender questioning students is complex and schools need to be able to deal with these issues on a case-by-case basis, balancing the needs of those students with other students, finding ways to support all families within the school community. The increasing concerns around appropriate treatment regimes, how access to facilities can be managed, and what impacts arise in relation to sporting activities are just some of the practical issues that need consideration. Malcolm Turnbull has offered a typically blunt assessment of the Morrison government’s energy policies in a webinar hosted by the Clean Energy Council. Speaking on a panel after interviews with several federal MPs, the former Liberal prime minister said the government he used to lead had “basically checked out” of leading on energy. He said: It’s got a bundle of aspirations but no policy on how you’re going to get there. Turnbull said in reality the government was putting “very little” funding into developing a hydrogen industry, and even less into “green hydrogen” made with renewable energy. He said the focus on “blue hydrogen” – which is made with gas, with carbon dioxide emissions captured and stored or used, rather than released into the atmosphere – was “essentially a con” and “absolutely terrible from a greenhouse gas point of view” as carbon capture and storage hardly ever worked. Turnbull is the Australian chairman of the mining billionaire Andrew Forrest’s Fortescue Future Industries, which is heavily backing green hydrogen. The company ran a full-page ad in the Australian Financial Review on Tuesday declaring that, contrary to government claims, only green hydrogen is “clean hydrogen”, and that the emissions from blue hydrogen can be 20% higher than from burning coal or gas for heat. Turnbull told the forum the future of green hydrogen was likely to be “between gigantic and very gigantic”, particularly in making green steel, aluminium and ammonia. The Clean Energy Council has released a future roadmap for renewable energy ahead of the election, urging politicians to back steps that could lead to the country meeting all domestic electricity needs using clean energy by 2030. The group’s chief executive, Kane Thornton, said: Now is the time to exploit Australia’s natural advantages to bring down the cost of electricity ... and position the country as the innate home of energy-intensive industries in the Asia Pacific. In addition to MPs Katie Allen and Fiona Martin, Guardian Australia understands that Trent Zimmerman and Warren Entsch also spoke up against the religious discrimination bill and argued amendments did not go far enough. Martin, a psychologist with 20 years experience, focused on her concerns for the mental health of young people and the fact kids with gender identity issues such as gender dysphoria, or transgender children are one of the most vulnerable cohorts. Martin holds the culturally diverse inner-Sydney seat of Reid, where Hinduism is the second largest faith group – and the Hindu Council of Australia has actually warned that minority religions face greater discrimination as a result of the bill. Martin wants the Sex Discrimination Act amended to protect all kids, including on the grounds of gender identity. We’re still gathering a full speaker list but gather Liberal Lucy Wicks spoke about her Christian views and how others’ “lifestyle/behaviour” shouldn’t prevent schools setting their own ethos. The Coalition party room met today, and considered two reports into the religious discrimination bills. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, spoke about the government’s proposed response to the inquiries and proposed amendments – but the meeting was interrupted by the apology and acknowledgement of sexual harassment. The meeting will reconvene after question time. Guardian Australia understands the proposed changes are: Fix constitutional problems with the statement of belief and employment practices clauses (but otherwise do not address concerns that they will override state laws). Clarify what schools’ written policies need to have before they can discriminate. Add a section 38(4) to the Sex Discrimination Act to prevent expulsion of students on the basis of sexuality – but no protection against other forms of discrimination or on the grounds of gender identity. These changes have not been formally adopted yet as government policy, so Labor can still (rightly) say it hasn’t seen the final bill. We know Liberal MP Angie Bell came out of the meeting saying she now supports the bill. But MPs Katie Allen and Fiona Martin expressed concerns that the SDA change excludes trans children. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said: We were very clear that this was a bill that we wanted to see passed, so it will go to the parliament. In the lower house, second reading speeches on the religious discrimination bill have recommenced, with Labor MP Graham Perrett criticising aspects of the bill including the statement of belief and employment practices, but describing the rest of it as “largely uncontroversial”. Perrett says changes need to be made to the Sex Discrimination Act, describing it as “utterly repugnant” for schools to be allowed to use contracts to discriminate against LGBTQ+ children. Outside parliament house there’s a protest by Hazara Australians calling on the Australian government to bring more people trapped inside Afghanistan to safety. They are also calling on the federal government to move Afghans already living in Australia from temporary visas to permanent visas, and to allow them to reunite with their families. Guardian reporter Josh Butler is keeping an eye on Craig Kelly and his visitors ... Here is a story from AAP about a dolphin, in case you need it right now: A dolphin has been rescued after getting stranded in shallow waters in Melbourne’s Port Phillip Bay. Water police were called to Greenwich reserve in Williamstown at about 4pm on Monday by marine animal experts from Melbourne Zoo. Two inflatable rescue boats carrying four officers were sent out and a sling was made to tow the marooned mammal into deeper water. Animal experts assessed the dolphin before it was successfully released. Leading senior constable Tony Christensen said: Our members often see dolphins in the bay during patrols and it’s great to see this one back where it belongs. We hope to cross paths again – but this time well away from shore. Please read: Guardian Australia’s medical editor, Melissa Davey, fact checks the federal government’s claims on aged care, including health minister Greg Hunt’s claim that of those who died in aged care from or with Covid, 60% were palliative and “in the absolute last days of their lives”. While that apology was happening and survivors looked on as parliament acknowledged their abuse, independent MP Craig Kelly was bringing in visitors from the anti-vaccine mandate protests. (Please enjoy the gritty reality of an ABC back-of-camera shot). Further to the post below on that all-in press conference where a wide range of equality advocates called for the religious discrimination bill to be scrapped. The chief executive of LGBTQ+ lobby Equality Australia, Anna Brown, said the government amendments are “completely inadequate” because they “fail to protect gay children” from suspension, detention and unfair treatment, and “completely” leave behind the most vulnerable, trans children. Ian Thorpe said parliament should do everything it can to protect the most marginalised – trans children – and that the bill has “no friends in parliament”. A spokesperson for the Hindu Council of Australia said the bill allows discrimination in hiring by religious institutions – which is harmful for smaller/newer religious groups in Australia, because they don’t have schools and hospitals of their own, and staff face pressure to convert if they find a job at the institution of another religion. Olivia Stewart, a transgender student, said she had been “directly discriminated against” by a school, who asked her to leave after warning she would be bullied for her gender identity. Sean Drummond, a disability advocate, said the bill “pits thoughts and prayers” against rights of groups including people with disability. While we’re on the religious discrimination bill – debate has resumed in the parliament. I won’t bring you the blow by blows, but stay tuned for any highlights and Paul Karp will (again) pull it all together for you. Liberal MP Angie Bell has revealed she will vote for the religious discrimination bill on the basis that she has secured protections for children with differing sexual orientation (but not trans children). Bell said in a statement: I will honour my commitment to the prime minister and his election commitment, to support the religious discrimination bill having successfully secured greater protections at the same time, through amendments to the sex discrimination act for children based on their sexual orientation. I will always advocate for an Australia free from discrimination for all. This bill and the amendments I have successfully advocated for are an important step in the right direction. On why she is not insisting that gender identity discrimination be removed at the same time, Bell said: There is still work to be done to see an Australia free from all discrimination, but it is important we make changes to legislation now that will assist in these efforts and not allow this opportunity to be lost. Transitioning students are at the highest risk of experiencing mental health difficulties and present particular challenges for single sex schools. Those details will be looked at through the ALRC process and reported back 12 months after the passage of the religious discrimination bill. The speeches are still going, but Brittany Higgins has left – Rachelle Miller also left the chamber but has come back in. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, has also spoken: Parliament House should be the safest workplace in the country. Unfortunately, it isn’t. And most certainly in the past, wasn’t. The experiences people shared as part of the Jenkins review are truly disturbing and confronting. [These] experiences have no place in any workplace let alone our parliament. I thank every individual who participated in the review. Your experiences have been heard and will be acted on. I join both the prime minister and the leader of the opposition in saying sorry and acknowledging that we will do better. We are a unique position – we can bring about change for the better. There is no easier place to bring about change than the place where we are working ... we are taking merely the first step to fix the culture and the broken system to provide a workplace that is safe. Together, we are committed to make Parliament House the safest workplace in the country and a reflection to our nation of a model workplace for us all to work in. The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, paid tribute to the thousands of women who marched for justice, and pointed out that half the parliamentary staff had experienced bullying, harassment or assault in their time at work. “The blame is ours. The shame is ours,” he said: Men have failed. Failed to act with respect, failed to act with basic human decency, failed to listen and failed to make the changes necessary when asked. As men we need to change our behaviours and we are committed to that. ... The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has also said sorry and highlighted the need for immediate action. He said: [The Jenkins report] catalogues in personal testimony and shocking statistics our failure to [lead by example]. It is also a demand that we act right now. We owe a debt of gratitude to everyone in this building as well as every former staff member who stepped up to share their experiences of workplace bullying and misconduct, of sexual harassment and most dramatically, of sexual assault. I also knowledge particularly the women who have bravely stood up and called out a culture of mistreatment that brought this issue into the light. I particularly pay tribute to the courage of Brittany Higgins who is with us today. You have torn through a silence that has acted as the life-support system for the most odious of status quos. To describe your experiences is to relive them. I say to everyone who took part, that took a level of courage that you should never have needed to show. But you did. And we thank you for it. We also knowledge everyone who has experienced misconduct but could not take part. Indeed, there are many who are not ready to speak and perhaps never will be. But I hope you can take some heart from knowing that this very institution that failed you is at last acknowledging your hurt. Most importantly, we are sorry. We are committing to change. The Jenkins report, with its piercing honesty about the treatment of women and men both, has exposed a damaged culture but no word any of us says in here is worth a thing if it does not lead to action. We can make a difference but it would take real and sustained effort to create the lasting cultural change that we need. I believe we can do it. I know that we have to. And how we can start doing that is by working across the parliament to implement every single recommendation of the Jenkins report. That is the absolute minimum we should be doing for the staff who are, in so many ways, the fuel and the engine of parliament ... No-one deserves to feel unsafe or disrespected any workplace, let alone our national parliament. Let us be the example for Australia that the national parliament ought to be. While the report concerns itself with this place, it is part of something bigger. An overdue national reckoning. Morrison goes on to thank commissioner Kate Jenkins and repeats the Speaker’s statement that parliament should have “the high standards of a place where any Australian can aspire to work”. Morrison said: [Jenkins] said this is an opportunity for the leaders of our country to transform and commonwealth parliamentary workplaces to become what they already should be. Workplaces where expected standards of behaviour [are modelled], championed and enforced. And where respectable behaviour is rewarded and which any Australian, no matter gender, race, sexual orientation, disability status or age, feel safe and welcome to contribute. That is our task, she has set it out clearly. We must hold ourselves to the standard, all of us. I hesitate in calling it a new standard, because that [suggests it] should not have been previously. This is a standard that should be outside of time. Because by taking an oath or affirmation that this very table, it means you are a leader. Whatever role in which you serve. Mr Speaker, we have understood in this place the power of an apology to bring healing and to bring change. I am proud that this is a chamber in which we have done this on so many occasions, but I believe Australia is somewhat unique in this regard. We ... have sought to silence the valid and just complaints of people because there was fear about electoral consequences. I am sorry. We are sorry. I am sorry to [Brittany] Higgins for the terrible things that took place here. And the place that should have been a place for safety and contribution, turned out to be a nightmare. I am sorry for far more than that. [Higgins] had the courage to speak, and so here we are. We are sorry for all of these things, and in doing so, each of us take on accountability for change. For those of us who have perpetuated the bullying and violence, the light will come to those behaviours. As it must. “I am sorry. We are sorry,” Morrison said. Prime minister Scott Morrison says he rises to “enthusiastically support” the statement, and to recognise “all of those who are why we are here today in making this acknowledgement”. He said: I particularly want to acknowledge Brittany Higgins, whose experience, and more importantly courage, is the reason why we are all here today. And I want to thank her for that. I also want to recognise all of those who have contributed to the Jenkins review. Some 1700 individuals contributed. 935 participated in the surveys from right across this building ... those who work and call this place their place of work. 490 interviews were conducted, 11 focus groups were undertaken. This review speaks of a long-standing culture, generations of culture, in this place and in the building before it, of bullying and harassment that has occurred over this time. A power imbalance over that time that has been exploited. And that exploitation, abuse and harassment has played itself out through terrible traumatic and harrowing experiences. The harassment of staff, particularly female staff, as well as the harassment of female members and senators. Over many decades, the culture [that] perpetuated bullying, abuse, harassment and in some cases even violence became normalised. This has to change, it is changing, and I believe it will change. Here is the full statement of acknowledgement: In the final sitting week of 2021 the Independent Review into Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces was published by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner Kate Jenkins. Today, on the first sitting day of 2022, we deliver this statement on behalf of the Parliamentary Cross-Party Leadership Taskforce recommended by Commissioner Jenkins and as a reflection of the Parliament. We acknowledge the unacceptable history of workplace bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault in Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces. This issue is of the greatest importance and the responsibility of all people who work in this place. Any bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault is unacceptable and wrong. We say sorry. Every workplace should be safe and respectful. This place and its members are committed to bringing about lasting and meaningful change to both culture and practice within our workplaces. We have failed to provide this in the past. We today declare our personal and collective commitment to make the changes required. We will aspire, as we should, to set the standard for the nation. We thank all of those who participated in the Jenkins Review, acknowledging everyone who came forward to tell us of their experiences. We also acknowledge the many others who could not or did not participate but who may have experienced misconduct. We know that your experiences have had profound and far-reaching impacts on your lives. We have listened and heard you, and we accept your calls for change. This Parliament should serve as a model workplace for our nation. Only by creating the best workplace will this parliament attract the best people our country has to offer. And only by attracting the best our country has to offer, and listening to the communities we represent, will we deliver the high standards that our country deserves. Parliamentary workers feel pride in working for their country, and the privilege and honour of making a difference for the Australian people. However, for far too many, it has not been safe or respectful. The Jenkins Review proposes an ambitious program of reform to ensure Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces meet the highest standards. We are fully committed to working across the Parliament to implement all of these recommendations within the timeframes proposed by Commissioner Jenkins. We have started to act. Last year, we established a new independent complaints process and began providing trauma-informed support for people who have experienced serious incidents working in the Parliament. Members, Senators and staff have undertaken professional workplace training. Parliamentarians must uphold the highest standards and be accountable for delivering required actions. We know that cultural change has to come from the top – it has to be role modelled and championed by all of us. While we know we cannot undo the harm that has already been done, we are committed to acknowledging the mistakes of the past and continuing to build safe and respectful workplaces. Australian officials have been denied consular access to a dual Australian-Chinese citizen who is being prosecuted in Hong Kong under the sweeping new national security law. The ABC has reported that the man – first arrested on 6 January last year, released on bail the next day and then re-arrested on 1 March – is accused of “conspiring to subvert state power”. The ABC report says the man has spent the past 11 months in jail and faces a potential jail term ranging from 10 years to life, if convicted of subversion. In a statement, a spokesperson for Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said: The Australian Consulate-General in Hong Kong was notified by Hong Kong authorities of the arrest of a dual Australian-Chinese citizen under its National Security Law in January 2021. Officials from our Consulate-General have attended the subsequent court hearings. However, we have been denied consular access despite multiple attempts because the individual is deemed to be a Chinese citizen under China’s citizenship laws, which do not recognise dual nationality. We are in regular contact with the individual’s lawyers and will continue to attend future court hearings. Australia and many other countries have expressed concern about the erosion of basic freedoms and autonomy in Hong Kong and have called on Hong Kong and Chinese authorities to abide by their human rights obligations. The Hong Kong National Security Law could be interpreted broadly and therefore result in detention that is arbitrary or lacks transparency as well as the removal of basic individual rights. The man’s case was first mentioned in Australian Senate estimates hearings in October, but there were few details before now. Coalition senator Gerard Rennick has spoken briefly at a growing anti-vaccine mandate protest outside Parliament House, accepting a letter the group wanted delivered to prime minister Scott Morrison. “I’m going to help you guys fight to end the mandates ... make sure our children don’t get vaccinated and make sure we restore our civil liberties and end government overreach,” Rennick told protesters, to loud cheers. One group involved in the protests has asked supporters to sign an open letter which is critical of Covid vaccines, which they claim will be “presented to the prime minister on Tuesday”. The letter claims that protesters “will bring hundreds of thousands sending you into hiding and we will take this country back for the people”. Labor senator Murray Watt, a long-term critic of his fellow Queenslander Rennick, tweeted that the Coalition MP was “working against Morrison govt policy”. Aged care nurses are descending on Parliament House this morning protesting dangerous staff shortages, underpayment, and a lack of personal protective equipment – issues that persist more than two years since the Covid-19 pandemic began and despite numerous inquiries into the aged care sector. The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation’s federal secretary Annie Butler said nurses are “fed up with this government for abandoning aged care workers and residents”: Every day that Mr [Scott] Morrison fails to act on safe, minimum staffing ratios, fails to deliver a decent, permanent pay rise for underpaid workers and fails to show our aged care workers and residents dignity and respect, is another day that elderly Australians in nursing homes continue to suffer. A piece published by the Medical Journal of Australia on Monday, led by the University of Wollongong’s Prof Kathy Eagar, calculates that aged care residents comprise 0.74% of the Australian population and 0.59% of Covid-19 cases. Yet they represent 36.87% of all Covid-19 deaths in the pandemic so far. Eagar and her colleague Anita Westera wrote that ongoing systemic failures in aged care were exacerbated by issues including decisions to end lockdowns and ease restrictions based on vaccination rates rather than whether the aged care sector was prepared; aged care booster programs not being complete before restrictions were eased; poor access to rapid antigen tests; and inadequate personal protective equipment. Other issues identified by the authors include poor pay for staff, less experienced staff being employed to cut costs, “a long-held agenda within the centre of government to curtail projected costs associated with an ageing population” and the commonwealth’s “hands-off approach to aged care”. They wrote: The current crisis yet again reflects the reactive and iterative policy making that has characterised aged care in recent decades. And while responsibility for aged care remains centrally controlled at the national level, this is unlikely to change. Olympic champion Ian Thorpe is standing up to speak about the religious discrimination legislation on behalf of Equality Australia – he’ll be followed by a range of speakers, who are all calling for the bill to be opposed. Thorpe, who is a mental health advocate and came out as gay in 2014, said it amounted to “state-sanctioned discrimination” that would “gain rights for one group of people, while excluding another group of people”. He said: The prime minister promised that there would not be a gay student not allowed in school and now it’s been considered trans is not classified in the category as well ... this is a group of people that we should be protecting. We want to see (this bill) disappear. It has no friends in parliament, it hasn’t... this is the third time this bill (has come around) and it is something that we would prefer to see squashed. The delegation includes representatives from the Hindu Council of Australia, the Australian Council of Social Services, and transgender year 12 student Olivia Stewart. Further to Paul Karp’s reporting on the argy bargy between the Coalition and Labor on the religious discrimination bill today, the Greens have flagged introducing amendments in the House and Senate to update what they claim is an “appalling” proposal. A Greens spokesperson told a media briefing after their party room meeting that they would introduce more modest amendments in the House. They hoped Liberal moderates may support them, rather than proposing “stronger” amendments in the Senate where the government does not control the majority. The Greens’ amendments would include removing section 38(3) of the Sex Discrimination Act, which says it is “not unlawful” for religious schools to discriminate based on sexual orientation or gender identity. This is central to today’s controversy around transgender students not being protected against expulsion, under the current government proposal. The Greens are “really disappointed” Labor hasn’t spoken more strongly in opposition to the current bill, the party spokesperson said, and claimed the current proposal was “throwing trans kids under the bus”. Getting down to business (part 2): Getting down to business (part 1): Queensland has recorded 5,178 new Covid cases and 12 deaths. About 700 people with the virus are in hospital, and another 22 in intensive care. The former Labor leader, Bill Shorten, has responded to reports the government will protect gay students from discrimination but not transgender students, by noting it is a “hypothetical” but that prime minister Scott Morrison promised to protect students from all forms of persecution. He said: We’re five minutes to midnight and he [Morrison] is having to be dragged across the concrete by the fingernails. Shorten said Labor is “against discrimination” and religious freedom is “a core value” but you don’t improve the rights of some while taking away from the rights of others. As to how Labor will resolve the balance between religion and other rights – there’s still nothing definitive until the Coalition settles its final bill. The head of Australia’s Communications and Media Authority, Nerida O’Loughlin, is speaking at the International Institute of Communications Asia Telecommunications &amp; Media Forum 2022 today. She is on a panel alongside Than Htun Aung, the deputy director general of Myanmar’s Posts and Telecommunications Department. That department, under the control of Myanmar’s illegal military junta, is responsible for widespread surveillance of citizens across the country. Advocates argue inviting representatives of the junta to speak at international conferences legitimises the Myanmar military regime: Victorian premier Daniel Andrews was also asked for this thoughts on the federal government’s religious discrimination bill. He said: I think everybody should be treated fairly, properly and that’s exactly the arrangements that we have in place ... In terms of the interaction between changes at a Victorian level and a commonwealth level, well there’s a few things to be settled there. Late last year, the Victorian parliament passed laws banning religious schools from sacking or refusing to hire staff based on their sexual orientation or gender identity. Andrews confirmed the Victorian government is seeking legal advice on how to defend its laws if the federal bill passes: We will use any and all legal avenues to defend those who ought to be treated fairly and equally and might not be under any arrangements where a commonwealth act overrode or set aside provisions of a state act that duly passed the parliament. Andrews said he wanted “every student to be treated equally”. He continued: I want every Victorian to be confident, safe, respected, included for who they are. And I must say it’s pretty offensive for some in the community to equate sexual orientation or gender identity to a choice not to get vaccinated. That’s the wrong choice. People’s identity is not a matter of choice; who you are is who you are, who you love, is a matter for you. You should be treated fairly and equitably. You should not be discriminated against based on who you are. That’s just my view. It also happens to be the view of the Victorian community. Tasmania has had a small increase in new Covid cases, with 601 recorded overnight after a few days in the 400s, AAP reports. Ten people are in hospital, one of them in intensive care. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, spoke to reporters in Melbourne earlier this morning. He welcomed the federal government’s decision to reopen the Australian border to tourists and all visa holders, provided they have received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine: Firstly, I think we all were a bit amused at the timeline that had been put forward by the commonwealth government around Easter, I thought that was ... some time off and perhaps we could do better than that. It’s great yesterday that the commonwealth were able to confirm that it will be much sooner than that. That’s good for the economy, for jobs, so that’s something that we fully support. Andrews said national cabinet is still awaiting advice from Australia’s independent expert group on vaccination, Atagi, on whether it will change the definition of fully vaccinated to mean three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. He said: They (Atagi) must be getting very close to making that decision. We’ve got a national cabinet meeting on Thursday, hopefully we can receive it before then or at that meeting. All the international evidence, all the advice I get from our team is that three doses is what’s required in order to be as safe as it can be. Andrews said if the definition of fully vaccinated changed for Australians, he expected the same would apply for international arrivals: That would be consistent with the approach they’ve taken ... Let’s just wait and see what Atagi comes up with. But I think it’s highly likely, the weight of evidence suggests a booster or third dose is not really an optional extra. It’s critically important and it’s not just for now, there’s also for whatever comes at us when the weather turns later in the year. Andrews announced free rapid antigen tests will be made available for children aged three to five attending early childhood services in the coming weeks. The program, which involves children being tested twice a week, will be “voluntary, but highly recommended”, he said. Quick flashback to prime minister Scott Morrison this morning, when he was asked if he would tune in to hear Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame speak at the National Press Club tomorrow. He said: Well, it’s going to be a busy week, I don’t get the opportunity to listen to all those speeches, but I’ll certainly ensure that I’m aware of what they have said, and I’m certainly, like the rest of the country, very interested in the contribution that they make and the contribution that they have made. I think the contribution they have made, as I said, has brought forward some very important issues that we’ve had to deal with and we should deal with and were long overdue, and I’m very pleased that they have been in the actions we’re taking together as a parliament to address those very serious issues. They were “communicated in confidence”... Anti-vaccine mandate protests will return to Parliament House today, to coincide with politicians returning to Canberra, with huge crowds expected. Labor’s shadow home affairs minister Kristina Keneally warned that some protesters “seek to do real harm” and that the groups “contain individuals that our national security agencies are worried about”. “Some of these protesters actually want to undermine and overturn democracy,” Keneally told a press conference. She noted a protester who was arrested last week after police allegedly found a gun in his car: Not all the people who are here to protest are here to protest peacefully ... There are individuals here who have expressed support for doing physical harm, indeed execution of parliamentary representatives, judges and the like. Protest leaders told supporters in social media videos to remain “peaceful”. However, at a small protest outside parliament on Monday, one speaker gave a speech saying “we are coming for you ... we are emptying this building” and warning of a “mess”. Keneally also accused the federal government of “currying favour with extremists”, citing support for the rallies from Coalition MPs George Christensen and Gerard Rennick, and former Liberal Craig Kelly. She called for prime minister Scott Morrison to pull his members into line: Mr Morrison needs to take seriously the integrity of our parliament, the security of our parliamentarians, and the staff who work here and indeed make clear to members of his government, it is not appropriate for them to be going out and giving support to people who seek to enact violence upon this building. Kelly told Guardian Australia on Monday that he planned to sign in a small contingent of protesters into parliament today, potentially to hold a press conference and try to meet with Morrison or Labor leader Anthony Albanese. Morrison’s office said the PM had no plans to meet the protesters. Read more detail on the protests here: I’m already terrified of my mortgage. This won’t help: To my fellow survivors – those who have spoken out publicly at great personal cost, those who have spoken out anonymously like I have, and those who suffer in silence: never forget that you are strong, resilient and amazing people. Others may call me overly optimistic, but I believe that there is now real momentum for change. Some context on the latest Covid numbers from Peter Hannam, who reports that hospitalisations are slightly down from yesterday: Josie Coles credits independent MP Zali Steggall for finding her and others a spot in the gallery: The bin fire of the religious discrimination bill is not as simple as same-sex attracted kids to be protected and trans kids to be forced to wait. Because the draft amendments Scott Morrison has proposed to the Sex Discrimination Act are so narrow they only prevent same-sex attracted students from expulsion, not from other forms of discrimination. So Labor and equality advocates are concerned that other forms of punishment of gay, lesbian and bisexual students will still be allowed (short of expulsion), as will pregnancy discrimination. Labor has been coy about the fact it has seen draft amendments, relying on the fact that attorney general Michaelia Cash has said the bill isn’t final until it’s passed their party room, which explains why shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus told the Labor caucus it hadn’t seen the final bill. There were some reports from Cambodia late last night that the Australian economist Sean Turnell had been released after a year of detention in Myanmar. Those reports credited Cambodia’s leader with securing his release. Unfortunately that’s not the case at this stage. A spokesperson for Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said in a statement late last night: The Myanmar authorities have advised DFAT that professor Sean Turnell remains detained. Following the foreign minister’s statement of 6 February marking the one year anniversary of professor Turnell’s detention, the Australian Government repeats its call for professor Turnell’s immediate release, and for his rights and welfare to be upheld. New South Wales has recorded 9,690 new Covid cases and 18 deaths. Victoria has recorded 9,785 new Covid cases and sadly 20 deaths. Labor leader Anthony Albanese was sporting ABC socks at the church service this morning, possibly in response to yesterday’s announcement that the national broadcaster’s funding would be restored. Barnaby Joyce did not join other leaders in the front row: Brittany Higgins is now also expected to be in Parliament House for that statement. It’s still astounding that the women who suffered the worst of parliament’s workplace culture and spoke out about it weren’t invited all along. Another former staffer, Chelsey Potter, says no one from the government has contacted her: Rachelle Miller also talked about the ongoing impact of her experience. She said: I’ve had days where I’ve driven past (Parliament House) and just burst into tears. The impact is significant on me. But I’m speaking on behalf of a lot of people who for whatever reasons, valid reasons, are not speaking out about their experiences. I like to feel like I’m speaking on behalf of them as well. Once again, Paul Karp has dug through the details to bring them to you. Here’s the latest on protections for transgender students: Labor leader Anthony Albanese said prime minister Scott Morrison wrote to him proposing a conversation about the religious discrimination laws. “Those discussions have not taken place,” he said. Albanese said the Coalition is still debating the legislation. “They’re having a party room (meeting) and they’re in dispute,” he said. Now Morrison is asked about whether the bill will protect transgender students. He says the current bill does not endorse the existing law. “That bill does not do the things you’re saying,” he said. He’s talking about the religious discrimination bill – but according to reporting in the Nine newspapers, it’s a parallel discussion over the sex discrimination laws that would protect students on the basis of their sexuality, but not on the basis of their gender. Morrison said: You’re referring to an existing law that was introduced by the Labor shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus. He put that in place. This bill does not seek to endorse that arrangement. That’s an existing law. What we’re dealing with here today are not those matters. Those are going through a process with the Australian Law Reform Commission. We’re dealing with discrimination against people for their religious belief and faith. That bill does not do the things you’re saying. There was an existing law introduced by the Labor government in Parliament. Yes, it’s all a bit of a word salad, served up with some sneaky sauce. But we’ll keep working through it and bring you the latest today. Prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking now, after this morning’s church service. He starts by speaking about the religious discrimination bill. Morrison says many people of faith have come to Australia to escape discrimination and he doesn’t want them to be discriminated against here. For many Australians, their faith and religion is their culture. You can’t separate them. When you listen to their stories, they will tell stories over hundreds of years and even longer, about how they as a people of faith and religion have survived through some of the worst things you can possibly imagine in countries around the world. But they came here to Australia so they could get away from that. And they could start a new life. So they could have their religious faith and they could have their belief and they could have their community and they could have their culture, and they would not be discriminated against. I don’t want them to be discriminated against. Before the last election I said I wanted there to be laws in place that ensured their freedom from that discrimination. That’s what this is about. There’s many other laws in our parliament, many other laws that deal with many other things. And there’s time and place to deal with those. But on this day, it’s important that we remember that for so many Australians, it doesn’t matter if you’re Hindu, if you’re Sikh, Christian, Muslim, Jewish, if you choose to have no religious faith at all, we sing Australians ‘one and free’ and I hope that means something today as we gather together and seek to put in place the opportunity for those who wish to live their religion and live their faith, binding Australia together, not forcing it apart. This is why I made that pledge before the last election, and that is why I continue to stand very strongly on this point. Katharine Murphy has the latest Guardian Essential poll. It includes a “modest rally” for prime minister Scott Morrison: The defence minister Peter Dutton has told the Today show he is reserving his right to take legal action against former NSW premier Bob Carr, who doubled down on his claims that Dutton was the “mystery minister” who called prime minister Scott Morrison a “psycho”. Dutton said: It was not me. I mean, every family’s got this crazy uncle that wakes up from the rocking chair and sort of in a startled way shouts out something and I just don’t know what is going on with Bob Carr. Is he the full quid or not? He’s a bizarre guy. He hasn’t produced any evidence. He’s now saying if it’s not me, then the person needs to come forward to prove my innocence. I just find it bizarre. But anyway, I just find it bizarre. But anyway, I think he has discredited himself. He hasn’t produced any evidence and you can’t just make a claim and then back away from it. But that’s what he’s done. I think it’s embarrassing for him and I think most journalists frankly have treated him as a bit of a joke and this sort of relevance deprivation syndrome cuts in for a lot of former politicians as we’ve discussed on the show before. Asked if he’d take legal action, Dutton said Carr’s post was still up, it was defamatory, and that he reserves his right. “Let’s see what happen,” he said. “I think he should take it down and hopefully sooner than later.” ABC’s Patricia Karvelas has asked Labor’s Tony Burke about the laws. She asks him if the amendments have more protections for gay students, but not transgender students. “I’m not sure we have seen the final amendments,” Burke says. He says they won’t see the final version until the government has had a further meeting. “The prime minister previously said he would end discrimination for all students and he should be true to his word on that.” Simon Birmingham has confirmed to ABC’s Radio National that under the federal government’s religious discrimination bill, transgender students could still be expelled. As the federal government tries to keep both conservatives and moderates happy, it has made amendments to its original bill to protect people’s sexuality, but not their gender. More to come. Don’t let this pass you by today – rogue Nationals MP George Christensen has used $10,000 a month in taxpayers’ money to pay for “e-material”. (And no, he wasn’t promoting the science). Sarah Martin reports: Hey, just in case you’d forgotten about deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce calling prime minister Scott Morrison a liar and a hypocrite, nationals deputy leader David Littleproud is talking about it on ABC television. He’s worried that the text saga is distracting from the Nationals’ real message. He’s trying not to, but he’s still talking about the texts. Littleproud says the Nationals will be campaigning on the “wombat trail” out in rural and regional Australia, but that Morrison and Joyce will (at some point) be out on the hustings together. Paul Karp is keeping a eye on all the religious discrimination argy bargy, here’s the latest: Before today’s firehose really gets going, here are a couple of pictures Mike Bowers took last night of the Last Post ceremony. Morning all. When parliament sits at noon, the presiding officers in both chambers will deliver a statement of acknowledgement about deficiencies (to put the problem diplomatically) in the workplace culture at Parliament House. This implements one of the recommendations of the Jenkins review. (Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner Kate Jenkins ran an inquiry last year into workplace culture triggered by allegations raised by the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins.) Today’s statement is a public apology to people who have endured bullying, harassment or worse while working for the commonwealth. As well as the formal acknowledgment, today’s statement will outline next steps in reform. After the presiding officers have delivered the statement, party leaders will speak. When I checked in with Higgins yesterday, she had not seen the wording of today’s statement. As I reported yesterday on the blog, former staffers who have led the push for change are also disappointed that the closure of the building to the public will prevent them attending today’s statement. The government says provision will be made for some visitors. (Tory here, rudely busting into Murphy’s piece – there is some chatter around this morning that the rude oversight will be rectified. I’ll let you know as soon as I do). It’s the first sitting day of 2022, and if sitting day eve was anything to go by, it’ll be firing on a number of fronts. The religious discrimination bill will be up for debate. At this stage it seems rather unlikely that prime minister Scott Morrison’s hope it will unite the parliament will be fulfilled. He’s off to the traditional parliamentary ecumenical service at 7.30am, so thoughts and prayers are on the way. There will be a statement of acknowledgement in parliament around midday. It was a recommendation of the Jenkins review that the workplace culture of bullying, sexual assault and harassment in parliamentary workplaces should be publicly acknowledged. That was a recommendation of the Jenkins review, and there is word it will include an apology. It’s likely there were other apologies flying around yesterday amid news that former staffers Rachelle Miller and Brittany Higgins had not been invited – despite being instrumental in the review itself. That is likely to have been remedied. Shortly I’ll bring you some more info on that statement. Then there’ll be more talk of tomorrow’s National Press Club appearance by Grace Tame and Higgins, who have become good friends through all of this. Those text messages from Barnaby Joyce and the mystery minister disparaging the PM are still the topic of talk, as a symptom of internal strife. And there’s some strife without, as those pesky anti-vaccine protestors continue to threaten chaos. As for legislation for a federal Icac ... wait and see. There have been mixed messages about whether the government will prioritise integrity over other issues. Mike Bowers will bring you pictorial excellence, while Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Daniel Hurst, Paul Karp and Josh Butler will be playing whack-a-mole with everything that is going on today. Strap in!A police officer charged with murdering an Aboriginal man said “it’s all good, he was stabbing me, he was stabbing you” seconds after the fatal shooting, a court has heard. Zachary Rolfe, 30, shot dead Kumanjayi Walker in November 2019 while trying to arrest him at the remote community of Yuendumu, 300km north-west of Alice Springs. Rolfe’s trial started in Darwin on Monday. The court has heard Rolfe shot Walker three times after he had attempted to arrest him in relation to an outstanding warrant at Walker’s grandmother’s house in Yuendumu. Walker had been asked to put his hands behind his back by Rolfe only seconds after police entered the property. But instead Walker pulled a pair of medical scissors from his right pocket and brought them down in a stabbing motion into Rolfe’s left shoulder. Rolfe’s colleague, Constable Adam Eberl, then struggled with Walker, who was shot soon after for the first time by Rolfe, the court heard. The first shot is not subject to any charges. Prosecutor Philip Strickland SC told the Northern Territory supreme court on Tuesday that as Eberl and Walker struggled on a mattress on the floor, Eberl gained control of Walker. Strickland said Erbel was on top of the 19-year-old Warlpiri man, whose right arm, which had been holding the scissors, was pinned under him. Rolfe walked across the room, placed his left hand on Eberl’s back, and pressed his right hand, holding his Glock semi-automatic handgun, against the left side of Walker’s body, Strickland said. Rolfe then pulled the trigger twice in quick succession, in what Strickland said on Monday was known as a “double-tap” designed to ensure maximum damage. It is the second and third shots that are subject to the murder charge. If a jury finds Rolfe not guilty of murder, he faces a charge of manslaughter, and if he is found not guilty of that charge, a further charge of engaging in a violent act causing death. The police officer has pleaded not guilty to all charges. Strickland said that moments after Rolfe shot Walker for the final time, Eberl said to Walker: “Don’t fuck around, I’ll fuckin’ smash ya mate.” But Strickland said Eberl also said to Rolfe, “Did you – fuck”, to which Rolfe responded “It’s all good, he was stabbing me – he was stabbing you”. Strickland said Rolfe also mentioned that Walker had scissors. But he said the comment about the stabbings could indicate Rolfe knew he had “gone too far”. “When he said those words, he knew that the shots were not necessary or reasonable,” Strickland said. “In short: he said those words in order to justify what he had done.” Strickland also said in his opening to the trial that the jury would hear evidence Rolfe ignored a detailed arrest plan for Walker, and that some officers, including Rolfe, had been critical of previous attempts to arrest him. He said that after discussions between Walker’s family, the local Yuendumu Sgt Julie Frost, and an Aboriginal community police officer, arrangements were made for Walker to hand himself in after his great uncle’s funeral, on the night of 9 November, 2019. If he did not surrender, Walker was to be arrested the following day at 5am, when it was hoped he was asleep, limiting the chances of a confrontation. Strickland said Walker had an extensive criminal history including offences relating to the assault of police and escaping custody, and on 6 November 2019 he had threatened two officers with an axe as they tried to arrest him. His outstanding warrant related to removing an electronic monitoring device and leaving a residential alcohol rehabilitation program, which family members say he had done to attend the funeral. Rolfe and colleagues based in Alice Springs had viewed footage of the 6 November incident multiple times and were critical of the officers involved, Strickland said. They had been sent the detailed arrest plan for 10 November, and screenshots of part of it were later found on Rolfe’s phone, while they were en route to Yuendumu on 9 November to assist in the arrest and provide high-visibility police patrols in the context of medical staff leaving town. But, Strickland alleged, not long after he arrived in Yuendumu, and having been instructed by Frost to do patrols of the community, Rolfe and other officers (not including Frost) instead made their way directly to a property known as House 577, where Walker often stayed with his partner. Rolfe spoke to Walker’s partner’s father, Strickland said, and those conversations led them to believe Walker was at another property, known as House 511, where his grandmother lived. At House 511, Strickland said, a woman questioned Erbel about why one of the officers (not Rolfe) had an AR-15 assault rifle. Strickland said four of the Alice Springs-based officers were from the immediate response team, which could be called to high-risk incidents and had access to high-calibre weapons, and they had been specifically requested to assist in arresting Walker the following day if required. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Strickland said that when Erbel was asked, “Why’s he got a gun? Like he’s aiming to shoot someone” he responded that the officer was not aiming to shoot anyone, and the weapon could not be kept in a holster. Strickland said Erbel then told the woman: “Someone probably shouldn’t run at police with an axe, yeah?” Strickland said Erbel, followed by Rolfe, entered the house soon after, despite the arrest plan, and what the prosecution would argue is evidence that their police training discouraged such actions. “The struggle and those events that unfolded once the accused and Eberl had entered 511, are the very things that Frost’s operational plan was designed to avoid,” he said. Strickland said Rolfe also repeatedly put his hand on his weapon in the earlier “clearing” of House 577, and failed to issue clear directions to Walker before shooting him on the second and third occasions – both of which he described as further breaches of police training. David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, said he would defend his actions as being reasonable and justifiable in the context of the danger faced by him and Erbel. Edwardson said Rolfe was acting in self-defence, and to defend the life of Erbel, when he fired the second and third shots, and his training had emphasised that “edged weapon equals gun”. Walker had a propensity for violence and had attacked Rolfe in a dark and confined space, he said, with the police officers having to make decisions without the “luxury” of being about to consider tactical options “frame by frame”. “He could not press the pause button,” Edwardson said. “He made a split-second decision to fire shots two and three.” The first witness in the trial, Sgt Robert Kent, who was not in Yuendumu at the time of the shooting, confirmed that NT police training did include the phrase “edged weapon equals gun”. But he said a range of circumstances had to be considered before drawing a weapon, and that each stage of the process – issuing commands, placing a hand on a firearm, drawing, pointing, and firing a firearm – were all considered an “escalation”. The trial before Justice John Burns is expected to continue until late February.Young children’s counting books can (whisper it) be a bit dull. They’re brilliant, of course, at helping under-fives learn their numbers. But turning page after page of, say, farmyard animals gradually multiplying can get rather formulaic. How to Count to One (and Don’t Even Think About Bigger Numbers) (Nosy Crow, 17 March) aims to mix things up: here, Caspar Salmon teasingly forbids his readers to count beyond one. Matt Hunt’s primary-coloured drawings teem with multiple lifeforms – ducks, whales, worms – but you must spot the one duck that’s rollerblading, or the one worm in disguise. It’s a neat bit of reverse psychology – little kids will itch to break the rules; they’ll revel in chatting back to the bossy narrator (who sometimes slips up: “I made a mistake! And now you have said ‘two!’” he cries). Like French author Hervé Tullet’s interactive bestsellers such as Press Here! and Say Zoop!, this debut is more than a book; it’s an invitation to have fun – a playful provocation. Monster! Hungry! Phone! by Sean Taylor and illustrator Fred Benaglia (Bloomsbury), is another high-energy read. If the title alone doesn’t wake you up, wait until the monster starts shouting his pizza order down the phone. A red, egg-shaped beast with a beakish nose and inky scribbled hairdo, he’s starving, but keeps misdialling and reaching a sleepy sloth or a jaguar in Nicaragua. Finally, with the pizza almost within his grasp, he accidentally scares the delivery guy away and is forced to gobble the only thing to hand … When a colourful glass marble drops into the grey, intricately sketched world of the insects in It Fell From the Sky (Frances Lincoln), they all agree it’s the most amazing thing they’ve ever seen. They study the mysterious new addition – roll it, lick it, try to hatch it. Soon, though, a greedy spider decides that it belongs to him, and turns it into a museum attraction with a hefty entrance fee. Until disaster strikes. The latest from Canadian-based creatives the Fan Brothers is a thought-provoking exploration of selfishness, which also encourages children to look deeply. Young imaginations should be enchanted by the idea that stuff lost from their pockets becomes treasure for bugs. Gill Smith’s illustrations for Saving the Butterfly (Walker) by Helen Cooper also lean towards muted grey shades as we see a boy and his older sister, two refugees, rescued from a boat. The boy settles, makes friends, but the girl is haunted by the past and can’t move on until the day her brother brings her a butterfly. As the insect and the girl begin to flourish, the illustrations become as rich and colourful as the butterfly’s wings. A tender tale focusing on the aftermath of conflict, it’s a great companion to Nicola Davies’s memorable The Day War Came (2019). The notion that a story or film can take you on a journey is overused these days, but it’s the perfect description for I Am the Subway (Scribe), a stunning new Korean picture book by Kim Hyo-eun (and translator Deborah Smith) that evokes the physical experience of riding on an underground train, and the random lives the subway throws together each day. Punctuated throughout by the sound of the train on the tracks – ba-dum, ba-dum – the book shows us Seoul through the eyes of a subway train moving in and out of each station, and delves into some of the passengers’ backstories, whether it’s a granny who grew up by the sea or an overworked young pupil. Kim’s watercolour illustrations are full of feeling – one standout image places the reader inside the carriage at the exact moment the doors fling open and strangers stare directly at us. A bestseller in Korea, this is one of the finest picture-book portraits of city life that I have ever read, and a beautiful reminder that humans the world over share many of the same worries and emotions, and the same daily rhythms. • To order any of these books for a special price click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyAmid the sound and fury of the Brian Flores lawsuit, you may have forgotten that the Super Bowl kicks off on Sunday at Los Angeles’ SoFi Stadium. As challenging as it is to pick a winner between the Cincinnati Bengals and the hometown Rams – barely a field-goal favourite, by Vegas’ reckoning – one team has already lost: the Chargers. You remember the Chargers. They’re the other NFL team that calls Los Angeles home, the one with the cute yellow lightning bolt on the sides of their helmets. Of course for 55 years they were the San Diego Chargers, the pro sports standard bearer for a sleepy SoCal idyll famous for sun and fun (they actually started life in LA before heading south in 1961 after a single season). In San Diego, they were one of the league’s heritage teams, in that group of pioneering AFL franchises with the Raiders and the Chiefs. Among other things, the Chargers were the team where Al Davis got started in pro football and where the vertical passing game was laboratory tested and perfected. They played at Jack Murphy Stadium, an architectural marvel that played host to three Super Bowls and two World Series – handling one of each in 1998. For a time they seemed an ideally situated franchise – beloved by locals, nationally respected and synonymous with a town any football fan would kill to visit in December or January – and opposing fans from Chicago or Cleveland were famous for taking over the Murph. As someone who mainly attended games there as a member of the working press, the real treat was being able to watch the action from a lower bowl, outdoor press box. I can think of few better ways to spend a 72-degree fall Sunday. Of course the picture in San Diego was not all sunny. The Chargers fanbase could be fickle (I was too when I lived in San Diego). The city, while nationally renowned, was a small market relative to California’s other NFL towns. And after the turn of the century the Murph was a dilapidated relic that couldn’t compete with JerryWorld, University of Phoenix Stadium and other football Taj Mahals. Seeing the writing crumbling from his stadium walls Dean Spanos, the Chargers’ longtime steward, did that thing all bajillionaires sports owners do when they feel the market has dealt them a bad hand; he threatened to move to Las Vegas or Oakland or Timbuktu unless the city built him a new stadium. And when his corporate welfare stickup was rebuffed, because San Diegans are awesome, Spanos took his ball and went north on I-5 to LA, leaving the town with a giant hole where a civic institution used to be. Talk about a copycat league. The Chargers didn’t just follow the Rams (formerly of St Louis) to the City of Angels; they’re little better than dollar-per-year subletters at SoFi Stadium, the pet project of Walmart consort and Rams owner Stan Kroenke. Before moving into SoFi in 2020, the Chargers played inside a black box MLS stadium in Carson, which – culturally and sometimes with traffic – is about as far from Hollywood as Dubuque. And while they’re not the only NFL teams to share a stadium – New York’s teams share one in New Jersey – the Giants and Jets at least are an unbroken tradition in the TriState. The Rams and Chargers – who started in LA in 1946 and 1960, respectively – had been gone too long for locals to remember why they should care about them in the first place. In the interregnum the Raiders, Dallas Cowboys and the USC Trojans became LA’s football teams. If there’s anything LA respects, it’s a winner. So it figures that now that the Rams are playing in their second Super Bowl in three years, and on their home field to boot, the Chargers barely register. In a recent survey designed to weed out the “saddest” NFL fans, or those “most emotionally upset” by wins and losses, the Chargers ranked dead last – which provides some sense of the depth of apathy here. Attendance is another quality indicator, and before the move to SoFi – again, the Rams’ house – the Chargers came in dead last through the turnstiles, too. And while LA Chargers crowds have picked up since they moved into SoFi, the vaccines rolled out and the superb young quarterback Justin Herbert came to town, at the end of the day, most of that lucre flows to Kroenke’s Rams. It didn’t have to be this way. Besides the best town and loyal fans, the San Diego Chargers had another thing going for them. They were less than 20 miles away from Mexico, the closest NFL team besides the Detroit Lions and the Buffalo Bills to an international border. Had Spanos been thinking ahead, he could’ve owned the Mexican market decades before the Cowboys, Raiders and 49ers set up shop. While the league was establishing games in London as a thing, it was also drawing similarly sized crowds for kickoffs in Mexico City. Spanos could have expanded his market to include an entire country, encroached deeper into Latin America and used those riches to build the stadium of his dreams. Given the NFL’s world-conquering ambitions and its efforts to ingratiate itself with the Latin community, leave no doubt: this is a massive fail. The Chargers could have been exemplars – first to take off outside the US, leading the NFL’s foreign expansion, a more valuable franchise than perhaps even the Cowboys. Instead, they’re a second-class team in an A-list town. Only a bajillionaire detached from reality could see this as winning.The UK government’s decision to allow homes to be built to low standards of energy efficiency cost owners of newly built homes about £234m last year, analysis shows. The zero carbon homes standard was supposed to come into force in 2016, but the measure, which was introduced under Labour, was scrapped by the Conservative government in 2015. Since 2016, almost 1.2m new homes have been built with energy efficiency standards that are well below those needed in the long term to reach the net zero greenhouse gas emissions target. The Liberal Democrats have calculated that as each home under the zero carbon standard could have expected an energy bill saving of £200 a year, the cumulative cost to households living in newly built homes has been about £790m since 2016. The research follows separate findings from Labour last year that suggested owners of newly built homes would face bills of £20,000 to upgrade them to zero carbon standards, a cost of about £20bn for the whole of the UK. If housebuilders had been forced to meet the zero carbon homes standard, the cost would have been about £5bn, and borne by the lucrative homebuilding industry. The technology needed to build zero carbon homes is already widely available, and in widespread use in other countries. It comprises heat pumps, solar panels, high-grade materials such as thermal glazing, and high-standard insulation. But these technologies are not widely used in the UK for building new homes, as they are more costly than the current building regulations require. Homebuilders have been reluctant to build to such requirements, because although it would mean large savings over many years to the owners of the dwellings, using the necessary materials and techniques would add to their construction costs. Wera Hobhouse, the energy and climate change spokesperson for the Liberal Democrats, said: “The Conservatives have slapped hundreds of pounds on to people’s heating bills by scrapping energy efficiency standards for new homes. This shameful record has left over 1.2 million more people living in poorly insulated homes, making them even more vulnerable to soaring energy prices. “It shows the Conservatives are more interested in cosying up to their property developer friends than slashing people’s bills and tackling the climate crisis.” Green campaigners and analysts fear the government is planning further cuts to the UK’s spending on insulation and other energy efficiency measures. The Energy Company Obligation, which adds about £1bn a year to energy bills to pay for insulation and energy efficiency measures for the poorest households, is under threat from the Treasury, although it has saved an estimated £11.7bn on bills for people on low incomes. Hobhouse added: “The fact ministers are now considering cutting even more energy efficiency measures shows that they still haven’t learned any lessons from this failure. The government needs to urgently bring back energy efficiency standards for new builds and insulate older homes, so people aren’t condemned to years of eye-watering energy bills.” A government spokesperson said: “Record global gas prices only underscore the importance of our plan to generate more clean power in this country so we can reduce our reliance on expensive, volatile fossil fuels. As such, we have no plans to move away from our green ambitions, and we remain committed to supporting our homegrown renewables sector, investing over £6.6bn to decarbonise homes and buildings across England, and extending the Energy Company Obligation from 2022 to 2026, boosting its value to £1bn a year.” The Conservatives have received an estimated £18m from property developers since Boris Johnson became prime minister.Peers are attempting to block plans which could prevent women who are fleeing rape, forced marriage, trafficking or female genital mutilation from securing refugee status – a move that critics say was sneaked into the nationality and borders bill. The Labour peer Lady Lister, with support from the crossbencher Lady Coussins, the Liberal Democrat Lord Paddick and the bishop of Gloucester, have tabled an amendment to the bill due to be discussed on Tuesday. If passed it will reverse a clause added to the controversial bill after the consultation period had ended. Peers say the belatedly added clause will seriously damage the ability of survivors of gender-based persecution to be recognised as refugees and granted protection, a change that will disproportionately affect women and girls. Lawyers say the clause, if approved, will change how the 1951 UN refugee convention is interpreted. Clause 32 of the convention refers to membership of a “particular social group” and is a key ground to qualify as a refugee. It is used by women and girls fleeing gender-based persecution. The current definition of “particular social group” in domestic law contains two conditions, either of which can be satisfied to demonstrate someone is in need of refugee protection. However, the new clause reverses this legal principle and substitutes it with what lawyers from the Immigration Law Practitioners’ Association (ILPA) say is an erroneous definition from European law which states that both conditions must be satisfied before refugee status can be granted. The introduction of this technicality would present a significant additional hurdle to women accessing refugee protection in the UK, meaning that some of the most vulnerable people seeking protection could no longer get it. Lister, who tabled the amendment to reverse the change, said: “Clause 32 is one example of how the bill will seriously damage women fleeing gender-based violence and abuse, by creating a significant barrier to refugee protection, as the UNHCR [United Nations high commissioner for refugees] has warned. It is crucial that the Lords overturn this change.” Alphonsine Kabagabo, the director of the charity Women for Refugee Women, said: “The government’s nationality and borders bill is the biggest threat to women being able to access refugee protection in the UK that we have ever seen. The bill is dangerous and discriminatory.” Zoe Bantleman, the legal director at the ILPA, said: “The bill introduces a regressive definition of ‘particular social group’ for the purposes of the 1951 refugee convention that reverses case law of senior UK courts, contravenes UNHCR standards, and reinstates an erroneous EU law standard, which will disproportionately affect women and girls fleeing gender-based persecution.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “The UK has a proud history of providing protection to the most vulnerable people in genuine need, including women, and this will not change. The changes we are making are to ensure we have a more consistent approach to assessing asylum claims and it is wrong to claim female asylum seekers will be excluded from being considered as a member of a particular group. The nationality and borders bill will deliver the government’s new plan for immigration – the most comprehensive reform in decades – to fix the broken asylum system.”‘I’ve been dead twice,” grins Pere Ubu’s David Thomas, over Zoom from his flat in Hove. “Death is very overrated. It was like being asleep. Once I was brought back by the ambulance crew. My wife said ‘Those guys worked like demons on you.’ The other time I woke up in ICU with all this stuff attached to me and it turned out I’d died again. I woke up and the doctor said, “You’re David Thomas!’’ It turned out that he’d been at the same Pere Ubu show that Ian Rankin had seen in the 70s, and was a lifelong fan.” Now 68, seated in front of his computer in a furry hoody, the drily-humoured Ohioan cuts a more subdued figure than the “enigmatic giant of a singer” Rankin has subsequently remembered shouting requests at during that gig at Edinburgh University in 1978. Thomas needs kidney dialysis three times a week, and when he gets up to answer the door he needs a walker. But while he may no longer bark out lyrics while careering about the stage, his spirit is indefatigable. “I’m not in the best of health, but my singing voice is better than it’s ever been,” he insists, cheerily. “I’m sort of glad that I can’t jump around any more because I don’t have to worry about falling into the drums. All my concentration goes into singing.” Thomas has fronted the seminal and hugely influential “avant garage” post-punk forerunners since 1975. Rolling Stone magazine once declared that “modern rock’n’roll reached its peak in 1978 with Pere Ubu’s [debut album] The Modern Dance and has declined ever since”, which the singer took as a challenge. “I wasn’t going to stop making music in 1978 just because everybody said ‘they’ve ended rock’n’roll,’ he insists. “I had … er, I have other things to say.” Although his health travails meant that 2019 album The Long Goodbye was taken as a farewell, the singer insists that after ceaseless reinvention he simply wanted to close the door on almost half a century of work “so I could start somewhere else”. This month, Ubu return to the stage after over two years with one of their more intriguing evolutions: an adaptation of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, performed live in Canterbury. However, Thomas says people can expect a “rocking show”, albeit one which “isn’t afraid of literary shenanigans. When I started the band one of the criteria for me was that I wanted a band that William Faulkner or Raymond Chandler would have wanted to be in. I expect rock music to be smart.” The son of a literary professor, Thomas has always brought a storytelling dazzle to rock’n’roll and sees Canterbury Tales – in which various medieval characters tell allegorical stories during a pilgrimage to the town – as the first road novel, the foundation of a tradition stretching from Kerouac’s On the Road to the storytelling in pop he misses in current music. “Canterbury Tales is like Ray Bradbury’s The Martian Chronicles,” he enthuses. “This alien world, an entirely different civilisation, but it isn’t just about telling stories. It’s about looking at a much bigger picture of human life through a smaller prism. It’s very different, but in the same context as everything I’m familiar with.” He isn’t about to try and cram all 24 stories and 17,000 lines of Canterbury Tales into a setlist, though. Instead, Ubu will present songs which embed “stories that somebody on that journey might have told at night”. New York Bowery Poetry Club founder Bob Holman will contribute “interconnecting narratives” taking in everything from illustrations of Chaucer characters to an Iggy and the Stooges lyric (“Look out honey, cos I’m using technology”). Dutch electronica band Rats on Rafts will appear alongside his occasional other band David Thomas and Two Pale Boys. Thomas promises other, more mysterious unnamed special guests and “probably some chaos”. The show is being partly based on Ubu’s Disastodromes in London in 1998 and 2003, which themselves followed a notorious initial series of events in their home town, Cleveland, Ohio in the 1970s. “One of the shows was in an old theatre overrun by drunks and winos,” the big man chuckles. “Big sparks were flying out of the electrical circuits in the walls and somebody set a sofa on fire in the lobby. The motto was ‘We call it a disaster, so nothing can go wrong.’” Thomas’s more outre instincts were informed by the city’s infamous pre-punk scene, where a band such as electric eels would fight audiences and each other, and run a lawnmower across the stage. “Which sounds more hazardous than it was,” he chuckles. “The blades were raised off the floor.” His first band, Rocket from the Tombs (who he has reconstituted on various occasions since 2003) went “hell for leather”, never had a drummer last longer than three months and “were never going to stay together because there was so much intensity and ambition to be a unique, great rock band”. Those urges and a need for constant reinvention have propelled Ubu through innumerable musical changes and 21 musicians, although Thomas rejects comparisons with the Fall, who similarly evolved around a sole constant member. “Mark E Smith went through musicians a lot quicker than I did,” he insists, pointing out that he’s never fired anyone and that bassist Michele Temple and synth player Robert Wheeler each played in Ubu for a quarter of a century. “If I called up 20 of the 21 tomorrow they’d come back. They love to work with me.” The 21st, presumably, is original keyboardist Allen Ravenstine, who once described how the singer could be a “dark cloud in a room, a stifling presence” and talked of “brutal” creative sessions. “Well, Allen has a different view of things,” the frontman shrugs, “but I don’t tell anyone what I’m working on and nobody knows the lyrics until I sing them in the studio. That’s the way I am.” This approach has kept them innovative, but Ubu have never had a hit. When they last played in Manchester, Thomas began the gig with a surreally hilarious monologue in which Madonna and Bon Jovi were reduced to playing third-rate rock clubs and Holiday Inns while Ubu had a global No 1 and “were playing stadiums on stadiums”. Would you have liked to have been more popular? “Who cares?” he shrugs, with a mischievous grin. “The only reason I would have liked to have been rich and famous is because I would have spent the money on even more outrageous projects.” The closest they came to the mainstream was between 1988 and 1993 when they made four much-loved albums for Fontana, a major label, making their British TV debut on Roland Rat: the Series. “It’s a distinctive period of the group,” he grins. “The only thing I regret is that Dave Bates, the A&amp;R man who signed us, wasn’t more intrusive. Dave was frightened to death of screwing with Pere Ubu. He was devoted to us and I can’t fault that.” He cackles. “I wish there’d been more oversight but we probably wouldn’t have paid attention anyway.” Thirty years on, fronting Pere Ubu has now become a life-threatening business. As a vulnerable person, contracting Covid would be fatal, but the singer points out that the Canterbury backstage area will be masked and the whole band are vaccinated. He is “stunned” that so many musicians are anti-vaxxers and applauds Neil Young’s decision – subsequently followed by Joni Mitchell – to remove his music from Spotify in protest at Covid misinformation in Joe Rogan’s podcasts. “Things would be a whole lot better if there were 40 more Neil Youngs.” Thomas had a productive lockdown. He’s remixed three albums for a forthcoming box set because “we never had enough money to go into the studio for anything other than a minimum but now I have my home studio I felt the need to fix things.” He hosts a livestreaming channel, DPK TV, has had a song on TV hit American Horror Story and the band website does a tidy trade in Ubu merch. He reveals that he’s actually made more money in the last two years than at any stage of his career, but that’s not what drives him. “I’ve saved enough that I don’t have to work any more and I could easily coast to death at this point,” he admits. “This is not the easiest life in the world. But I want to keep pushing at it. If I were satisfied, I’d quit.” • Pere Ubu perform Canterbury Tales at the Gulbenkian Arts Centre, Canterbury, on 11 February. The three-album box set Nuke the Whales 2006-2014 is released on Fire Records on 1 April.Scott Morrison was sorry for a longstanding toxic culture, “generations of culture, in this place and in the building before it, of bullying and harassment”. The prime minister was sorry that the place Brittany Higgins worked in, the people’s house, “turned out to be a nightmare”. The sorrow was expressed in Tuesday’s statement of acknowledgment – a succession of well-crafted speeches from the presiding officers and the political leadership acknowledging that a powerful institution, the parliament of Australia, had failed its workforce far too often. The prime minister was sorry for the toxic culture. Sorry for the danger that lurked unchecked in the supposedly safe place. Sorry for the hazardous by-products of occupational aggression. And Morrison was “sorry for far more than that”. This “more” sounded intriguing. Would Morrison be sorry for treating Higgins like a political crisis to be managed? Would the prime minister be sorry for launching a coded attack on the journalist who first reported Higgins’ allegation during a press conference last year that was supposed to be a mea culpa over his government’s handling of complaints from women? Would he be sorry for having his wife clarify things that should have been clear to him? Would the prime minister be sorry for failing a significant test of leadership over the preceding 12 months? Would Australia’s prime minister be humble enough to read into Hansard precisely how he had failed, and would he be candid enough to share what he had learned? Sorrow, after all, is one thing. Self knowledge is quite another. Morrison doesn’t apologise very often, so Tuesday’s apology was, of course, significant. The parliament apologised on Tuesday because apologising was recommendation one of the Jenkins review: acknowledge the unacceptable history of workplace bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces. “We are sorry,” the prime minister told the chamber. To remove any ambiguity, the prime minister said: “I am sorry. I am sorry to Ms Higgins for the terrible things that took place here”. No more “Brittany”. Ms Higgins. One lesson learned, perhaps. A woman who has been to hell and back in going public with her allegations has earned the dignity of formality. A woman capable of shaming the most powerful institution in the country is an equal – not a daughter or a subordinate. One enduring lesson, perhaps. Ms Higgins was watching on from above, a visitor in the visitors gallery of her former workplace. The former Liberal staffer, who was the primary catalyst for the ritualised act of repentance playing out below, had been invited to attend the event at the last minute, because while everyone is sorry, some basic blockages seem impossible to clear. The first time Higgins saw the official statement of acknowledgment was on Tuesday afternoon when the independent MP Zali Steggall printed off a copy from the computer in her office. Clarity that she and a handful of others had been invited to attend the formalities in person only arrived on Monday night at 10.21pm. Participants in the process felt themselves shunted on a travelator. The moment was being rushed to an arbitrary point in time and space. The government wanted the statement of acknowledgment to be delivered before Higgins and the 2021 Australian of the Year, Grace Tame, addressed the National Press Club on Wednesday. First mover advantage. Inclusion was the casualty of the deadline. Higgins sat rigid and masked in the visitors gallery on Tuesday with other women who have raised their voices to change the toxic Downton Abbey culture of political staffing – including former aides Chelsey Potter, Rachelle Miller and Josie Coles. Some others weren’t invited at all. Some women watching remotely raged and wept. The collective sorrow – the fine words – didn’t magically erase the bullying, belittling and worse. And yet there was the sound of a line being drawn. Parliament, institutionally, with multiparty unity, might be turning a page. But the staff who have endured trauma still live with their trauma, with their lack of resolution, with the measurable gap between what they wanted to happen, and what happened. They also live with the knowledge of what it cost them to drag the prime minister and the parliament to Tuesday’s moment of collective recognition – just how deeply they needed to dig. Higgins stuck it out resolutely in her seat for most of Tuesday’s acknowledgments. But as the repentance rolled on, she wept, and left the chamber when it became too much. Because most of the last 12 months, let’s be really honest, has been too much. So what were the limits of a prime ministerial mea culpa? The prime minister, on Tuesday, was sorry, for Ms Higgins, and for her antecedents, “for all of those who came before Ms Higgins and endured the same”. Morrison also told the chamber that sorry was only the start of this collective reckoning. “That is our promise to those who are here today and those watching across Australia”. “For those of us who are here now, we know we have that opportunity, and we must, and we can, and we will do better”. Words are fine. Actions are better. This isn’t over. Australians will be watching what you have learned. What you are prepared to change.Words matter. They are all you have as a politician. They are your only weapon. We wage war and we broker peace with words. We inflame or we calm. That is why it is so important to deploy them carefully and responsibly. Unfortunately, a cynic knows how to cast aspersions, make an insinuation and whisper sweet nastiness in the public ear – preferably without anyone noticing. But it’s a dangerous business. The poison you pour in the well may be intended for your enemy, but it can all too easily poison your friends and all around you too. This is my problem with Boris Johnson’s foul slurs against Keir Starmer. Johnson knew precisely what he was doing when he falsely claimed Starmer failed to prosecute Savile when he was director of public prosecutions. He had discussed it with his advisers beforehand. He knew he was up against the wall, and he desperately wanted a distraction. He was advised against it, in the strongest terms. He was told it was irresponsible and dangerous. He was leaching off the conspiracy theories of the very hard-right in the UK and the US and giving dangerous elements in society succour. It would provide an authoritative platform for the very nastiest characters in the body politic. It was bound to inflame feelings – and yesterday we saw precisely what it could do, when an angry mob lambasted Starmer as he returned to parliament from the Ministry of Defence. The fact that the braying crowd recited the prime minister’s vicious slurs would have counted as a victory for Johnson. He had achieved his aim. They were ventriloquising him. He had incited them. There was malice aforethought. Perhaps the most cynical aspect of this is the fact that Johnson seems to have no thought for Savile’s victims – whose representatives have universally condemned him – nor is he doing anything to ensure that present and future generations of child abusers are brought to justice. He doesn’t care about child abuse. The victims are just collateral in his insidious ploy. It is not the first time Johnson has done this. He loves inflammatory language. It is his modus operandi. When he is in trouble you can see him reach for a more exorbitant metaphor, a sharper quip, a harsher turn of phrase. Back in 2019 he was endlessly accusing everyone who disagreed with him of “surrender” and “betrayal” and being a “traitor”, deliberately whipping up anger. When the Labour MP Paula Sherriff took him to task for it in the Commons and begged him to moderate his language because of the daily death threats she and other female MPs were receiving, he launched another attack at her. She was almost in tears, but he said he had never heard such “humbug” in all his life. Then the predictable (and intended) result was that all the demons of Hades were unleashed upon her on social media. And so it has been this week. As minister after minister has defended the PM in ever more outlandish fashion, criminal and unsavoury factions have taken to social media to back him up. We know how this plays out. We have seen the same tactics in the US. It ends up on the steps of Congress. But it’s not yet too late to stop that fatal trajectory here. It will require, as a very minimum, that the PM apologises fully and with genuine contrition, withdraws the remarks and condemns those that repeat them. But I suspect he can’t do that. It’s not in his nature. He’d far prefer to smirk, like Muttley the cartoon dog, at the success of his cunning plan. That’s why he really will have to go – and Tory MPs will have to do the deed sooner rather than later. Chris Bryant is the Labour MP for RhonddaAustralia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, along with other political leaders, has apologised for the “terrible things” that happened in parliament workplaces and acknowledged a culture of bullying, abuse, harassment “and in some cases even violence” built up over decades. Morrison’s apology on Tuesday followed a landmark review by Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, in 2021 into federal parliament’s culture. The Jenkins review, which recommended a significant overhaul of the workplace culture, found one in three staffers interviewed had been sexually harassed. The inquiry was constituted after a former government staffer, Brittany Higgins, alleged she was raped by a colleague after hours in a Parliament House ministerial office in March 2019. Morrison was widely criticised for his perceived mishandling of the aftermath of Higgins’ allegation which triggered a broader #MeToo reckoning in the Australian parliament and led to public rallies. Morrison’s standing with female voters took a significant hit. The prime minister attempted to recover from the damage by introducing more workplace support for political staff and by reshuffling his cabinet to amplify a female “perspective” within the conservative Coalition government. On Tuesday, the prime minister used a formal statement of acknowledgement in the lower house to apologise directly to Higgins and praise her “courage”. “Parliament can’t be a place of cruelty,” Morrison said. “Nor can it be a place where incivility towards each other is somehow proof of some strength.” The prime minister said the federal parliament needed to adhere to the highest workplace standards – and be “a place where any Australian can aspire to work and know they can work safely”. The sentiments were echoed by the leader of the National party, Barnaby Joyce, the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, the leader of the Greens, Adam Bandt, and by members of the crossbench. Albanese paid tribute to Higgins, who watched proceedings from the visitor’s gallery in parliament. The Labor leader said she had “torn through a silence that has acted as the life-support system for the most odious of status quos”. But there was controversy the evening before the formal apology was delivered. Higgins and other former staffers who had campaigned for an overhaul of the toxic culture in the preceding 12 months were initially not invited to attend parliament for the statement. A surge in Covid infections has restricted public access to the building. But an invitation was issued at the last minute. The Jenkins review made 28 recommendations. The first was that Australia’s political leaders make a public statement to acknowledge “the impact of the misconduct on individuals and the lack of action taken in the past” and “outline the institutional leadership commitment to change with shared accountability for progress”. The government has signalled it will introduce legislative changes recommended by Jenkins in the remaining parliamentary sitting weeks before Australians go to the polls likely in May. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Jenkins review found gender inequality in the political ecosystem was a key driver of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault within commonwealth parliamentary workplaces. It found that power imbalances and the misuse of power were among “the primary drivers of misconduct”. A survey undertaken to inform the review found 37% of respondents in parliamentary workplaces had personally experienced bullying and 33% had personally experienced sexual harassment – with 1% experiencing an actual or attempted sexual assault. 84% of people who experienced sexual harassment did not seek support or advice. The report recommended a new code of conduct for parliamentarians and their staff to help normalise employment conventions. Jenkins said the new code should address current legal requirements that prohibit bullying, sexual harassment, sexual assault and workplace discrimination. • Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlAt first glance, The Justice of Bunny King looks like it comfortably slots into a familiar category of earnest, sincere dramas: woman fights social services to get her kids out of foster care. That’s a bit of a movie cliche, and there are a couple of scenes here that you may feel like you’ve seen before. But first-time feature director Gaysorn Thavat brings real depth and layers of emotional intelligence to the issues, and her film is unexpectedly funny. It’s a match for the Australian actor Essie Davis, whose role as Bunny King is her best since The Babadook. Bunny works as a “squeegee bandit”, washing windscreens on a busy stretch of road in Auckland, New Zealand. She is sofa-surfing, staying with her sister’s family while saving for a rental deposit , as she needs secure accommodation to get her children back. Looking at Bunny’s jar of shrapnel, you sense it’s going to be an uphill struggle. But she is someone who walks on the sunny side of life. That in itself is a bit trite: the relentless optimist. It’s a measure of Davis’s performance that Bunny seems absolutely authentic; a real-feeling woman not a character study. The story of how her children – five-year-old Shannon (Amelie Baynes), who is disabled, and 14-year-old Reuben (Angus Stevens) – were taken into care, emerges painfully. It involves domestic violence, and what’s clear is that the justice system has been viciously unfair to Bunny. At contact sessions with the kids she is affectionate and excited, almost childlike herself. But she has a self-defeating streak of anger, lashing out at social workers. The strength of the writing is in portraying Bunny’s reality, allowing us to wonder – like the social workers – whether she really is a reliable parent. This is thoughtful film-making, though I didn’t quite buy into the explosion of drama at the end. • The Justice of Bunny King is in cinemas 11 February.Friday is a momentous day. CBeebies, the BBC’s dedicated channel for viewers aged six and under, will be 20 years old. There aren’t many television companies around the world that would devote an entire channel to bright, educational, inclusive output – but it isn’t until you have kids that you realise what a lifesaver CBeebies is. It is an utterly trustworthy place, full of wholesome stories and thoughtful messages. Among the wild west of YouTube and streaming platforms, it is an outpost where you know your children will always be looked after. CBeebies has produced so much wonderful television that it is impossible to list it all, but here is a countdown of the 20 best shows from the past two decades. Happy birthday, CBeebies! 20 Tee and Mo This show about a monkey and her son features a series of songs performed by Lauren Laverne. For the most part, the songs exist to remind parents that they are not alone in their mundane struggles – there is one about waking up, one about tidying up, one about the backbreaking effort of getting a child out of the house. And then there is a lovely lullaby waltz called Go to Sleep. Almost without exception, every new parent has been caught off-guard by Go to Sleep. Maybe it has been a hard day. Maybe you are incapacitated with exhaustion. Whatever the reason, there will be a time when Go to Sleep will come on unannounced and reduce you to rubble. Most parents have cried to Go to Sleep at one point or another. It is less a song and more a cruise missile to the chest. It should probably be banned. 19 Feeling Better Hosted by Dr Radha Modgil, Feeling Better was a 2018 series designed to help children cope with the emotions they encounter while growing up. It was tremendously effective, too. Every episode saw Dr Radha attend to a puppet who was experiencing new and complicated feelings, by putting them into context, reassuring the puppet that feelings are normal, then singing a song about it. It was the sort of show that would struggle to be made anywhere else. 18 In the Night Garden There are a couple of stages to watching In the Night Garden. The first comes when you are introduced to its army of nonsense characters – Igglepiggle, Makka Pakka, the Tittifers, the Ninky Nonk – and assume you have been concussed. But sit with it for a few episodes and In the Night Garden unfolds with a beautiful logic. Designed to appeal to a toddler’s mind, this is often the first CBeebies show a child will fall in love with. 17 Balamory One of CBeebies’ launch offerings, Balamory was a live-action show about a small Scottish fishing community, shot in the village of Tobermory, on Mull. A bright, otherwordly series, Balamory was more traditional than the shows CBeebies would later produce, but it was a sensation nonetheless. It still is: 20 years on, the comedian Miles Jupp still hasn’t shaken his association with the show (he played Archie, the clueless aristocrat who lived in a bright pink castle, if you were wondering). 16 Grandpa in my Pocket A series based on the titular age-old problem. Your grandfather was the beloved British actor James Bolam. In a procession of staggeringly inopportune moments, he kept putting on a magical shrinking cap, becoming the size of a mouse and speeding around the house, bringing toys to life like a cackling miniature poltergeist. This show was delightful, but, honestly, the grandfather was a handful. 15 Swashbuckle The closest your children will get to Fun House or Finders Keepers. A fun, silly, nautical gameshow where young contestants are pitted against an uptight captain and her idiotic crewmates. You could write a thesis on the fact that, since the protagonists are pirates taking on the authoritarian might of the British navy, Swashbuckle is a way to indoctrinate children into the ways of guerrilla warfare. But you shouldn’t, because it would be stupid. 14 Bedtime Stories Possibly the best-known CBeebies show, and certainly the starriest, Bedtime Stories ends each day on the channel. A celebrity will appear and read gently from a picturebook close to their heart. The level of celebrity Bedtime Stories attracts is amazing; Tom Hiddleston, Tom Hardy, Kristin Scott Thomas, Dolly Parton, James McAvoy and Elton John have all read stories. It isn’t always the biggest stars that shine brightest, however – I have a soft spot for Nadiya Hussain’s telling of My Little Star. 13 Tweenies Tweenies predated CBeebies by three years, but heavy rotation in the ensuing years and its enormous cultural footprint means it deserves its spot. The series followed four young (but adult-sized) children as they played, sang, learned and (often, in the case of Milo) threw apocalyptic tantrums that were quickly followed by needy apologies. The Tweenies also released several singles. Their first was called No 1 and went to No 5. Their last, bewilderingly, was a cover version of the 1995 song Have Fun, Go Mad from the Dunston Checks In soundtrack. 12 Twirlywoos Twirlywoos is a lesser-known effort from Anne Woods’ Ragdoll Productions – also known for Rosie and Jim and Teletubbies – but it is easily one of the best. Each episode happens across two parts. In the first, the Twirlywoos (a family of four bulbous seafaring creatures with propellers on their heads, along with their pet urchin) travel into the real world and create havoc for a succession of well-meaning but dimwitted humans. Once some lives have been ruined, the Twirlywoos head back to their boat and learn lessons about prepositions. Everything about Twirlywoos is impossibly charming; it deserves much more recognition than it gets. 11 Old Jack’s Boat The most delightful show CBeebies ever made. In every episode, lovely, twinkly Bernard Cribbins boards his boat and tells a lovely, twinkly story to his adorably old dog. Not a huge amount happens in the stories – they usually revolve around the local community, which includes Freema Agyeman and Helen Lederer, and younger kids may be put off by the slower pace at first – but it is a great world in which to immerse yourself. Better yet, several episodes were written by Russell T Davies. 10 Dipdap A wildly inventive series of three-minute shorts, Dipdap revolved around a simply animated character forced to overcome the obstacles created for him by a line drawing. There was something beautifully timeless about Dipdap – it was a 21st-century show with the feel of a 70-year-old Warner Bros cartoon. Don’t be surprised if children are still discovering it anew several generations from now. 9 Gigglebiz Justin Fletcher has a whole array of CBeebies shows to his name – there is Something Special, if you need something soothing, or Justin’s House, if you want to feel as if you are trapped in a hellish liminal soft play centre for ever – but Gigglebiz is probably the best showcase of his talents. An all-out sketch show that appeals to children and parents, Gigglebiz earns its place for never pandering to its young audiences. Also, it is a sketch show. Do you know how rare those things are these days? 8 Maddie’s Do You Know? Maddie Moate is one of CBeebies’ all-time breakout stars – and her ascent began here. Maddie picks a thing she wants to learn more about – soft-play cushions, say, or toilet rolls – and visits the factory where they are made. Deep down, it is an update of those old Sesame Street production-line segments, but Maddie’s wide-eyed enthusiasm for everything she sees really sells it. 7 Let’s Play In which Sid Sloane and Rebecca Keatley dress up in the uniforms of various professions then travel magically into their world. By itself, Let’s Play would be a perfectly diverting television show, but what pushes it over the edge is the dizzying number of characters Keatley and Sloane play. There is one episode, set in a courtroom, in which Keatley simultaneously plays a claimant, a defendant, a witness, a member of the jury, two lawyers and an usher. It is astounding – Kind Hearts and Coronets told in 20 minutes. People should have thrown flowers at Keatley’s feet as the credits rolled. 6 Andy’s Dinosaur Adventures Like Justin Fletcher, Andy Day has an entire squadron of CBeebies shows. Andy’s Dinosaur Adventures is the most popular and the best. The conceit is simple – Andy travels back in time to interact with various prehistoric animals, by digitally inserting himself into Walking With Dinosaurs footage – but Andy is a bright and charming guide throughout. The manner in which he travels back in time, involving a magic clock in a museum that Andy seems to remember only when anyone mentions the word “time” to him, defies logic to such an extent that it gives adults something to pedantically overanalyse during the long days of parenthood. A godsend. 5 Numberblocks A show so staggeringly effective that they use it in schools. Prior to Numberblocks, shows about maths would be about characters doing maths. In Numberblocks, the characters are the maths. They throw themselves together and pull themselves apart to demonstrate mathematical principles in a satisfyingly visual way. This means that children are able to latch on to relatively challenging ideas with ease. If I had grown up with Numberblocks in my life, I would be much less stupid as an adult. 4 Rastamouse Rastamouse is a stop-motion animation about the crimefighting adventures of a Rastafarian mouse who also performs in a reggae band. While it might not be the most culturally accurate show CBeebies has ever made – Benjamin Zephaniah criticised the characters’ West Indian accents – it is one of the most loved. The characters are beautifully designed, the humour is happily offbeat and, as someone who has suffered through more CBeebies Spotify soundtracks than most, I can gladly attest that the music isn’t at all insufferable. 3 Teletubbies Of course Teletubbies is up there. For 25 years, it has been the archetypal BBC kids’ show – which is odd, given that it’s about a group of infantile custard-drinking aliens who blunder around under the watchful gaze of a baby trapped in the sun. But this loose relationship with adult logic is exactly what makes Teletubbies so special. Point a preschooler – any preschooler – at an episode of Teletubbies and they will be transfixed. The creation of Teletubbies was a watershed moment when it came to presenting information to children. The fact that it is still so popular underlines how important it is. 2 Bluey Joe Brumm’s Bluey isn’t just one of the best children’s television shows of all time; it is one of the best shows full stop. A show about a family of Australian blue heeler dogs, Bluey is in reality a series of short films, each with its own distinct mood and soundtrack. There is Takeaway, a story about a father trying to entertain his children, set in one location and told in real time. There is Sleepytime, scored to Holst’s The Planets, in which a young girl travels through space in order to gain the bravery to sleep alone. There is Movies, which includes a big Disney-style musical number. There is Camping, which involves a genuinely ostentatious time jump to show how the main character is faring in adolescence. There is Flat Pack, in which, no joke, the characters roleplay evolution, from prokaryotes all the way to a posthuman utopia. Bluey is absolutely breathtaking television and it deserves to be watched by everyone. 1 Hey Duggee If anyone tries to tell you that children’s television was better in the good old days, sit them down and make them watch Hey Duggee. Grant Orchard’s animated series about a dog who runs a cub-scout-style youth group might well be the best kids’ show ever made. It is fast, it is funny, it is sweet, it is educational, it is visually distinct, it throws adult references into the mix with wild abandon (one episode is an Apocalypse Now riff, for crying out loud). And, Lord, is it inventive. In one episode, the characters become puppets; in another, ceramic mugs. To watch Hey Duggee is to watch a television programme struggle to constrain the scope of one man’s limitless imagination. It is utterly astonishing and much, much better than anything you watched as a child.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has come under fire in parliament for the government’s handling of the aged care crisis as Labor sharpens its attack on the Coalition’s pandemic response. In the first question time of the parliamentary year on Tuesday Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, targeted the government’s response to Covid outbreaks in residential aged care, demanding Morrison admit responsibility for the crisis that has seen about 600 aged care deaths linked to Covid this year. The aged care sector has been reeling from the impact of the Omicron wave of the virus, with a quarter of all shifts going unfilled during January and concerns that carers have been left to work in dangerous conditions with a lack of government support for testing and personal protective equipment. Albanese, who attempted to suspend standing orders to debate the government’s response and to call for the aged care services minister Richard Colbeck to be sacked, said that Morrison needed to take responsibility. He also demanded Morrison apologise to aged care residents and their families “for his failure to listen and act on countless warnings about the continuing crisis in aged care.” “The aged care crisis is indicative of the way this prime minister and this government approaches every issue – it’s always too little, too late and it’s always the case that they ignore a problem until it becomes a crisis,” Albanese said. “The problem is … their distractions, their dishonesty and their disunity is stopping them looking after the interests of Australians, particularly those people in aged care,” he said. In response to questions, Morrison said that the pandemic had taken a heavy toll around the world and in Australia, but said only 10% of those who had passed away in nursing homes had died with the virus. More than 4,000 people died in aged care homes in January. “It has been an incredibly tough time for those who have been working in those facilities, with the onset of Omicron, and it has been incredibly tough for those families who had to say goodbye to loved ones over that period of time,” Morrison said. “At every moment of this pandemic, we have sought to provide every single support we possibly can to ensure we can be assisting both the workforce and those who are engaged in providing that care.” Morrison said that Australia had one of the lowest mortality rates in the world, and accused Labor of trying to politicise the pandemic. “He (Albanese) has constantly been negative when it comes to the serious challenges that our country has faced,” Morrison said. “He can seek to downplay Australians’ efforts, in how we’ve come through this pandemic, with his constant negativity, snarling and growling, but the facts are these: on each occasion, we have worked to address the situation that we have had before us.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In the Senate, Labor senator Kristina Keneally said the situation in the aged care sector was an “utter disaster” as she singled out Colbeck for criticism. “Disease is running rampant through facilities, too few staff to care for those living there, our greatest generation left unwashed and without food. Have you no shame, have you no responsibility, have you no care?” Keneally said. Colbeck, who was criticised for attending the cricket rather than front a Covid committee, acknowledged there had been “some issues”, but defended the government’s response. “The Labor party can play their dirty, nasty personal politics but they have no plan,” Colbeck said. The Coalition begins the parliamentary fortnight under pressure on a number of fronts. It faces internal division over the religious discrimination bill which Morrison has prioritised for the current sitting fortnight, but which the Tasmanian Liberal MP Bridget Archer has said she will not support. Morrison has also faced calls for the government to get on with introducing its Commonwealth Integrity Commission bill after the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, suggested there was no time to fulfil the election promise made before the last election. Morrison’s character has also been targeted after the revelation of text messages sent by Liberal colleagues that questioned his trustworthiness, including from his deputy, Barnaby Joyce. There are just seven sitting days in the current session of parliament, before budget week in late March.Neil Young has continued to criticise Spotify, following his departure from the platform in protest over their star podcaster Joe Rogan. In a message posted to his website, Young wrote: To the musicians and creators in the world, I say this: You must be able to find a better place than Spotify to be the home of your art. To the workers at Spotify, I say [co-founder and chief executive officer] Daniel Ek is your big problem – not Joe Rogan. Ek pulls the strings. Get out of that place before it eats up your soul. The only goals stated by Ek are about numbers – not art, not creativity. He also encouraged readers to divest from four US banks – Chase, Citi, Bank of America and Wells Fargo – “for their continued funding of the fossil fuel damage even as the global temperature keeps climbing”. He addressed “baby boomers”, saying: “70% of the country’s financial assets are in your hands compared with just about 5% for millennials. You and I need to lead.” Young, a consistently outspoken figure during his rock career who has taken stands against US presidents Richard Nixon, George Bush Jr and Donald Trump, left Spotify last month, describing it as “the home of life-threatening Covid misinformation. Selling lies for money.” He cited Joe Rogan, host of the world’s most popular podcast, who has been widely criticised for allowing misinformation about Covid-19 to proliferate on his show. Other artists including Joni Mitchell joined his protest, with much of Mitchell’s catalogue now removed from Spotify. Young has since been pointing his fans towards streaming companies with their own ethical controversies: Amazon and Apple. He tweeted: “Amazon has been leading the pack in bringing hi-res audio to the masses, and it’s a great place to enjoy my entire catalog [sic] in the highest quality available. Thanks also to Apple Music (I LOVE APPLE) and Qobuz for sticking with my high res music.” Ek alluded to the Young-Rogan controversy in an earnings announcement on 2 February, saying: “Spotify is already implementing several first of its kind measures to help combat misinformation and provide greater transparency. We believe we have a critical role to play in supporting creator expression while balancing it with the safety of our users.” In a 1,100-word opening statement announcing Spotify’s successes, he used the word “music” only once. Later, in a question and answer session, he discussed music in more depth – and in the terms that were criticised by Young. He hailed how “we really replaced one model, right, which is you paid a la carte, which meant that typically the superfans were ones paying for music and the vast majority of people weren’t paying at all. Now we have an ecosystem where hundreds of millions of people are paying for music again across all of these subscription services.” He said the company’s next aim was “unlocking through superfans. That’s where the real dollars comes in … more flexibility, more ways for creators to use their assets, videos, engage with people, have their content show up in new unexpected ways. That will drive engagement and that, in turn, will drive people to move from casual listeners all the way up to a superfan and enables new forms of monetisation, too.” Since Young’s protest, Rogan has been further criticised for numerous uses of the N-word on his podcast, with the company removing more than 70 offending episodes. “While I strongly condemn what Joe has said ... I want to make one point very clear – I do not believe that silencing Joe is the answer,” Ek said in response.A British football fan who claims he was tortured and falsely imprisoned in the United Arab Emirates in 2019 while on holiday there to watch Asian Cup matches is suing the new head of Interpol. Ali Issa Ahmad was granted permission by the high court in London for legal action against Maj Gen Ahmed Nasser al-Raisi,, who has been accused of complicity in torture and was appointed as head of Interpol last November. Raisi, who was appointed inspector general of the UAE’s ministry of interior in 2015 with responsibility for overseeing prisons and policing, is one of six senior UAE officials being sued for damages by Ahmad, 28. In May 2021, Ahmad sent letters of claim for damages to the six officials. Along with Raisi, the officials include Saqr Saif al-Naqbi, the head of state security public prosecution in Abu Dhabi; Maj Gen Faris Khalaf al-Mazrouei, commander in chief of the Abu Dhabi police; and Maj Gen Ahmed Naser Ahmed al-Dahri, second in command of the Abu Dhabi state security department. Ahmad says that while he was in UAE he was falsely imprisoned and subjected to assault and battery, intentional infliction of harm including psychiatric harm and negligence between 23 January and 12 February 2019. Ahmad’s problems started when he wore a football shirt bearing a Qatari logo when he attended a match between Qatar and Iraq at Al-Nayhan stadium in Abu Dhabi on 22 January 2019. He was approached by officials and said he received racist abuse from them and was ordered to remove the shirt. The following day, he was stopped again by officials and he says he was seriously assaulted before being detained and imprisoned. At the time, the UAE authorities issued a statement saying Ahmad had inflicted the injuries himself, and accused him of wasting police time. Ahmad said that at the time he wore the Qatari football shirt he did not know that doing so in the UAE was an offence. He says he sustained injuries to an arm and his chest, and had a tooth knocked out after being punched in the face by officials. He says he was deprived of food and water while he was detained. The high court order granted Ahmed permission late last month to serve the claim out of UK jurisdiction. Ahmad is being represented by Carter-Ruck solicitors. A letter from the UAE foreign ministry to Ahmad’s lawyers sent in June 2021, seen by the Guardian, claimed diplomatic immunity for the six officials and argued that the English courts had no jurisdiction. Ahmad said: “I am so happy that the high court has granted permission to serve my claim against the people responsible for my torture in UAE. I have suffered for the last three years. I deserve justice. Torture is painful, it has changed my life and changed how I feel emotionally. I am a victim of torture because of the football shirt I wore.” The Foreign Office lodged a complaint with the UAE authorities about Ahmad’s treatment but it is understood no response was received. The UAE embassy has been approached for comment.Early one morning last February, a group of young people gathered on a street corner in Myanmar armed with brushes and buckets of paint. In the faint light of dawn, they quickly completed their task and dispersed. “I felt excited and nervous. I was scared too, because I didn’t want to get caught,” says Tu Tu, a pseudonym for the group’s organiser. Hours later, the streets were teeming with people demanding that the military, which had seized power on 1 February, stand down. Media reports from that day show people marching and drone photographs of huge resistance slogans painted on the road. Tu Tu’s group had succeeded in its mission. It was one of many ways that the arts have invigorated the pro-democracy movement. During the first weeks after the coup, as protest chants and revolutionary songs reverberated across the country, artists energised the crowds with dance and music, and covered walls and streets with murals and graffiti. Within weeks, however, the sound of gunfire and the screams of protesters filled the air while blood stained the streets. One year on, the military has killed about 1,500 people and arrested more than 11,000 – 8,700 of whom remain behind bars. These violent crackdowns have made it too dangerous to make art in public. But some artists continue to work underground. “Art is as powerful as a weapon,” says Tu Tu. “When we fire a gun, one bullet can only hit one enemy, but if we can illustrate something clearly through art … we can spread our message much faster.” After protesting became a life-threatening endeavour, few of Tu Tu’s friends were willing to keep painting words on the ground. They went out a few more times, but finally had to stop. “My friends were worried, so they didn’t participate any more. I understood, but I wanted to do so many things,” says Tu Tu, who requested the Guardian use pseudonyms for them and anonymise their gender and location. Determined to keep resisting, Tu Tu began making illustrations instead, and took on the artist’s name Black Art. “I don’t need much to make illustrations; I can even do it with just a pen or pencil. I can express anything based on my ideas,” they say. They have since made dozens of illustrations highlighting the crisis in Myanmar. Broken Heart shows a girl holding a pink balloon and facing a row of police; in a second image, a police officer guns her down and her balloon floats into the air. Coup Makes Orphan shows a child crying in front of a soldier shooting a protester in the head. Black Art also makes illustrations based on photographs taken across the country. The Last Kiss shows a boy at his father’s funeral, while Screaming from Myanmar has a crying girl clutching her dead father’s photograph. Spring Revolution and The Last Bow depict parents grieving over their children. Two illustrations, Heroes Never Die and They are Free Now, are tributes to five youths who jumped from the roof of a building in August to avoid being arrested by military forces; two of them died. “I even cried when I drew some illustrations,” says Black Art. “My illustrations are based on real stories and they are sad stories.” Since May, armed resistance has grown across the country and the military has responded with indiscriminate attacks on civilians. Black Art’s more recent illustrations highlight the military’s use of airstrikes and arson attacks on towns and villages. The artist told the Guardian that they see art as a way to document what is happening in Myanmar. “I want art to be left as a form of history which can be seen by the next generation, to prevent something like this from happening again,” they say. Although many of their friends have decided to take up arms against the military, Black Art remains committed to fighting through art. “I believe that everyone should be involved in this revolution, but holding guns is not enough,” they say. “We can only win this by participating in every way, and I am participating in mine with the belief that we will win.” Aye Win, a hip-hop artist in Yangon, uses music to rebel. During the protests in February, he and a group of friends held two freestyle rap events under the name Rap Against Junta before they had to go underground. “When [the military] started the crackdowns, we couldn’t meet any more,” says Aye Win. “We all moved to the internet and used different applications to connect.” In the following months, some of Aye Win’s friends joined the armed resistance against the coup, and others left the country, but Aye Win took on the role of Rap Against Junta’s director and persevered as an artist. On 30 June, the group released Dictator Must Die, a track featuring artists from Thailand, Indonesia, Hong Kong, India, Taiwan and Myanmar. After that, they released a full album on 21 October. Called Dick Council – a play on Sitt Council, the Burmese name for the junta – it included 12 tracks by local artists. It was followed by Blood on 7 January, which features singers from eight different ethnic backgrounds rapping in their own languages. Throughout this entire process, Rap Against Junta has not held a single in-person meeting. With the military increasing its use of informants to break down the resistance movement, many of the contributing artists have kept their identities secret even from one another. “Most of the other rappers don’t know who I am and I also don’t know who they are,” says Aye Win, who connected with contributing artists through an open submission process on social media. The need to maintain anonymity, however, has made it difficult to identify people to support the project. “When we approach people for help using a fake identity, they don’t really trust us and they always put aside the proposals to collaborate,” he says. Rap Against Junta also had to adapt creatively when promoting their music. In their music videos, their faces are masked or shown in silhouette, while Aye Win has only allowed himself to be photographed behind a full mask or interviewed using voice-distorting technology. As the country’s economic crisis worsens, Aye Win also says it is becoming harder to find people who can give time to Rap Against Junta because they need to earn an income. “People are trying to make money and put food on the table, so they cannot commit like before,” he says. Aye Win is also facing pressure from his family. “My parents are discussing my future plans. I have just been stuck [at home] and doing nothing for one year. I am doing something, but it is not an established way of making a living for them,” he says. “[They said] I should go somewhere else and survive while I am still young; the future is nowhere to be found here for me.” But Aye Win sees making protest art as a serious mission. “It is a kind of revolutionary work, and we need to finish by deadlines – we have to pay attention to every detail,” he says. “We have a lot of very raw protest art here, but we have to maintain our course and go on consistently, without letting up.” Emily Fishbein is a freelance journalist writing on human rights and social justice in Myanmar. She focuses on underreported stories using a collaborative approach with local journalists Additional reporting by Zau Myet AwngThe consensus that has prevailed for the past 40 years told us that monetary policy must be depoliticised, so that central banks can independently pursue the goal of price stability in the economy without catering to politicians, private finance or corporations. Andrew Bailey, the governor of the Bank of England, threw that impression aside last week when he suggested that workers should not demand higher wages in order to contain the inflationary pressures confronting the British economy in 2022. “I’m not saying nobody gets a pay rise” he said. But “we do need to see restraint in pay bargaining, otherwise it will get out of control”. When central banks call for workers to yet again shoulder the pain, their role as guardians of the distributional status quo – the struggle over the distribution of national income between labour and capital – becomes clear for everyone to see. It is a misjudged call, tearing off the veil of carefully curated neutrality, and showing whose interests the Bank really protects. Bailey’s reasoning is clear. The 1970s left central banks scared of the prospect of wage-price spirals, when powerful unions obtained worker pay rises that kept pace with higher living costs, and in turn companies transferred those higher labour costs into higher prices, triggering renewed wage demands. Covid-related labour shortages, global supply bottlenecks and renewed appetite for striking threaten to reignite these cycles. But Bailey did not explain that wage-price spirals only occur if firms dump wage increases into prices, instead of simply reducing their profits. It was not, he implied, up to capital to moderate profit expectations to address inflation. Rather, workers must take (another) one for capital. Yet the Bank is aware of how bad the post-2008 decade has been for British workers. In 2017, its then chief economist, Andy Haldane, explained that the “weak wage puzzle” – surprisingly weak wage growth even during periods of booming labour markets – was not just about slow productivity growth, or slack in the labour market, but also the power of capital to “divide and conquer” workers. Decreasing unionisation eroded workers’ power to negotiate better wages and defend, let alone increase, their share of national income. The Bank’s clear stance here raises key questions about its future. First, are we seeing the limits of the institutional arrangement that put central banks in charge of targeting inflation in the first place? After all, outsourcing inflation control to workers smacks of monetary impotence. If interest rate increases, however painful to mortgage holders, cannot deliver price stability, perhaps it is time for another approach, learning from experiments of the postwar era. While these are typically dismissed as the failed wage policies of the 1970s, the National Board for Prices and Incomes, created by a Labour government in 1965 and dismantled by a Conservative one in 1970, offers a better starting point. In the words of its chairman, the Conservative MP Aubrey Jones, the NBPI sought to restrain both powerful employers and unions. In more than 160 reports on various industries, public and private, it asked whether firms could absorb higher wage and other costs by lowering profits, particularly if those profits arose from excessive market power. And rather prescient for today’s British economy, it warned that allowing firms to pass wage increases off into higher prices reduces their incentives to seek productivity gains. While the board had no powers to enforce its findings, it made a clear case for governments to engage in strategic price controls where firms could not justify price increases. Today, it would probably ask if instead of raising interest rates and removing existing caps on gas prices, the response to energy-related inflationary pressures should maintain caps, introduce a windfall tax on gas producers’ record earnings and an overdue structural reform, including public ownership, to align the energy sector with the ambitions of a low-carbon economy. The Bank, alas, is not asking these questions. Second, can we rely on the Bank to discipline fossil capital, as required by its March 2021 environmental mandate? Then, the Bank had raised expectations that it would pioneer an ambitious strategy to make private finance greener, the first among high-income countries. Shortly after this, it outlined an innovative “proof of concept” plan to decarbonise its portfolio of corporate bonds, by first lowering the carbon intensity by 25% until 2025. While its gradualism fell short of expectations, the plan ignited constructive debates about how to reduce the Bank’s subsidies to fossil capital. But in its rudderless fight against inflation, the Bank threw that plan out of the window when it announced in February that it would get rid of its corporate bond holdings entirely by the end of next year. Rather too keen, you suspect, to absolve itself from the task of penalising dirty finance, a task for which its governor seems ideologically ill-suited. Third, the Bank of England has the power to obstruct governments intent on assuming greater responsibility for price stability or climate policy. Its inflation-targeting framework dictates that it should unwind its massive purchases of government bonds undertaken to support Covid-19 fiscal measures. This would push borrowing costs higher just as governments come under increasing pressure to shield citizens from eye-watering increases in living costs and support the low-carbon transition via public investments. A central bank that is proving remarkably unwilling to discipline capital has at its disposal tools to discipline governments, all in the name of a policy framework that, by its own admission, is rather ineffective. It should instead develop new mechanisms to coordinate with fiscal authorities such as the Treasury to tackle the twin challenges of inflation and climate. If Alan Greenspan was long worshipped as the central banker who always made the right call, Andrew Bailey is now in danger of always making the wrong one – on interest rate increases, wage restraint, government debt or climate. But these times demand more credible leadership and openness to institutional change. Otherwise, to quote Ariana Grande, thank you, next. Daniela Gabor is professor of economics and macrofinance at UWE BristolThe security landscape of the Baltic states and eastern Europe may be changed permanently if Russian troops amassed on the Ukraine border start to integrate with Belarusian troops, Lithuania’s prime minister has said. “This is a 1938 moment for our generation,” Ingrida Šimonytė said in an interview. “Neutrality helps the oppressor and never the victim.” Šimonytė, who is due to meet Boris Johnson on Tuesday, is one of the European politicians most willing to make a case for democracy and expose the methods of autocracies. Her stance has led her country of only 2.8 million people on to the frontline of ideological conflict not only with Russia but also China. Belarus is threatening to block potash exports to her country, and China punished Lithuania for the opening of a Taiwanese representative office in Vilnius by cutting trade and pressing companies to pull out of Lithuania. The UK has joined Lithuania to take China to the WTO over its behaviour. Šimonytė said the twin threats from the superpowers showed it was necessary for the west not to be mired by self-doubt, internal divisions and self-satisfaction. “The first response is not to be afraid but to speak up,” she said. “We never see the masses on the streets demanding more autocracy.” The 47-year-old argued that the massing of Russian troops in Belarus may be changing the security landscape in her region and was being driven by the political weakness of Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko. “After the elections and demonstrations in August 2020 in Belarus, Lukashenko is now out of options about what he can do,” she said. “Before he was flirting with the EU, releasing some prisoners for money. He played this dual strategy, but he cannot do that any more. No one regards him as legitimate in Belarus. He needs money and Russia’s help to survive. He is dependent on them. “This current buildup of Russian forces in Belarus is unscheduled. There was a Russian military exercise in 2021. If these military exercises mean weaponry and troops will remain on Belarus soil indefinitely, that changes the calculations substantially. “It will mean an increase in Nato presence, and that would not be a provocation, as Moscow claims, but a reaction to what has changed on Nato borders. This is now an area full of weaponry. Russian troops that are in the south of his country can be moved very quickly. There are sorts of hybrid attacks under way. Pipelines falling apart. This is how unfortunately these regimes operate. There are no red lines they will not cross.” Already a further 300 German troops are being flown to Lithuania. On Monday, French diplomats claimed Vladimir Putin had reassured Emmanuel Macron that the Russian troops massed in Belarus would leave, but Šimonytė said Putin pursued a policy of strategic ambiguity. “What he will definitely not do is to declare his true intentions in advance,” she said. She showed some wariness about Macron’s diplomatic mission to Moscow, saying: “I know Putin was probably feeling very happy because he feels an important guy. Everyone is coming to talk to him, and maybe that is one of his motives. This debate should not be constructed around the question of ‘what can we do to make you happy?’ but rather ‘we are serious now and when we are saying every country has the right to choose the security net for itself, we mean it’. When you are saying ‘Nato is increasing at your expense’, that is completely fake. The truth is the opposite.” She sidestepped the question of whether she felt Germany was acting as a drag anchor on sanctions, saying what would be scary was if there was a disagreement about what the west was seeing. “Sometimes decisions in democracies take longer,” she said. But she did not disguise her opposition to the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany, saying it increased European dependency on Russian gas and was a “very significant tool” for the Kremlin. “Even though we are close partners with Germany, we have been saying for a very long time do not increase your dependency on Russian gas,” she said. “With Putin there are no purely commercial projects. Everything can be turned into a geopolitical project.” Šimonytė questioned whether Germany’s past faith in changing autocratic regimes through trade remained valid. “For a very long time there was a consensus that if you increase trade, cultural and people’s exchanges, then somehow there will be a change in standards of living, and perceptions will become more similar. In many cases that has happened – it happened in Lithuania – but it is not universal. Perhaps empires do not change.” She called on the west to call out the hypocrisy of Russia’s oligarchs. “We have overlooked how these people are using our way of living. They like our universities, our hospitals, banks, because they know rules exist in this part of the world and no one will come and strip them of your possessions. You can go to court to protect yourself, yet at the same time they are trying to undermine our way of living in any way they can. It is very dangerous schism.”China’s Olympic committee has pledged to increase production of merchandise after unexpected demand from people looking for a way to get involved in the Games led to shortages of the local mascot. The official mascot, a panda named Bing Dwen Dwen wearing a transparent snow suit, has featured across the Games events and promotions. A large dancing Bing Dwen Dwen appeared in the opening ceremony, while plush toys have been held aloft by athletes on the podium. Its popularity has led to shortages of merchandise across retail outlets, exacerbated by factory shutdowns across the lunar new year holiday period, according to officials and state media, which have reported hours-long queues of people outside shops. On Monday, the Beijing Olympic Committee said it was working with factories to increase supply. At one flagship store, the Tmall Olympic, 50,000 mascots had been sold already, according to local media, while an online store sold out within 15 minutes. Other outlets were instituting limits of one per customer, and “one Dwen at each family” became a trending topic on Weibo, with more than 10 million viewers in 24 hours. Analysts from Shanxi Securities estimated the total revenue from official Olympic merchandise could reach 2.5bn yuan (£291.4m). Olympic mascots and associated merchandise are often hit and miss. Some remain largely unrecognised even during the Games, as was the case at the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympics with Vinicius or the 2002 Salt Lake City trio of Powder the hare, Copper the coyote and Coal the black bear. London’s 2012 mascots were described at the time as “phallic bugbears”, while at Sydney in 2000 the trio of native Australian animal mascots were upstaged by an unofficial wombat named “Fatso” on a late-night comedy TV show about the Games. But in Beijing, the furore around Bing Dwen Dwen has provided a way for people to feel more involved in an event they are blocked from attending. Strict pandemic protocols mean few Chinese fans can attend events, and those who do must quarantine for weeks before and after entering the dedicated Olympic bubble. Instead, people have gathered at homes and in bars and restaurants, crowding around TV and phone screens to watch a competition happening in their capital city. “It is such a shame that I can’t watch the Winter Olympics in Beijing when it is happening so close to me. However, I got my Bing Dwen Dwen today!” one Weibo user commented. Mr Tang, an employee at the Olympics media centre inside the bubble, said he was among many locals and foreigners lining up to buy one. After he posted pictures of his Bing Dwen Dwen on his WeChat, he received about a dozen offers from people wanting to buy it from him. The mascot’s popularity was “beyond [my] imagination”, he said. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu and ReutersLong-term paracetamol use could increase the risk of heart disease and strokes in people with high blood pressure, a study suggests. Patients who have a long-term prescription for the painkiller, usually used for the treatment of chronic pain, should opt for the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible time, researchers say. The University of Edinburgh study, published in the scientific journal Circulation, is the first large randomised clinical trial to address the issue and complements earlier work in observational studies. Paracetamol has often assumed to be a safer alternative to another class of painkillers called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, which have long been known to increase blood pressure and the risk of heart disease. In the study, 110 patients with a history of high blood pressure were prescribed 1g of paracetamol four times a day – a routinely prescribed dose in patients with chronic pain – or a matched placebo for two weeks. All patients received both treatments, with the order randomised and blinded. Those prescribed paracetamol had a significant increase in their blood pressure, compared with those taking the placebo. This rise was similar to that seen with NSAIDs, and might be expected to increase the risk of heart disease or stroke by about 20%, experts say. The lead investigator, Dr Iain MacIntyre, a consultant in clinical pharmacology and nephrology at NHS Lothian, said: “This is not about short-term use of paracetamol for headaches or fever, which is, of course, fine – but it does indicate a newly discovered risk for people who take it regularly over the longer term, usually for chronic pain.” Prof James Dear, personal chair of clinical pharmacology at Edinburgh, added: “This study clearly shows that paracetamol – the world’s most used drug – increases blood pressure, one of the most important risk factors for heart attacks and strokes. Doctors and patients together should consider the risks versus the benefits of long-term paracetamol prescription, especially in patients at risk of cardiovascular disease.” The study found that after people stopped taking the drug, their blood pressure returned to what it was at the start of the study. Researchers said they did not have accurate numbers of the people in the UK who are on paracetamol long-term and have high blood pressure. But it is estimated that one in three adults in the UK have high blood pressure, increasing with age, while one in 10 people in Scotland – where the research was conducted – take paracetamol regularly. There were limitations to the study. It involved only 110 people, it did not look at patients with chronic pain, and the results do not reveal anything specific about what might happen in people who did not have high blood pressure to begin with. Prof Sir Nilesh Samani, the medical director at the British Heart Foundation, which funded the study, said the research showed “how quickly regular use of paracetamol can increase blood pressure in people with hypertension who are already at increased risk of heart attacks and strokes”. However, he also stressed: “If you take paracetamol occasionally to manage an isolated headache or very short bouts of pain, these research findings should not cause unnecessary concern.”Getting an hour or so more sleep each night can help people to cut calories, according a small clinical trial in overweight adults. Researchers in the US found that people who typically slept for less than 6.5 hours a night shed an average of 270 calories from their daily intake when they got an extra 1.2 hours of sleep. Sustained over three years, the reduction in calories could lead people to lose about 12kg (26lbs) without changing their diet during the day, the scientists believe. Some participants in the study consumed 500 fewer calories a day after improving their sleep. The study was not designed to look at weight loss, but researchers noticed the fall in calories within two weeks of patients changing their sleep patterns. “If healthy sleep habits are maintained over longer duration, this would lead to clinically important weight loss over time,” said Dr Esra Tasali, of the University of Chicago’s sleep centre. “Many people are working hard to find ways to decrease their caloric intake to lose weight – well, just by sleeping more, you may be able to reduce it substantially.” The trial studied 80 adults aged 21 to 40 with a body mass index between 25 and 29.9, meaning they were overweight. Half of the participants were randomly assigned to receive personalised sleep hygiene counselling aimed at extending the amount of time they slept each night. The study did not ask the volunteers to restrict their diets or change their exercise routines. All slept in their own beds and used wearable devices to track their sleep duration. Previous studies have shown that getting too little sleep can lead people to put on weight by increasing their food intake. The latest trial, published in Jama Internal Medicine, suggests the effects may be reversed by helping people to sleep for longer. “Most other studies on this topic in labs are short-lived, for a couple of days, and food intake is measured by how much participants consume from an offered diet,” said Tasali. “In our study we only manipulated sleep and had the participants eat whatever they wanted, with no food logging or anything else to track their nutrition by themselves.” One of the most surprising findings from the study is that a single sleep counselling session could change people’s bedtime habits enough to improve the amount of sleep they got. “We simply coached each individual on good sleep hygiene, and discussed their own personal sleep environments, providing tailored advice on changes they could make to improve their sleep duration,” Tasali said.At the end of last summer, Claire and her partner, Alan, found the perfect New York apartment. “At the time we naively thought the mortgage process would be the most difficult part,” recalled Claire. “Little did we know.” The first-time buyers were suddenly confronting the reality of trying to purchase an apartment in a market-rate co-op building. They worked on their application for a month. “We submitted every piece of financial paperwork you can possibly imagine,” said Claire. “Bank statements, W2s, tax returns, gift letters explaining any sums of money we had received from third parties. No stone was left unturned in terms of our financial history.” They wrote a letter stating why they wanted to live in the building, and provided 12 other letters including personal and professional references. A month later, they got a response. “I remember I looked at my phone,” she recalled, “and all the blood drained out of my brain.” Alan had texted to say they’d been rejected by the co-op board. Their broker couldn’t explain why – he didn’t know. “It could have been based on the fact that my partner is Asian American, or it could have been that they wanted someone with more money, someone who would pay all cash,” Claire said. “The point is, we have no idea.” Co-op boards – a small group of building shareholders entrusted with overseeing everything from the financial health of a building to maintenance – are seen as directors of a private corporation, which is what co-ops are, so they aren’t legally required to disclose their reasons for denying applicants. Co-ops are a significant part of New York City housing, making up about 74% of Manhattan’s apartment stock. They’ve been around for more than 100 years, a 20th-century model for an urban “planned community”. They resemble country clubs and private social clubs, assuring shareholders – those who have bought units in the building – that they’ll be surrounded by others who look and earn money like they do. The upside for anyone who’s accepted is the guarantee of community, but the incalculable downside is exclusion for countless others – the secrecy allows for discrimination with impunity. The model hasn’t adapted to modern transparency standards and is little inclined toward doing so, given the political power that comes with such economic might. It’s a danger for buyers and renters who don’t fit the mold of any given building, and the broader effect is fewer housing options in a city that’s already short on affordability. Despite their significant footprint in New York real estate, little data exists on co-ops because of their lack of transparency. In 2006, the then New York governor, George Pataki, signed a law requiring that co-op sales be publicly recorded – so it is possible to track, say, the rise in the median asking price for a Manhattan co-op from $625,000 in June 2010 to $850,000 in November of last year. But about the people who live in the buildings – and those who are kept out, both renters and buyers – we know very little. Setha Low, a professor of anthropology and the director of the public space research group at the City University of New York (Cuny), has spent 12 years studying co-ops. She has collected and is still analyzing data on 50 buildings in New York. Individuals with sound finances who were turned away by boards told Low that subtle hostilities or the feeling that the board was going through the motions during the application process often left them to think they were rejected because of some aspect of their identity. “There’s no question,” she said, “there’s all kinds of discrimination going on. It works in a variety of ways. Some buildings don’t want high-profile people, sometimes it’s about race or ability, a lot of buildings won’t consider a single mother. It’s unbelievable that we still live this way.” The Fair Housing Act of 1968 creates a federal prohibition on housing discrimination, but without disclosure from co-op boards it’s not practically possible to enforce the law. A 2010 lawsuit brought against a co-op in the Bronx (with only 1% of its 1,100 units owned by African Americans) went on for three years and resulted in a modest settlement that included a revised application process and required fair housing training for board members. But that case is an outlier. Testing, or getting actors to apply for housing, is often used to screen for housing discrimination but it’s far more complicated to test co-ops. As Claire and Alan learned, the process can take months and involves extensive financial reporting. “The co-op penetrates all the way through to your very personhood,” said Low, “because you are all collectively part of something.” This idea of “collectively being a part of something” through the co-op model began flourishing in New York during the 1910s and 20s, just as the country instituted some of its first and most sweeping limitations on immigration, and as Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, less that 25 miles from the city, became an important center for the country’s new and thriving eugenics movement. In those early days, developers pushing the co-op model assured prospective buyers that they’d not only be surrounded by financially stable neighbors but also acceptable neighbors, whatever that might mean to any group of people – it became the model for socially engineering who has access to a building. Matthew Gordon Lasner, who wrote extensively about co-ops in his 2012 book High Life: Condo Living in the Suburban Century, said: “In Europe, where apartment-dwelling was extremely common, there was no prevailing social anxiety about who your neighbors might be. In the US, there has always been a tremendous amount of anxiety about this. So developers figured out how to exploit that anxiety, introducing and encouraging screening and exclusion as a way to add value to this form of real estate.” This market-driven co-op model was an American creation. Earlier European co-ops had a non-profit model, which placed caps on things like sale prices and shareholder income, in order to foster inclusion. The market-driven model, by contrast, is for profit and it isn’t afraid to discriminate in order to protect those profits. In his book, Lasner highlights one co-op developer who bragged to the Chicago Tribune in 1924 that his building was going to “be about as hard for the first five [buyers] to prove their right to residence as it would be for a Chinaman to get into the KKK. Ability to pay the purchase money will be only a minor consideration in the searching scrutiny into the applicant’s claims to entrance.” While such overtly inflammatory language may not be acceptable today, the same basic idea of the screening process, shrouded in secrecy, remains in place. This archaic system not only affects those seeking to buy; it also makes co-ops even less accessible to renters. Though most co-ops maintain a certain percentage of apartments as rental units, shareholders are preferred over renters because they are viewed as more reliable individuals who bring more financial stability to the building. The sense is that a building is less transient with shareholders because they’re generally more inclined to stay in the building longer while their investment grows. More rental units disappear every year as buildings convert to co-ops. Landlords empty out a building of renters, form a corporation, and start advertising to potential shareholders. The financial incentives for this type of conversion go beyond the initial windfall: it saves the landlord from shouldering long-term maintenance costs (shareholders pay monthly maintenance fees) and co-ops enjoy several favorable tax valuations and exemptions. In New York City, these conversions started in 1941 and over the last 80 years, 3,278 rental buildings have become co-ops, according to the real estate data company Property Shark. During the 1980s, hundreds of buildings were converted every year. In 1985 alone, 48,176 apartments were taken off the rental market and sold to shareholders, according to a report from Cuny’s Baruch College. Steven Goldschmidt has served on his Upper West Side co-op board for the past 17 years. His building went co-op in 2004, leaving only 15% of apartments available for renters. Goldschmidt, who works as senior vice-president and director of sales at Warburg Realty, said co-ops would “tolerate” renters to a certain point, but the dynamic between shareholders and renters was often fraught. Co-ops don’t extend many rights to renters; they are often left off email lists and barred from shareholder meetings. It’s ownership that grants these rights, in the eyes of the co-op. Natalia Nakaszawa experienced this treatment when she moved into a co-op in Queens’ Jackson Heights neighborhood as a renter with her husband, Patrick, in 2014. They assembled the lengthy application package and sat for an in-person interview with the board – a common part of the screening process. “We ended up sleeping on the floor of our new apartment for about 15 days,” said Nakaszawa. While they had been approved as tenants, the board had not yet approved their move-in date, so they weren’t allowed to bring furniture into the building. “It felt like they had all the cards.” Surrounded by boxes in the hallway after they got permission to bring in their belongings, they were approached by a neighbor who questioned whether they had, in fact, received board approval. That kind of surveillance persisted. While she said she could not be sure what was driving the suspicion, Nakaszawa, who is Asian Latina, did take note that “in general, the makeup of the board was, unsurprisingly, white and older”. A year after moving in, she gave birth to her son and soon after, shareholders in her building took a vote on whether to ban children from the roof deck, with 25% voting in favor. A couple of years later, a babysitter called Nakaszawa to explain that a neighbor was threatening to call the police because her son was crying. Experiences like this became routine. “One neighbor,” she said, “told us she hoped our child would die.” Eventually they decided to move. “It became so toxic,” she said. “Every person I knew who had a child ended up moving out. It’s very hard to live peacefully with this level of power play. You’re never safe to just live your life.” Addranna Montgomery is an attorney with the housing rights staff at TakeRoot Justice, a legal advocacy organization in New York. She understands the systemic problems that define the market-driven co-op model; as a lifelong New Yorker preparing for a move, she might soon have to apply to live in one but is trepidatious about doing so as a single Black woman. Montgomery has known others, particularly Black women, who have experienced trouble with the screening process. “It’s a known thing that getting into a co-op in some of these neighborhoods, particularly as a Black, single woman, is not going to be an easy feat,” she said. “There’s no reporting. You just talk about it to your friends and your community and it becomes known fact. The process is replete with racism – let’s just be frank.” Over the years, her frustration with New York City housing – the cost, the lack of access – has fueled a stronger sense of determination. “At times,” she said, “I’ve felt locked out of my hometown. And I say to myself, ‘I’ll be damned if that’s going to happen.’” She lives in a rent-stabilized apartment but is ready to become a homeowner in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Park Slope. From an early age, she was in the neighborhood most weekends for choir practice or visits to the Brooklyn Public Library. She remembers enjoying the view of Prospect Park across the street from the library steps. “I love the park. I want to be close to it. That’s always been a dream of mine.” In some ways she’s already moved into the neighborhood, having joined the Park Slope food co-op and taking yoga classes in the area; she spends weekends walking the tree-lined streets off of Seventh and Eighth Avenues. She often walks past buildings she’s tracking for available units. Sometimes she contemplates approaching a doorman or security guard to chat and get a feel for the place, for whether the building might be receptive to her as an applicant. Montgomery said that often when she peers into lobbies, seeing the people going in and coming out, she thinks: “I don’t know anyone in there.” As Lasner points out in his book, the exclusionary aspects of the market-driven co-op structure don’t directly affect the shareholders. “Once you’re in and through with the headache, well, people enjoy power,” he said. “I feel like a lot of shareholders participating in this process of exclusion don’t really realize what they’re doing – that they’re part of a larger, problematic system.” New York is the last city in America where the co-op model continues to thrive. While its endurance might be worrying, it is not surprising. “At this point, there’s just too much skin in the game – a lot of capital and political power. It’s not going to disappear any time soon,” Goldschmidt said. Within the real estate industry, there is some movement for more disclosure, including revealing reasons for rejecting applicants, which Goldschmidt supports. “I wouldn’t be thinking about this if it wasn’t for the terrible abuse by co-op boards, rejecting buyers for absolutely no sane reason,” he said. Goldschmidt said he loved being on his board because it afforded him the opportunity to be directly involved in his most immediate community. But he also acknowledged how dysfunctional the governing bodies can become. “It’s a very inbred world,” he said. In January of 2021, the New York state senator Brian Kavanagh introduced S2874, which would require New York City co-ops to operate within a “uniform application process” with timelines, guidelines for clear communication throughout the process, and written statements of approval or denial provided to the applicant and to a state agency for discrimination monitoring. There would still be room for dishonesty in the disclosures, but requiring them would be a first step in curbing some of the more egregious abuses of the screening process. “There were a lot of issues we saw consistently with co-ops and that’s what we’ve targeted in the bill,” said Britny McKenzie, who, as a policy coordinator at the Fair Housing Justice Center, worked closely with Kavanagh’s office on the bill’s language. “We think it’s vital.” McKenzie notes that similar bills have recently passed in Westchester and Suffolk counties, just outside New York City. Kavanagh is trying to garner more support for his bill with help from McKenzie and other advocates. Claire and Alan asked to use only their first names because they were still applying to other co-ops. They recently began the application process again, in another building. No naivety this time, and maybe a little less hope. Particularly when they came to a question in the new application that asked if they had ever been rejected by a co-op board. “Not only do we need to disclose that this happened,” Claire said, “but we are also being asked to give an explanation.” An explanation that – as anyone familiar with a co-op would know – Claire does not have. “It feels like an unjustified mark on us,” she said. “We feel like we’ve been tarnished without any recourse for defending ourselves. Boards act with total impunity.”The influential rightwing lobby group the American Legislative Exchange Council (Alec) is driving a surge in new state laws to block boycotts of the oil industry. The group’s strategy, which aims to protect large oil firms and other conservative-friendly industries, is modelled on legislation to punish divestment from Israel. Since the beginning of the year, state legislatures in West Virginia, Oklahoma and Indiana have introduced a version of a law drafted by Alec, called the Energy Discrimination Elimination Act, to shield big oil from share selloffs and other measures intended to protest the fossil fuel industry’s role in the climate crisis. A dozen other states have publicly supported the intent of the legislation. Texas has already begun compiling a list of companies to target for refusing to do business with the oil industry after the state passed a version of the law last year. Top of the list is the world’s largest asset manager, BlackRock. The push to blacklist firms that boycott the oil industry follows a meeting in December between politicians and Alec, a corporate-funded organisation that writes legislation for Republican-controlled states to adopt and drive conservative causes. At that meeting in San Diego, members of Alec’s energy taskforce voted to promote the model legislation requiring banks and financial companies to sign a pledge to not boycott petroleum companies in order to obtain state contracts. The wording closely resembles that of laws drafted by Alec and adopted in more than 30 states to block support for the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement against Israel’s oppression of the Palestinians. Similar laws are also being promoted to protect the gun industry from boycotts. The legislation written by Alec, which has a history of extreme denial of the climate crisis, claims that “American and European fossil energy producers … are among the most socially and environmentally responsible companies in the world”. It laments that “corporations are boycotting fossil energy companies by refusing to provide them with products or services”, and says that share selloffs by financial funds hurt investors. “Banks are increasingly denying financing to creditworthy fossil energy companies solely for the purpose of decarbonizing their lending portfolios and marketing their environmental credentials,” the draft legislation says. “This model bill proposes a strategy in which states use their collective economic purchasing power to counter the rise of politically motivated and discriminatory investing practices.” The drive to pass the legislation follows the refusal of major financial firms to fund new oil and gas drilling in the Arctic. Banks and other financial institutions are also under pressure from environmental groups and customers to divest from fossil fuel companies. JPMorgan Chase, Citibank and Goldman Sachs are among those firms to publicly commit to supporting the transition away from oil. As with anti-BDS laws, any business with more than 10 employees would have to certify that it is not boycotting fossil fuel companies in order to do business with a state government. State funds, such as pensions, will usually be obliged to sell investments in corporations that refuse loans to the oil industry. Alec’s push comes after the Texas legislature passed a version of the law in June 2021. That legislation was backed by the Texas Public Policy Foundation, an active member of Alec that is funded in part by Koch Industries, which accused Wall Street firms of “colluding in a coordinated attack against Texas and our way of life” by denying capital to oil firms. TPPF, which has several members also working inside Alec and maintains close ties to Senator Ted Cruz and rightwing former Texas governor Rick Perry, then pushed for the law to be adopted by other states. Jason Isaac, a former Texas state legislator who now heads TPPF’s initiative to defend the oil industry, sent a memo to participants in the Alec meeting in San Diego in which he criticised “woke” banks and other financial institutions he accused of “colluding to deny lending and investment in fossil fuel companies”. “The following model policy is based on anti-BDS legislation supported by ALEC regarding Israel and was recently passed in Texas to include discrimination against fossil fuels. Voting for this model policy, and encouraging more state legislatures to adopt it, will send a strong message that the states will fight back against woke capitalism,” the memo said, which was obtained by Alex Kotch of the Center for Media and Democracy. In January, Texas Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick asked the state comptroller to put BlackRock, which manages an estimated $10tn worth of assets, at the top of its list of blacklisted companies because he said its pledge to work toward decarbonising the energy sector “will destroy the oil and gas industry and destabilize the economy worldwide”. Patrick accused BlackRock chairman and CEO Larry Fink and his executives of making reassuring statements in private by saying the company “was committed to Texas and Texas’s vast energy footprint” but taking a different position in public by pledging to pressure energy firms to work toward net zero. “Therefore, BlackRock is boycotting energy companies by basing investment decisions on whether a company pledges to meet BlackRock’s ‘net zero’ goals,” Patrick wrote. BlackRock, which stands to lose about $20bn in Texas public sector pension funds, in fact remains a significant shareholder in oil and gas companies through index funds. “BlackRock does not boycott energy companies,” it said in a statement to the Guardian. “We do not pursue divestment from oil and gas companies as a policy. We expect to continue to be invested in these companies and will work with them as they drive the energy transition to maximize long-term value for our clients. Our primary concern with the law is the potential negative consequences it could have on current and future Texas pensioners.” The anti-BDS legislation has faced criticism and legal challenges. Several states were forced to amend anti-BDS laws to restrict them to larger companies after courts ruled that requiring individuals to sign pledges not to boycott Israel intruded on free speech rights. Kansas revised its law in 2018 after a Wichita teacher brought a federal lawsuit in response to being told to sign a pledge not to boycott Israel in order to keep her job. The city of Dickinson, Texas, dropped a similar requirement for residents applying for hurricane damage relief after an outcry. • This article was amended on 9 February 2022. An earlier version suggested there had been a legal challenge in Dickinson, Texas, after residents seeking financial help for hurricane repairs had to pledge not to boycott Israel; while that requirement was criticized as unconstitutional, it was dropped without legal action shortly after coming into effect.New York is just one of the country’s tight real estate markets, which means renters everywhere are factoring in what trade-offs they are willing to make to land an apartment. As part of our new Guardian US series, The Rent Is Too Damn High, we want readers to share the compromises they’ve made – whether you live in one of the most competitive areas like New York, Boston, the Bay Area or Miami ... or anywhere in between. Is the rent cheap but you have to climb the fire escape to get in? Do you have a skyline view but no kitchen? Are you back to a roommate situation for the first time in a decade? Whatever the trade-off, we want to hear about it (and whether or not it was worth it). Share your experience Use the form below to submit your experience, Please share your contact details so that we can get in touch about your submission. We will publish a selection of responses. Responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.“I would’ve never thought that this moment would be happening right now,” Dr Dre said in an October interview heralding his headlining slot in this year’s Super Bowl halftime show. “Everybody’s gonna leave here happy and excited about what we’re about to do.” On paper the 55-year-old Dre (real name: Andre Romelle Young) seems a perfect fit for this showcase – not just a famous Angeleno of the City of Compton but arguably the most influential maker of modern Black music besides Quincy Jones and Kanye West. In addition to the Dre and NWA rap catalogues, the Super Bowl halftime show – the world’s most watched musical performance – will include collaborators Snoop Dogg, Eminem and Kendrick Lamar, plus hip-hop soul queen Mary J Blige. Midway through next Sunday’s title clash between the Cincinnati Bengals and Los Angeles Rams, Dre and friends will play to a global audience in the hundreds of millions for 12 precious minutes. The F Gary Gray directed trailer, titled The Call, features Dre organizing his team like chess pieces as Still Dre and Mary J’s Family Affair and other Dre-produced hits play in the background. The slick production harks to the naughties era of million-dollar music video budgets. It’s an audacious return to the spotlight for a man who once ruled the radio, stage and screen as a solo rap artist – and who is barely a year removed from suffering a brain aneurysm. But in the age of #MeToo and #BlackLivesMatter, frankly, the gangster rapper turned super producer is a tone deaf choice for a league grappling with raging gender and race crises. This year’s music lineup, with its cumulative 43 Grammys, puts most music festivals to shame and is already being feted as the best ever Super Bowl halftime bill. But apart from the conservative pundit Jason Whitlock (who upbraided the Dr Dre Super Bowl halftime as an exhibition of “lyrical pornography”) and Howard University Africana studies professor Greg Carr (who dismissed it as a “21st century minstrel show”), it wouldn’t be a stretch to say that everyone else is looking forward to this show. Who couldn’t be? The trailer, which immediately went viral, has more than 12m YouTube views. At the very least it marks an emphatic turnabout from five years ago, when Rihanna, Cardi B, Adele and other high-profile artists reportedly rejected opportunities to perform at the Super Bowl halftime in solidarity with Colin Kaepernick, the mega-talented quarterback who knelt during pre-game performances of the national anthem to bring awareness of anti-Black racism. He touched off an activism movement in sports that contributed to his apparent blackballing, a contention that became the basis of his 2018 collusion lawsuit against the league. This led to Super Bowl halftime bills featuring Justin Timberlake in 2018 and Maroon 5 in 2019. In an attempt to win back the big-name artists and disgruntled fans, NFL commissioner Roger Goodell joined forces with Jay-Z, a prominent Kaepernick advocate and adviser who was among the most prominent artists to boycott the Super Bowl halftime show. The idea was that Jay-Z would provide the NFL’s aggrieved Black worker class a platform where they freely speak out about pressing issues while negotiating with the NFL’s billionaire owners behind the scenes to engineer Kaepernick’s return. But instead of a Kaepernick sequel or better representation within the sport’s decision-making ranks, the Jay-Z-Goodell alliance yielded hashtags on the field and other performative gestures, including the playing of Lift Every Voice – aka the Black national anthem. Months after Kaepernick settled with the league in 2019, Goodell and Jay-Z went public with their relationship, which gave the hip-hop mogul’s Roc Nation entertainment company significant power to choose the acts for the NFL’s signature events. But Jay-Z, who arguably sold his friend out for a content deal, has yet to say anything in defense of a halftime show lineup that celebrates a league whose racial woes appear to be worse than ever. Just last week Brian Flores, a bright Afro-Latino coach who was fired after three overachieving seasons with the Miami Dolphins, filed a class action suit against the NFL, his former employer and two other teams he interviewed with in the past, branding the sport as systemically racist. And with only Pittsburgh Steelers longtime head man Mike Tomlin remaining as the NFL’s only Black head coach, the Flores lawsuit has reignited the debate about the efficacy of the Rooney Rule, an exemplary league policy that requires teams to interview ethnic-minority candidates for head coaching and executive football operations vacancies. For the past two decades team owners have gotten around this by bringing in Rooney Rule candidates for token interviews only to wind up hiring the white guy they wanted all along. Before that bombshell, in October the NFL was rocked by the release of eight years of emails from the Las Vegas Raiders Jon Gruden, the league’s highest-profile coach; his misogynistic, racist and homophobic correspondence, which was unearthed in a larger inquiry into the Washington Football Team’s frat house-like workplace culture, ultimately cost Gruden his $10m a year job. While the NFL was attending to that crisis, it was seeking to put an even bigger one to bed, agreeing to a $1bn settlement with former players after being outed for using the practice of “race norming” – which, among other things, assumed Black people to be cognitively inferior – in determining payouts for concussions claims. But this, too, became headline news and left the league with another black eye. * * * “Jay-Z is one of the main reasons we’re sitting here right now,” Dre said in October, flanked by Snoop Dogg – an early collaborator and mentee. “See that’s hip-hop, Dre,” Snoop said. “See how hip-hop has been implemented at a high executive level to where the NFL trusts him? He’s a part of our culture; we’re a part of his culture. So it’s a beautiful thing to where the NFL is catching up.” Dr Dre has yet to really answer for his own fraught history with women. In 1991 Dre assaulted television host Dee Barnes after an episode taping, “slamming her face and the right side of her body repeatedly against a wall near the stairway,” according to Barnes’ $22.7m lawsuit. (After pleading no contest, he was fined $2,500 and given a community service sentence that included a spot on an anti-violence public service announcement.) In 2015, the singer Michel’le, the mother of one of Dre’s children, accused him of committing domestic violence against her throughout their entire time as a couple. In a 2016 book Lisa Johnson, the mother of three Dre kids, alleged Dre “hit me in the mouth and bust my lip”. (She never filed criminal allegations against him, but was granted a restraining order.) In 1990 label-mate Tairrie B claimed Dre punched her twice at the Grammys for releasing a song slagging him and his NWA bandmates, an altercation that the police allegedly broke up. She further claims that she was paid to drop the charges against Dre because her album wouldn’t come out if she moved forward. In December Dre finalised a $100m divorce settlement with Nicole Young, his wife of 24 years. And during a contentious 18 months of back-and-forth exchanges, she alleged the music tycoon held a gun to her head, punched her in the face and slammed her against a wall, lifting her off her feet by her neck. While Dre refuted those claims, he did somewhat address the other allegations before the 2015 release of his third album Compton, apologising to “the women I’ve hurt”. * * * “We have 11 or 12 minutes to go out and do something spectacular,” Dre said in October. “We have to figure out, creatively, how we’re just gonna, like, blow people’s minds.” At this point, the lineup’s too big to fail. The show is this weekend, and the league’s partners have so much at stake already – not least Dre and Jay-Z, the pen behind Still Dre. The Dr himself is said to have invested millions in the show. Like the league’s efforts to address its race and gender problems, this too appears to be a no-win proposition. Most disappointing: it’s a moment we all should have expected.Cecilia Flaherty, 45, had been happily settled in her Williamsburg, Brooklyn, rental apartment for four years when, one morning in early June, an exterior wall of her building collapsed into the street. “There was an immediate vacate order and we pretty much had to move out in our pajamas that morning,” Flaherty says. Without warning, she and her 12-year-old daughter were dropped into one of the city’s most tumultuous rental market periods, with apartment prices that shape-shift with each coronavirus mutation. Flaherty estimates she saw 25 rentals in a one-month span this summer while staying with friends in the neighborhood. “I was just dumbstruck,” Flaherty says, detailing apartments in her $3,000 per month price range with windowless, makeshift bedrooms and kitchens with little usable space. Through a stroke of luck, Flaherty ended up assuming the lease of her friends’ apartment. She was on edge for the entire summer, not wanting to assume she could eventually take over the place for good. She was enormously relieved, come the end of summer, when the lease officially became hers – even as she now pays more than what she budgeted for. Whiplash in the rental market Flaherty’s story speaks to how confounding it is to be a renter in New York, particularly over the past few months as rents continue to climb and the number of apartments up for grabs shrinks. If the early stages of the pandemic favored the renter – with bountiful apartments and incentives such as free months or waived amenity fees – that period has run its course as people continue to make their way back to the city (and even the Omicron variant hasn’t slowed the New York rental market). Between December 2020 and December 2021, the city’s median asking rent made its largest year-over-year gain since the pandemic began, from $2,500 to $2,800, according to data from StreetEasy. In December 2021, Manhattan’s median rent, with incentives factored in, reached a new record for the month at $3,392, reports the real estate company Douglas Elliman. The same report showed a similar pattern in Brooklyn. In both boroughs, the availability of rentals on the market fell at record rates for the month. The whiplash of the pandemic-era rental market has precedent. “In the initial years following the global financial crisis, New York City saw lower rents and greater affordability,” says Jonathan Miller, founder of the real estate appraisal firm Miller Samuel Inc. Both then and now, what Miller calls the creative class pushed the city into recovery mode, sensing opportunity among the lower rents “until development catches up and prices them out”. The concessions that have characterized the pandemic-era rental market are also beginning to disappear. In the first quarter of 2021, nearly 34% of apartments – the highest share in the city’s record – came with one or more months of free rent. In December, that figure was 16%, similar to the few months predating the onset of the pandemic. The StreetEasy economist Nancy Wu predicts that when these apartments return to their gross rent this quarter, many renters who can no longer afford them will be forced to move. “We’re going back to a time when trade-offs have to be made,” Wu says. “Living in New York City has always been about trade-offs between having your ideal neighborhood versus number of bedrooms, space, or desired amenities.” Renters who shed roommates during the pandemic may have to regain them, she says, and those who leveled up to a more desirable neighborhood might have to move further afield. The effects of the pandemic on the rental market have been particularly acute in Manhattan, where rental prices were the most affected and vacancies the most abundant. “The Manhattan rental market is the most polarized I’ve ever seen it,” says Miller, whose firm tracks the market for Douglas Elliman, citing the divergence between median rents in doorman and non-doorman buildings, which he uses as a proxy to distinguish the high end of the market from the low end. “At the high end, you’ve got bidding wars and a faster paced market,” Miller says. “The bottom fell out of the Manhattan rental market at the lower end. Lower-wage earners were hit far harder during the pandemic.” But that doesn’t mean a Manhattan rental is an easy get these days. According to data from Douglas Elliman, where in December 2020 there were 24,794 rentals on the market, in December 2021 there were just 4,753 available. ‘You can’t have the life you envisioned’ Like many renters, Raven Monroe left Manhattan at the onset of the pandemic and moved back in with her parents in North Carolina. Monroe, 27, had been renting a $2,200-a-month one-bedroom in the East Village while working as a teaching artist. When the pandemic halted gatherings and lockdowns went into place, she left her rental behind to begin a period of remote work and saving. Monroe, who is still in North Carolina, says she now feels like the right time to return to the city has passed as rents climb. Looking for an apartment remotely has also proven to be a challenge, given the speed with which rentals are plucked off the market. “A lot of my friends and I all feel like we’re struggling. I have a master’s degree, and a lot of the people that I know have advanced degrees, and it doesn’t seem to matter,” Monroe says. “We can’t find employment that matches our education, which means we also end up living in these situations that are very college-like. It makes you feel like you can’t have the adult life you envisioned yourself having.” Monroe plans to return to Manhattan soon to stay with friends until she finds a suitable apartment. Between August and December, the citywide share of rental vacancies dropped from about 41,400 units to 24,413, according to StreetEasy. “Renters are starting to feel like there’s no good inventory left,” says Keyan Sanai, a leading rental broker with Douglas Elliman. Meanwhile, New York’s eviction moratorium was lifted on 15 January, removing the protections that kept countless New Yorkers housed during one of the most economically challenging periods on record. Stephanie, 52, who declined to share her last name, says the eviction moratorium allowed her to stay in her South Bronx apartment since eviction proceedings began in 2019. She has been seeking an apartment with her rental assistance supplement from the city, but she says that in the past two and a half years, she hasn’t had the opportunity to formally apply for any – even after the value of her voucher was increased to $1,945, or market rate, in early September. “When they find out my income is public assistance and a voucher, my application doesn’t get anywhere,” Stephanie says. “I sometimes explain to them it’s a source of income discrimination but it doesn’t matter. I’m just very dejected.” (Income discrimination is illegal.) On 16 December, the mayor’s public engagement unit launched an initiative with StreetEasy to educate New York property owners, brokers and agents about the value of leasing to voucher holders. Almost 84,000 eviction filings have been made in New York City since March 2020, according to data from Princeton University’s Eviction Lab. Although Wu predicts that though vacancies will increase in the spring, there are uncertain months ahead, and renters are already feeling left in the lurch. “There’s an ominous feeling amongst renters that, because they are hearing from their friends that there’s nothing out there, they just re-sign their contracts,” says Sanai, the rental broker. “They don’t even think about it. Their landlord wants $400 more per month? They re-sign.”“If you take the door off the hinges, you can fit a bed in here,” a Brooklyn broker told me on a weekend tour of a one-bedroom apartment. I’d gain space because the door wouldn’t have to swing, and the landlord would let me store it in the basement – but I’d still have to crawl over the bed to get anything from the closet. The bedroom window perfectly framed the jail on Atlantic Avenue and the apartment’s tub looked like it was last used to mix cement. No, there were no plans to reglaze it, the broker told me. “This place will be rented by Monday,” he said. So glib. So right. I actually considered renting this place. It was October 2021 and the city’s rental inventory had dropped by 52.4%, the lowest in 10 years. The pandemic deals my friends were eating up at the beginning of 2021 – when Brooklyn’s median rent fell by 10% and a third of apartments came with at least one month free rent – were over. It felt like everyone was competing for the same prizes, but only half as many were available. Hopeful home buyers who left New York only to find themselves priced out of a nationwide housing boom returned seeking rentals. So did everyone else who left during the worst of the pandemic, and we all needed a one-bedroom immediately. The dramatic ebb and flow led to Manhattan being the most expensive city in the country to rent in as of January, and every other borough is also experiencing rapidly rising rents. Real estate experts don’t see a break coming any time soon. Our new seven-piece Guardian US series, The Rent Is Too Damn High, looks at how the pandemic further strained one of the country’s toughest rental markets. We talk to striking low-income renters on edge now that the eviction moratorium has been lifted. We ask a broker to explain the tricks they pull on us. We investigate why co-ops, which make up 74% of Manhattan’s apartment stock, are able to operate with such power and impunity. They have no legal obligation to explain a rejection – though any longtime New Yorker would, and did, shrug and tell me: “It’s because you’re Black” – as I found out in November after a grueling application process only to be denied. Why do we stay here? Why’d we all come back? Is it the hope that one day we might win the housing lottery, or luck into a rent-stabilized dream in the East Village? (We will meet some of those lucky ones later in the week.) Or knowing bad rental luck can’t last forever? After five months of searching, a broker I met back in November sent me an unlisted apartment, one of the best I’ve ever toured. I signed the lease last week. If you’ve also recently searched for an apartment – in New York or elsewhere – tell us about your experience.Good morning. Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin did not appear to reach a breakthrough in five hours of talks at the Kremlin on Monday evening aimed at fending off a Russian attack on Ukraine. Macron is due to travel to Kyiv on Tuesday where he will hold talks with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. He said he planned to brief Putin on the results of the discussions in a phone call. “Right now the tension is increasing and the risk of destabilisation is increasing,” Macron said, according to a simultaneous translation of his remarks after the talks. “Neither Russia nor the Europeans want chaos or instability when nations have already suffered from the [coronavirus] epidemic. So we need to agree on concrete measures.” Is Russia still moving troops to the Ukraine border? It certainly looks like it. A recent trip by the Guardian to the Voronezh and Kursk regions in Russia found a hive of barely hidden military activity as Russian troops continued to position themselves for a potential assault on Ukraine. What have Nord Stream 2 and gas got to do with the Ukraine standoff? Gas is not just a source of energy, sometimes it is a political weapon. As western countries weigh possible sanctions against Russia for an invasion of Ukraine, the future of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline hangs in the balance. How Canadian truckers’ anti-vaccine protest was steered by neo-Nazis and QAnon Thousands of demonstrators have occupied Canada’s capital for days and say they plan on staying as long as it takes to thwart the country’s vaccine requirements. The brazen occupation of Ottawa is the result of unprecedented coordination between various anti-vaccine and anti-government organizations and activists, and has been seized on by similar groups around the world. It may herald the revenge of the anti-vaxxers. The so-called “freedom convoy” – which departed for Ottawa on 23 January – was the brainchild of James Bauder, an admitted conspiracy theorist who has endorsed the QAnon movement and called Covid-19 “the biggest political scam in history”. Bauder’s group, Canada Unity, contends that vaccine mandates and passports are illegal under Canada’s constitution, the Nuremberg Code and a host of other international conventions. Are neo-Nazis and QAnon really involved? Since protesters have arrived in Ottawa, the extreme elements of the protest have been visible: neo-Nazi and Confederate flags were seen flying, and QAnon logos were emblazoned on trucks. Supreme court lets Alabama use maps decried as biased against Black voters Alabama does not have to redraw its congressional map for the 2022 elections, the US supreme court ruled on Monday, a win for Republicans that will leave in place a plan that has been described as a textbook example of discrimination against Black voters in the US. The court ruling boosts the party’s chances of holding six of the state’s seven seats in the House of Representatives. The court’s action, by five votes against four, means the upcoming elections will be conducted under a map drawn by Alabama’s Republican-controlled legislature that contains one majority-Black district, represented by a Black Democrat, in a state in which more than a quarter of the population is Black. The chief justice, John Roberts, joined with the court’s three liberal justices in dissenting from the ruling. A three-judge lower court, including two judges appointed by Donald Trump, had ruled that the state had likely violated the federal Voting Rights Act by diluting the political power of Black voters by not creating a second district in which they made up a majority, or close to it. What did the ruling say? Justices Brett Kavanaugh and Samuel Alito, part of the conservative majority, said a lower court acted too close to the 2022 election cycle. So does this mean the state may still have violated the Voting Rights Act? Kavanaugh said he had not reached a conclusion on the larger question in the case but cited a legal principle saying that courts should not change election rules close to an election. In other news … With his second executive action, Virginia’s new governor, Glenn Youngkin, made masks in schools optional, causing uproar among educators and parents. A Virginia judge has blocked Youngkin’s order, allowing school districts to continue to enforce mask mandates, but there is still turmoil. An employee at a Home Depot in Arizona has scammed the company out of hundreds of thousands of dollars since 2018 by swapping cash from registers with fake $100 bills, according to a criminal complaint. Adrian Jean Pineda allegedly siphoned $387,500 over four years. Germany has been left fuming after a night of ski jumping mayhem at the Winter Olympics. A series of disqualifications for the favourites meant the world champions failed to make the final. “This is a parody, but I am not laughing,” said Germany’s head of Nordic events, Horst Hüttel. Chimpanzees have invented a creative method for treating injuries: catching insects and applying them directly to the open wound. Scientists observed this behaviour in chimpanzees in Gabon, noticing that the apes use insects to treat not only their own wounds but also those of their peers. Stat of the day: BP’s annual profits reached an eight-year high of $12.8bn BP’s annual profits reached an eight-year high of $12.8bn in 2021 as it benefited from a surge in energy prices, prompting renewed calls in the UK for a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies to relieve the financial pressure on households facing a sharp rise in bills. Natural gas and electricity prices have soared since last summer because of tight gas supplies and rising demand as economies bounced back from the pandemic, and the standoff between Russia and Ukraine pushed gas prices higher. Don’t miss this: Arrested Development’s Will Arnett on divorce, fatherhood and friendship After years of playing insecure braggarts, Will Arnett is taking on a new challenge – as the star of the improvised celebrity cop show Murderville. The actor was one of the breakout stars of Arrested Development, going from a complete unknown to being cast in movie comedies such as Blades of Glory and Hot Rod, playing characters not a million miles from Gob. “I like characters who are really cocky and really dumb. That always seems to be a really great cocktail for me,” he says. He talks to Hadley Freeman about his “weird” period, his split with Amy Poehler, and having a baby in his 50s. Climate check: what are PFAS and what risk do they pose? PFAS are a family of thousands of human-made substances – nicknamed “forever chemicals” because they do not break down in the environment – that have been widely used since the 1940s in a huge range of everyday consumer products and industrial processes. The devastating impacts of PFOA was first exposed by US lawyer Rob Bilott who has been fighting for decades on behalf of people exposed to the chemicals. But what risk do they actually pose? Last Thing: Las Vegas casino tracks down tourist who won $229,000 without knowing A tourist from Arizona won $229,000 on a Las Vegas slot machine but walked away unaware of his windfall owing to an error in the machine. It took nearly three weeks for gaming board agents to track him down and enrich him. On 8 January, Robert Taylor hit a jackpot on a slot machine at the Treasure Island Hotel &amp; Casino on the Vegas strip. But the “slot machine experienced a malfunction that prevented Mr Taylor and casino personnel from realizing that a progressive jackpot had been won”, the Nevada Gaming Control Board said. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comLabour shortages, in particular of HGV drivers, have held back growth at Ocado, but the online supermarket said it had managed to keep price rises lower than the 3.8% level of grocery price inflation reported last week. It made total sales of £2.5bn last year, up 7.2% on 2020. The vast majority of its sales, £2.3bn, came from its Ocado Retail arm – a joint venture with Marks &amp; Spencer – up 4.6% as more people shopped online. Customer numbers increased by 22% to 832,000, driving a near-12% increase in orders, although this was partly offset by a 5.8% reduction in average basket size to £129. Ocado’s pretax loss widened to nearly £177m from £52m, reflecting higher investment in its automated warehouses and the solutions division that sells its technology to other retailers. The sales growth was weaker than that of rivals such as Sainsbury’s and Ocado’s share price fell more than 11% to £12.49 in early trading on Tuesday. The company said order growth had been restricted by worker shortages in the second half, coupled with a warehouse fire caused by a robot collision in Erith in south-east London. Drops made by each van a week dropped to 177 last year from 184 in 2020. However, labour shortages are easing, and its vacancy rate has dropped from 8% in October to 3.5%. Tim Steiner, the chief executive, said: “The past year has further reinforced that demand for online grocery is here to stay.” Online sales make up 12% of the total UK grocery market, and the research firm GlobalData expects the online share to increase to 18% by 2025. As the cost of living crisis continues to worsen, with food and energy bills soaring, Steiner indicated that price rises at Ocado had been lower than the 3.8% grocery price inflation reported by the market data firm Kantar last week. The company uses vast warehouses, with robots crisscrossing a giant chessboard-style grid layout to sort its orders. Ocado opened five new big warehouses globally last year for itself and partners including the US retailer Kroger, including its first two in the US, and has 13 that are operating, with a further six to open this year. After the opening of a Zoom micro-warehouse in Acton in west London, Ocado Retail expects to open a second Zoom site in Canning Town by the summer, followed by three others across the UK in the coming 18 months. It is competing with rapid delivery startups including Getir and Gorillas. Late last month, Ocado’s shares enjoyed a bump after it unveiled robots that are 80% lighter than the previous ones, along with lighter warehouse grids for them to run on. Sophie Lund-Yates, an equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Next year’s profits are expected to be lower than the market was hoping. The trouble is, Ocado’s impressive robotic grid systems and software are a fundamentally attractive product for retailers looking to boost their online footprints, but Ocado has been unable to scale as quickly as would have been ideal.”Nvidia’s $40bn (£29.6bn) takeover of the Cambridge-based Arm has collapsed due to insurmountable regulatory hurdles, leaving the British chip designer to seek a stock market flotation in the next year as an alternative. The deal, which would have been the largest in the semiconductor industry, had become mired in red tape on both sides of the Atlantic and in China and had also faced fierce opposition from players within the industry since it was announced in September 2020. Japan’s Softbank acquired Arm – which has more than 500 clients that use its chip designs, including Apple, Samsung and Google, in products ranging from iPads and mobile phones to cars and smart TVs – for $32bn in 2016. In a joint statement, Softbank and Nvidia said they had decided to terminate the deal due to “significant regulatory challenges preventing the consummation of the transaction, despite good faith efforts by the parties”. The cash and stock deal was worth about $40bn when it was announced 18 months ago, but has dramatically increased to as much as $75bn as Nvidia’s share price has soared. Softbank moved quickly to announce it is to revert to its backup plan of an initial public offering to cash in on Arm, and will receive a $1.25bn break-up fee from Nvidia. The chip designer, which employs 6,500 staff including 3,000 in the UK, also announced a management shake-up with the chief executive, Simon Segars, replaced by Rene Haas, head of Arm’s intellectual property unit who previously worked at Nvidia for seven years, to lead the publicly listed company. “Rene is the right leader to accelerate Arm’s growth as the company looks to re-enter the public markets,” the SoftBank chief executive, Masayoshi Son, said in the statement from Arm. “We will take this opportunity and start preparing to take Arm public, and to make even further progress.” Nvidia said that despite the failed takeover it would remain a close partner due to Arm’s strategic importance in the global chip industry. “Arm is at the centre of the important dynamics in computing,” said Jensen Huang, the founder and chief executive of the California-based Nvidia. “I expect Arm to be the most important [computer processing unit] architecture of the next decade.” The US Federal Trade Commission dealt a hammer blow to the prospect of successful takeover, launching legal action in December to block what it called an “illegal vertical merger” that would give Nvidia too much market power. Last year, the UK ordered an in-depth investigation into the deal, citing competition and national security concerns, while the EU and China had also raised serious concerns. SoftBank said on Tuesday that Arm would prepare for a stock market flotation before the end of the financial year to 31 March 2023. While no decision has been made on where to list the company, it is understood that the US is favoured as it generally results in higher valuations for technology stocks. Many of Arm’s extensive client base said that takeover by Nvidia would end its status as the Switzerland of the semiconductor industry, with the US company able to control the technology and licensing of chip designs to rivals. In 2018, the US company Qualcomm abandoned its $44bn, two-year pursuit of the Dutch chip maker NXP after failing to secure approval in China, a victim of a trade dispute between Beijing and Washington.Great Britain’s hopes of a first medal at these Winter Olympics crashed as their mixed curlers lost their bronze-medal match 9-3 against Sweden. It was so one-sided that Britain’s Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat conceded with two ends remaining as a mark of respect. It was arguably their best move of the match. In fairness to Dodds and Mouat, their Swedish opponents Oskar Eriksson and Almida de Val had a blinder. De Val, in particular, was sensational as she recorded a 100% success rate. The two also combined well together. It was Eriksson’s superb take-out in the second end which set up partner De Val to chip out Britain’s stone for four. Sweden then stole three more in the third end to go 7-1 ahead. “The Swedes came out firing today, that shot that she played in the second end was an amazing shot in a bronze-medal game,” said Dodds, whose 56% success rate was well down on her 73% tournament average. “And I can’t even think of a shot Oskar missed all game so they just played great out there and we just couldn’t keep up with them.” The sentiment was shared by Mouat, who said: “It’s pretty raw, obviously very gutted. We’ve put in a lot of effort in the last two months to really try hard and to get to this point. It’s going to be gutting to leave this mixed doubles tournament without a medal because it really felt like we were on form to win one.” That might be overplaying it. On the surface, Britain’s curlers looked to have qualified easily. But there was a sense that, while nicking some very close games, they had never quite hit the highest notes that took them to a world title last year. And with the score 9-3 after six ends, Team GB decided to call it day. “It’s almost a sign of respect to them for playing so well,” Mouat said. “We would love to battle on. It’s just when you are six down without the hammer and the last shot, I would say you have about a 0.01% chance of winning. “When you’re at that point it’s a sign of respect and sportsmanship to shake hands. They really do deserve that medal.” Mouat is widely regarded as one of the nicest people in the sport and his concession was a measure of the man. Regardless, it heaps additional pressure on Team GB, who have targeted between three and seven medals in Beijing. “I don’t think either of them made a mistake,” Dodds said of the Swedish pair. “It’s hard to fight back when your opposition is playing that well. Congratulations to them for winning the bronze they played amazing.” Both British players now have to pick themselves up before the men’s and women’s tournament start on Thursday. “I don’t think I’ll cry,” Mouat said. “I’ve been in the men’s team for five years now and we have trained unbelievably hard for this moment. I don’t want to let my team down feeling sorry for myself for one event that has not gone right for us. Both of us are going to turn it around and we’re both going to play amazing next week.” Later Italy won the gold medal, beating Norway 8-5 in the final. It was an extraordinary victory given Italy had no tradition to speak of in the sport they referred to as “bocce on ice” before being granted an obligatory spot in the 2006 Turin Olympics as the host. Even now, Italian officials say, there are only three curling clubs and about 400 participants in the entire country.British teenager Kirsty Muir branded the standard in the women’s freeski big air final as “insane” after finishing an inspiring fifth on her Winter Olympics debut. Muir, 17, is the youngest member of the British Winter Olympics team in China, and went into the last of her three runs knowing she needed a big score to try and finish among the medals. In pushing for the podium, Muir attempted a trick she had not performed before and a crash left her out of the top three. “I went for a switch misty 10 in the last jump which I’ve never tried before,” she said. “I just wanted to go for it. I’m just so happy I went and tried it.” Muir eventually scored 169.00 points behind China’s US-born Eileen Gu, who won gold on 188.25. The silver medal went to France’s Tess Ledeux, with the Swiss skier Mathilde Gremaud taking the bronze. The event, like Muir, was making its first Olympic appearance, and when asked to sum up her performance afterwards, she said: “I’m so happy right now honestly, the level was insane. I couldn’t have hoped to have skied better today and I’m so proud of all the girls.” Muir had landed a rare dub 12 trick on her opening jump. “Getting to the final,” she said, “I knew I’d be happiest if I really went for it. I’ve landed the [dub 12] trick before, but I tried it with a different grab which I’ve only landed in competition once before, and that was definitely the best I’ve ever done it.” The Aberdeen-born teenager, who previously won the silver medal in the sport at the Lausanne 2020 Winter Youth Olympic Games, had said in a social media post on Monday that qualifying in the top 12 to reach the final was “a dream come true”. Muir will now go on to compete in the women’s slopestyle competition on Sunday. She told the BBC that after that, it will be back to education for her, saying: “I’ve got a bit of studying to catch up on for sure. I’m focused on my next event, and then it’s back to school.”When news of Thich Nhat Hanh’s death spread around the world, I saw far more people than I’d have expected say how he affected them, through a talk, a book, a retreat, an idea, an example. It was a reminder of the huge impact Buddhism has had in the west as a set of ideas that has flowed far beyond the limits of who belongs to a Buddhist group or has a formal practice. You could think of Buddhism in this context as one tributary of a broad new river of ideas flowing through the west, from which many have drunk without knowing quite where the waters came from. A Vietnamese monk who founded meditation centers on four continents and published dozens of books, Thich Nhat Hanh was one of the great teachers who came from Asia in the 20th century, along with Zen monks from Japan and Tibetan rinpoches. He stood out because he came to the west as an explicitly political figure, arguing against the war in Vietnam (though the Dalai Lama’s opposition to the Chinese occupation of Tibet is certainly political too). His death seemed to me not an ending but a reminder that something far grander than this great teacher began sometime in the last century and continues to spread. We are not who we were very long ago. A lot of new ideas have emerged from Buddhism and other traditions emphasizing kindness and compassion, equality and egalitarianism, nonviolence, critical perspectives on materialism and capitalism, and what I once heard the Zen priest Paul Haller at the San Francisco Zen Center call “the practice of awareness”. They constitute a shift in what we ask of ourselves and others as profound as it is subtle. That subtlety consists of its incremental nature and of its realization as personal beliefs and actions in everyday life – that sometimes add up to more concrete changes in laws and institutions. You have to go back to how widely accepted various forms of cruelty and domination were half a century ago, from corporal punishment in public schools to domestic violence and systemic silencing and exclusion, to recognize how much has changed. A lot of us have had the experience, in recent years, of going back to old novels and films and even songs to find that we no longer overlook or accept their casual cruelty. Of course the new ideas are corruptible, and charismatic leaders, including in Buddhist lineages, have abused their power – but I was amused to find that corporate attempts to co-opt mindfulness sometimes backfire when they make employees less tolerant of harmful policies. This river of new ideas is a confluence of many other tributaries, of feminism, antiracism and ecological ideas, and it has as one of its key principles a vision that everything is connected. Of course not everyone has changed; Bipoc people in the US are far from achieving equality by most measures; and many of these ideas exist more as aspirations than everyday practices. But none of this means the ideas and ideals don’t matter, and the backlash by the right is a backlash against something they see as transformative and threatening. I’ve called contemporary conservative thinking “the ideology of isolation”, obsessed with control through separation and segregation, with borders and anti-immigration rhetoric, with policing racial and gender categories, and marriage inequality both as a denial of marital rights to same-sex couples and of male domination within heterosexual marriage. It’s anti-environmental, because the foundational truth of ecological science is that the world is made of pervasive, interconnecting systems, not discrete objects. With that comes a mandate to act with responsibility toward the consequences that is at odds with the conservative ideals of individual freedom and unfettered capitalism. Hanh died on 22 January. On 25 January, the Save the Redwoods League announced that it had transferred title to a 523-acre stretch of redwood forest to the Intertribal Sinkyone Wilderness Council, a coalition of 10 tribal groups on the north-west coast of California. The place that had been dubbed Andersonia West “will again be known as Tc’ih-Léh-Dûñ (pronounced tsih-ih-LEY-duhn), meaning “Fish Run Place” in the Sinkyone language,” the press release notes. You have to know that the Save the Redwoods League was founded 104 years ago by wealthy white men who were both eugenicists and elitists to understand how vast a transformation has taken place. Most of that transformation has been in the past few decades. I remember reading an academic paper on the scurrilous past of the Save the Redwoods League in the mid-1990s, when the environmental movement tended to ignore or oppose indigenous presence in the lands they sought to conserve and was complacent or oblivious about its own past. The League was co-founded by Madison Grant, who headed the American Eugenics Society, was vice-president of the Immigration Restriction League, and is notorious for the pseudoscientific book The Passing of the Great Race. The other founders held similar views. The law professor Joyce Alene tweeted a few weeks ago, on Martin Luther King Day: “The moral arc of the universe is not going to bend itself.” People – famous, powerful, unknown, humble – bend it, often in increments or ways too small or subtle to measure. They add up. In the 1990s I watched the environmental movement slowly shift from its fantasies of “virgin wilderness” to the recognition that nearly every place on Earth was or is indigenous homeland and therefore environmental protection and human rights were not separate concerns (and that access to nature and to clean air and water were also racial-justice issues). The ideas that fed the shift came from indigenous struggles and indigenous intellectuals and allied scholars and activists. Those struggles are far from over, but the premises with which many of us operate are far different than they were. These usually begin as changes in consciousness and new narratives. They end as changes in law, policy, everyday practices and stuff as tangible as land ownership. This year, that includes an old-growth forest under indigenous management, with trees more than eight feet in diameter that “tower among Douglas fir, tan oaks, and Pacific madrones over a vibrant understory of huckleberry, manzanita, and ceanothus”. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist. Her most recent books are Recollections of My Nonexistence and Orwell’s RosesA woman outside a jail in Tehran asks to see her husband. Visiting hours have finished, the guard tells her. The woman pleads: “He’s about to be executed.” Inside, her husband looks up as she walks into his cell, silent, despairing. As the door slams shut, the camera is left staring at the closed door, listening to the woman’s agonised sobs. So begins this restrained Iranian drama about her fight for justice. It’s a film that quietly builds tension, almost suffocating by the end. Made in the austere Iranian tradition, the style is spare, no soundtrack, little to no camera movement – but with a real intimacy between the characters and screen. Maryam Moghaddam (who also co-directs) plays Mina: one year after her husband Babak’s execution, she is blandly informed by an official that he has been exonerated – the real murderer has been identified and arrested. It’s all been a terrible mistake, everyone is sorry. But there is nothing to be done. “After all, it was God’s will.” As a widow living alone, Mina is powerless. Her late husband’s brother bullies her to move in with the family. Reading between the lines he would like to marry her and his father appears to want to get his hands on the blood money due to Mina as compensation. When she refuses, they threaten her with a custody battle over her daughter Bita (Avin Poor Raoufi), who is deaf. Then along comes Reza (Alireza Sanifar), a depressed sad-looking man who seems too good to be true. He tells Mina that he is an old friend of her husband – he wants to help out, find her somewhere to live. But is all what it seems? Here the film pivots into a kind of subtle thriller, as Mina and Reza become friends, possibly more. This is a suspenseful engrossing watch, though perhaps with a couple too many plot developments. • Ballad of a White Cow is available on 10 February on Mubi.Vladimir Putin’s threats over Ukraine could backfire to damage the Russian economy, the head of the International Energy Agency has warned, as any escalation of the current tension would cause a “seismic” upheaval of the EU energy market that would have “more consequences for Russia” than for Europe. Fatih Birol, the executive director of the global energy watchdog, said that if Russia reduced gas supplies further it would prompt European countries to seek urgently to shift away from Russian gas, which would hurt Putin economically. “If Russia stops the gas supply to Europe, it could have a seismic impact on European energy. [Russia] has to consider the consequences if existing oil and gas supplies to Europe are halted,” Birol told the Guardian. “Failure to maintain [supplies] would shatter Russia’s reputation as a reliable partner and that would be a tectonic shift. Russia would be seen as a threat and that would have far-reaching consequences for European economies, but even more consequences for Russia. Europe would choose a strategy to diverge from Russia,” he predicted. He said the next two months would be “critical” in deciding how the current energy crisis played out. A mild winter would ease the pressure, but if not then Europe would face stark foreign policy choices on how to deal with Russia, he said. Birol has previously said Putin was exacerbating the gas crisis in Europe for political reasons, as Russian gas supplies to the EU had dropped 25% in recent months despite increasing demand. “I hope this was only a coincidence,” he added. The worst outcomes could still be avoided, he said: “Of course, we do not know what will happen if this political tension goes beyond being tension. I hope there will be dialogue, and that there will be no major geopolitical distortions.” Birol, one of the world’s foremost energy economists, also sharply criticised as “irresponsible” those who have claimed the high energy prices in the UK, Europe and the US should be blamed on the shift to low-carbon power. “Claims that the current volatility is owing to renewable energy are misleading to say the least, and are not based in fact,” he said. “This is not a clean energy crisis, or a renewable energy crisis. These claims are irresponsible and are being used to attack public support for the net zero transition.” He added: “Countries should understand that the current situation is not happening because they have a lot of clean energy policies, but because we do not have enough clean energy policies.” Renewable energy helps to reduce the volatility in energy markets, which was being caused by high gas prices and gas supply issues, he said. The impact of the gas price was at least eight times bigger in raising energy prices than the impact of the price that some countries have put on carbon, he added. People making false claims that the shift to net zero was raising energy prices either did not know the facts, or were deliberately attacking clean energy in service of the vested interests of fossil fuel suppliers, Birol said. He urged governments not to give way to those calling for stronger investment in fossil fuels as the remedy for high prices. “That would be myopic, and against the fundamental economic interests of these countries,” he warned. “The cure would be worse than the disease.” Birol was also optimistic that the resurgence of coal use, particularly in China, would prove to be temporary. “The production increases [in coal] are strong, but mainly driven by post-pandemic demand and high gas prices,” he said. He said the economics of renewable energy were still an attractive investment, accounting for more than 90% of the new power capacity installed last year globally. To reduce the pressure of high gas prices, governments should “accelerate efforts on renewable energy and energy efficiency”, he said. The world did not need large amounts of gas power to make up for the intermittency of renewable energy, as some have claimed, he said, as this could be achieved with more investments in the electricity grid to balance supply and demand, and in battery storage, as well as hydroelectricity, nuclear power and using carbon capture and storage technology with any gas-fired power stations that remained. Hydrogen could also replace gas in some applications, he predicted. Despite the current energy price, Birol said he was “more optimistic” about the world’s chances of tackling the climate crisis and moving to net zero emissions since the Cop26 UN climate summit in Glasgow last November, where governments affirmed their commitments to reach net zero emissions and hold global temperatures to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, though few yet have detailed plans. “Many governments see the current high energy prices as confirmation of their long-term plans to reduce the share of fossil fuels,” he said. “Of course, high energy prices are taken by some to push back on and reduce public support for the net zero transition. But I think this is a temporary thing. The long-term structural trends are in favour of clean energy options.”SSE, the electricity generator and network company, has upgraded its profit forecasts to nearly £1bn for its latest financial year as soaring gas prices more than made up for disappointing renewable energy output. The FTSE 100 company runs gas-fired power plants alongside hydroelectric and windfarms, meaning it can make up for still periods by burning more gas – albeit at the cost of increased carbon dioxide emissions. That has allowed it to take advantage of the tight global gas market, in which prices have quadrupled, adding to the squeeze on household incomes but providing a huge surge in profits for some of the UK’s biggest energy companies. SSE, which is based in Perth, increased its adjusted profit forecast for the financial year ending on 31 March to “at least 90p” a share, up from 83p, in a trading update published on Tuesday. That would suggest profits (excluding some one-off costs) of at least £950m. It would compare with adjusted profit after tax of £910m for the year to 31 March 2021. Renewable energy output in the UK and Ireland from April to December was only 81% of planned levels, SSE said, because of an “exceptionally still and dry” summer. Meanwhile, energy output of 11.2 gigawatt hours (GWh) from its gas- and oil-fired plants was nearly double total renewables generation of 5.9GWh. Gregor Alexander, the SSE finance director, said he had “renewed confidence about delivery of good financial results for the full year”. He argued that gas-fired plants give the company “balance through a turbulent trading period” as well as the ability to give sustainable shareholder returns over the long term. The company has also committed to reducing its direct emissions by 80% by 2030. The SSE profit upgrade came despite fossil fuel energy output falling by 14% for the period compared with 2020, reflecting the extraordinary gas price increases that have taken centre stage in UK politics during the winter months. SSE’s profit upgrade came on the same day as the oil company BP announced its highest annual profits for eight years at £9.45bn, while its fellow FTSE 100 driller Shell made £14.3bn. The energy company profits have sparked calls for a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies. SSE, formerly Scottish and Southern Energy, no longer provides energy to retail customers, meaning it has avoided much of the turmoil in that part of the market. British household bills will rise by a record 54% on average from April after the regulator lifted the cap on default tariffs to £1,971. SSE Energy Services, SSE’s former energy arm taken over by Ovo Energy in 2020, faced criticism last month for advising customers to reduce their heatings bills by “having a cuddle with your pets” and “doing a few star jumps”.When Boris Johnson was seeking re-election as London mayor in 2012, the mood was bleak. Three months before the vote, the Tories were 17 points behind in the polls and his team were concerned that they were heading to defeat. As the Conservatives tend to do in times of trouble, they called in Lynton Crosby . The campaign, as Tom Bower documents in The Gambler, his biography of Johnson, was quickly changed. Out was the strategy to focus on plans for “Boris Island” – the doomed Thames estuary airport – and new funds for street parties. In was a new sense of discipline by which Johnson would focus on five key issues: police, crime, housing, transport and the economy. Johnson went on to win. But not everyone was happy with the new direction of travel. His PR chief, Guto Harri – who was appointed No 10 director of communications on Saturday – lamented: “Lynton’s taking the bubbles out of the champagne.” In other words, Johnson was being turned into just another politician. As the prime minister’s latest reset gets under way, MPs are unsure which version of Johnson they are being sold: a new, serious one or a return to the joker. There have been plenty of calls for greater discipline and a smoother No 10 operation after months of chaos over “partygate”. It’s why Johnson’s claim to MPs last week that Crosby would be offering regular strategic advice was met with cheers. But since then the Tory election guru has played down his role and the great reboot has got off to a clunky start. The first full week of the reset has been dominated by a row over his comments on Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile (including protesters mobbing the Labour leader); speculation over the number of no confidence letters that have been submitted; and the faint praise of Johnson’s new press chief, who declared in an interview that his new boss was “not a complete clown”. The appointment of Harri to director of communications and the Cabinet Office minister Steve Barclay to chief of staff – along with a mini-reshuffle of Johnson’s ministerial team – was meant to reassure MPs and suggest that Johnson was in control after a slew of resignations. But while Johnson succeeded in avoiding an immediate backlash, both have been met with a mixed reaction. Barclay’s appointment is the more popular of the two. He is viewed as a safe pair of hands who will keep MPs connected to No 10 – a crucial task when Johnson is trying to avoid 54 letters of no confidence going in and triggering a vote on his leadership. But there are some ministers who are concerned he could be both ineffective and controlling. He will be balancing one of the trickiest roles in No 10 with ministerial duties and his own constituency work. “He’s a technocrat,” says one senior Tory. “He’s a less efficient Dan [Rosenfield, former Downing Street chief of staff] but hopefully less up his own arse.” As for Harri’s appointment, not everyone is thrilled to see the bubbles back in the champagne. While one cabinet minister praises the fact he has a longstanding relationship with Johnson so will “know how to get the best out of him”, the fact that the press chief kickstarted the job with an interview declaring that the pair “had a little blast” of Gloria Gaynor’s I Will Survive on his appointment has rung alarm bells. Traditionally advisers should avoid becoming the story. “You couldn’t make it up,” says a member of the 2017 intake. ‘“I presumed it was a parody.” “Before you know it he will be doing the broadcast round on the Today programme,” jokes a former government aide. Another adds “he’s the new Scaramucci”, in reference to Donald Trump’s former press chief who lasted just 10 days. Reports that he lobbied on behalf of Huawei have only added to doubts. Meanwhile, MPs on the right of the party are concerned that Harri’s appointment is at odds with reassurances from Johnson that his government will focus on traditional Tory values after its recent difficulties. “We’re being told he will scrap the woke stuff but he’s just hired someone who took the knee on television,” says one such MP, in reference to Harri’s exit from GB News. But the bigger problem with Johnson’s reboot goes beyond personnel changes. As a general rule, government resets rarely come from a position of strength. Over the past three months, Johnson’s authority has seeped away. He serves in No 10 at the pleasure of his MPs – many of whom he has had to placate with multiple promises. “I give it two months,” says a former minister. “It feels like we are back to a minority government. Boris is governing on MP demands. It’s unsustainable.” Another MP – yet to put a letter in – adds that one of the best things the prime minister has going for him is that his critics believe he is more likely to lose a confidence vote in a few months’ time than now, so some are holding off from submitting letters. As for Johnson’s mini-reshuffle this afternoon – in which the whips’ office has been shaken up and Jacob Rees-Mogg moved from his role as the leader of the commons to the minister for Brexit opportunities – caution was the word of the day. Johnson’s team were acutely aware it had the potential to backfire. Multiple members of the 2019 intake believe the prime minister has suggested they are on the verge of promotion and are awaiting the call. But such a move would trigger a backlash of its own. Following the appointment of the 2019-er Andrew Griffith – who previously served as Johnson’s business adviser – as policy chief in the wake of Munira Mirza’s resignation, one MP from an older intake warned that any more promotions among the 2019 group will result in “a bloody nose”. Sending any ambitious ministers to the backbenches to make way for others also risks more letters going in. In the end, the reshuffle pointed to Johnson’s weakened position. Even those the prime minister was under pressure to sack due to bad performances – as was the case with Rees-Mogg and the new commons leader, Mark Spencer, after their botched plot to spare the former Tory MP Owen Paterson a suspension over a breach of lobbying rules – were simply moved to other government roles. MPs are already complaining that Johnson has missed an opportunity to extend an olive branch to MPs he has becomes estranged from by bringing new blood into his government. Instead he rewarded loyalty and highlighted the limits of his grand reset. For many MPs, Johnson is on borrowed time. They are acutely aware that this is the second time he has shaken up his team. Briefings that the “grownups” have entered No 10 are all too familiar. It’s the same language that was used when Rosenfield was brought in to replace the Vote Leave regime. If the dysfunction continues, MPs will take it as the final straw: they will conclude that changing the people around Johnson isn’t enough – you have to change the prime minister, too. Katy Balls is the Spectator’s deputy political editorToday in a nutshell: Team GB’s curling pair failed to secure a medal, but Ester Ledecka remains on track for an historic double-double. Next up: Unbeaten Italy go for curling gold, the women’s luge concludes and then tomorrow we get the Nordic combined and the start of the men’s ice hockey. Eileen Gu is poised to emerge as the biggest American breakout star of these Games – while competing under the Chinese flag. She took gold today in the women’s freestyle big air putting down the first 1620 of her career – a four-and-a-half-revolution manoeuvre she admitted never even attempting in training before. France’s Tess Ledeux delivered a double 1620 – the largest rotation ever seen in women’s freeski – but could only take silver in the end. Team GB’s Kirsty Muir finished fifth in an event which was watched by the tennis star Peng Shuai, who was the guest of the International Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach. There was a gripping day’s racing on the snowboards in the parallel giant slalom. Ester Ledecka took gold for the Czech Republic and retained her title in the women’s competition. In 2018 she became the first competitor to win gold in two different sports at the same Winter Games, and on Friday she will attempt to retain her Alpine skiing Super-G title. “It’s a little bit difficult because part of my head is still racing right now on that course, and the other side of my head is already trying to get through the line on the skiing course” the 26-year-old said afterwards. Benjamin Karl of Austria triumphed in the men’s race. Quentin Fillon Maillet of France won the men’s 20km biathlon. A clean shooting round from Anton Smolski of Belarus propelled him to a surprise silver medal. He was one of only two of the 92 competing athletes to achieve it. The British pair of Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat missed out on a medal after Sweden’s Almida De Val and Oskar Eriksson secured a convincing 9-3 victory with two ends to spare in the mixed doubles curling bronze-medal match. Nathan Chen set a world record during his short programme, scoring 113.97 points to break the previous mark set by longtime rival Yuzuru Hanyu. The final is on Thursday. Mexico’s Donovan Carrillo has advanced too – a first for the country. Canada will top Group A and be the No 1 seeds going into the women’s ice hockey knockout stage after they defeated USA 4-2 in the morning’s first game, which is likely to have been a dress rehearsal for the eventual final. Japan beat the Czech Republic in a shootout to top Group B as both sides progress. A regulation time win for either Sweden or Denmark in tonight’s final Group B match will enable them to seal the last quarter-final berth. Things you might have missed I can’t have been the only person hoping mixed team ski jumping meant people jumping simultaneously in formation, right? But that’s not how it worked at all. Late yesterday Slovenia took the inaugural gold. ROC were second, Canada third, and lots of people were left unhappy about how officials applied the rules and expelled jumpers for wearing the wrong suits. There was a controversial end to the men’s 1,000m short track yesterday too. China’s Ren Ziwei appeared to haul back Hungary’s Shaolin Sándor Liu on the line. The Hungarian fell, still just about went over first and celebrated his gold medal. But then a video review penalised him for an earlier infringement, so China ended up with a Ren Ziwei-Li Wenlong gold-silver one-two. You might also enjoy: Emotional Vincent Zhou out of Winter Olympics after positive Covid test ‘This is a parody’: Germany left fuming after night of ski jumping mayhem Team GB prove a hit with China in the Winter Olympic fashion stakes Ireen Wüst makes Olympic history with gold at fifth Games The briefing’s picture of the day The Austrian skier Matthias Mayer defended his Super-G title, adding a third Olympic gold to his collection, but only by a whisker. Ryan Cochran-Siegle of the US finished only 0.04 seconds behind him. Aleksander Aamodt Kilde of Norway finished third. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Tuesday 8 February 7.47pm and 8pm Cross-country skiing – after a gruelling day that started with qualifying in the morning, we’ll see the women’s then the men’s sprint free finals 🥇 8.05pm Curling – Norway are now the only thing that stand between unbeaten Italy and the gold 🥇 9.10pm Ice Hockey – ROC play Finland and Sweden face Denmark in the final group games 🏒 9.35pm Luge – the women will hurtle down on their final run 🥇 Tomorrow – Wednesday 9 February 9.30am – 3.45pm Snowboard – there is a lot of action on Wednesday, including women’s and men’s halfpipe qualification. The women’s cross final is the session finale 🥇 10.15am and 1.45pm – the women’s slalom is contested over two runs 🥇 11am Freestyle skiing – it is the freeski big air day for men 🥇 3pm, 4pm and 7pm Nordic combined – this should be great, as the ski jumping trial round and competition round are followed in the early evening with the 10km cross-country 🥇 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – the men’s competition begins with two group B match-ups: ROC v Switzerland followed by Czech Republic v Denmark 🏒 7pm – 9.20pm Short track speed skating – for women there are 1,000m heats and the 3,000m semi-finals, for men the 1500m goes from quarter-finals all the way to the final 🥇 8.05pm Curling – the round-robin stage gets under way in the men’s competition 🥌 8.20pm Luge – two runs at the Yanqing National Sliding Centre will decide the doubles medals 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6.30pm Beijing time … 1 🇨🇳 China 🥇 3 🥈 2 🥉 0 total: 5 2 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 3 🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 4 3 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 2 🥈 3 🥉 3 total: 8 4 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 2 🥈 3 🥉 2 total: 7 5 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 2 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 5 6 🇸🇮 Slovenia 🥇 2🥈 1 🥉 2 total: 5 7 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 2 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 3 8 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 2 🥈 0 🥉 4 total: 6 Selected others 11 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 4 total: 6 14 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 2 15= 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 The last word I’m so happy right now honestly, the level was insane. I couldn’t have hoped to have skied better today and I’m so proud of all the girls. I went for a switch misty 10 in the last jump which I’ve never tried before. I just wanted to go for it. I’m just so happy I went and tried it” – Kirsty Muir, the youngest British athlete in Beijing, who finished fifth in the freeski big air today.Castleford Tigers After nine seasons under the guidance of Daryl Powell, there is a new era at Castleford in 2022. The former Hull FC coach, Lee Radford, has taken the reins in West Yorkshire and that change has resulted in an overhaul of a Tigers squad that struggled last season. Among their new recruits are players such as Joe Westerman and George Lawler, both of whom will have England aspirations. They should help Castleford squeeze into the play-offs. Coach Lee Radford Captain Paul McShane Key player Niall Evalds Last season 7th Prediction 6th Catalans Dragons Perpignan witnessed more rugby league history in 2021, as Catalans not only finished top in Super League for the first time but reached their maiden Grand Final. While they ultimately came up short against St Helens, the Dragons have strengthened once again in a bid to go a step further. The signing of State of Origin star Mitchell Pearce, on top of the immense squad already assembled in the south of France, could take Catalans into uncharted territory again. Coach Steve McNamara Captain Benjamin Garcia Key player Mitchell Pearce Last season 1st and Grand Final runners-up Prediction 1st and Grand Final winners Huddersfield Giants Last year was always going to be a formative one for Huddersfield in Ian Watson’s first season in charge. A disappointing ninth-placed finish underlined that, but the Giants have gambled on a new half-back pairing of Théo Fages and Tui Lolohea to thrust them back up the table. Will Pryce, son of the former Great Britain half-back Leon, will be one of the competition’s standout talents too, but with so much quality above them, Huddersfield face a tough task to make the play-offs. Coach Ian Watson Captain Michael Lawrence Key player Théo Fages Last season 9th Prediction 8th Hull FC It was a year of frustration for Hull FC in 2021. One of the competition’s biggest spenders failed to deliver on the field and Brett Hodgson faces a significant challenge to change that given the strength of the teams at the top. There have been some impressive signings including the former England scrum-half, Luke Gale, but a lack of depth in the pack could be the thing that prevents Hull from challenging again. Coach Brett Hodgson Captain Luke Gale Key player Jake Connor Last season 8th Prediction 9th Hull Kingston Rovers The surprise package of Super League in 2021, Hull KR look in a strong position to push for the play-offs again this year. They have made one of the signings of the winter in convincing three-times Super League winner Lachlan Coote from St Helens, and their young squad will only be better for the experiences of last year. They are in a tussle with several other teams to make the top six, but history has shown they are entirely capable of doing so. Coach Tony Smith Captain Shaun Kenny-Dowall Key player Lachlan Coote Last season 6th Prediction 7th Leeds Rhinos Last season injuries and suspensions forced Leeds into blooding a number of young players potentially before their time. But that should stand them in good stead, with the Rhinos looking to go one step further than last year’s exit in the play-off semi-finals. With a core of young, British talent and new half-backs in Aidan Sezer and Blake Austin, this could be an exciting year for Leeds. Coach Richard Agar Captain Kruise Leeming Key player Richie Myler Last season 5th Prediction 3rd Salford Red Devils Salford are one of a handful of clubs who look to be in the relegation battle at first glance but they, like some other teams, also have the potential to surprise. That illustrates the quality of the majority of the squads in Super League this year, but also the unpredictability surrounding the Red Devils given the fact they have a new coach, a new half-back pairing and some eye-catching signings. Coach Paul Rowley Captain Elijah Taylor Key player Marc Sneyd Last season 11th Prediction 10th St Helens St Helens’ quest to become the first side in the modern era to win four consecutive Grand Finals is an intriguing one. For the first time in several years there has been major surgery on their strongest side, with mainstays such as Lachlan Coote, Théo Fages and James Bentley departing. The phenomenal Jack Welsby will replace Coote at full-back, and with St Helens’ business in the transfer market shrewd, there is little doubt they will challenge again. Coach Kristian Woolf Captain James Roby Key player Jack Welsby Last season 2nd and Grand Final winners Prediction 2nd Toulouse Olympique Toulouse’s first off-season as a Super League club has been marred by frustration. They have lost key playmaker Johnathon Ford, and recruitment has not quite been as impressive as some expected. They will undoubtedly benefit from the fact that travel to France will be complicated in the early months of the season, and should pick up some wins. But an instant return to the Championship seems likely. Coach Sylvain Houles Captain Tony Gigot Key player Tony Gigot Last season Promoted Prediction 12th Wakefield Trinity While Wakefield have made some signings that have strengthened a squad that struggled throughout parts of 2021, this season looks like it will be another battle for Trinity. They finished last year with a flourish under interim coach Willie Poching, which convinced Wakefield to give him the reins full-time. But you would expect the West Yorkshire club to be fighting with Toulouse at the bottom. Coach Willie Poching Captain Jacob Miller Key player Mason Lino Last season 10th Prediction 11th Warrington Wolves There is palpable excitement in the air at Warrington following the arrival of Daryl Powell from Castleford. The brand of rugby Powell likes his teams to play will undoubtedly refresh the Wolves, and make them one of the teams to track. A club with their quality and spending power undoubtedly have the potential to challenge for silverware, but they are in a cluster of teams who are just behind the standout pair of Catalans and St Helens. Coach Daryl Powell Captain Jack Hughes Key player Gareth Widdop Last season 3rd Prediction 4th Wigan Warriors With a new coach, new signings and new feel to Wigan Warriors, there is a sense rugby league’s most famous club can press the reset button in 2022 after a disappointing few seasons. The new coach Matt Peet has promised Wigan will be attractive to watch with with playmakers Bevan French and Jai Field back fit. But the Warriors might have to be patient in terms of lifting a trophy as this young squad may not be ready just yet. Coach Matt Peet Captain Thomas Leuluai Key player Bevan French Last season 4th Prediction 5thMitt Romney and his niece, Ronna McDaniel, exchanged texts after the Republican National Committee she chairs called Donald Trump’s attempts to overturn his election defeat and the Capitol riot “legitimate political discourse”. Romney, the Utah senator, 2012 presidential nominee and only Republican to twice vote to convict Trump at his impeachment trials, told reporters on Monday he “expressed his point of view”. The RNC used the controversial language in censuring Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, the only Republicans on the House committee investigating January 6. Romney was one of few Republicans to scorn the move, saying: “Shame falls on a party that would censure persons of conscience, who seek truth in the face of vitriol. Honor attaches to Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger for seeking truth even when doing so comes at great personal cost.” But he did not mention his personal connection to McDaniel, who stopped using “Romney” in her name after Trump took over her party – according to the Washington Post, at Trump’s request. Romney also said the censure “could not have been a more inappropriate message … so far from accurate as to shock and to make people wonder what we’re thinking”. On Monday, he told reporters he and his niece had since “exchanged some texts”. “I expressed my point of view,” he said. “I think she’s a wonderful person and doing her very best.” He also said McDaniel was “terrific”. Amid criticism, McDaniel claimed “legitimate political discourse” pursued by Trump supporters in service of his lie that his defeat was the result of electoral fraud “had nothing to do with violence at the Capitol” – language not in the formal censure. She also said she had “repeatedly condemned violence on both sides of the aisle. Unfortunately, this committee has gone well beyond the scope of the events of that day.” That day, 6 January 2021, Trump supporters who attacked the Capitol – after Trump told them to “fight like hell” – did so in an attempt to stop the vice-president, Mike Pence, certifying electoral college results. Seven people died, more than 100 police officers were hurt and more than 700 people face charges. Eleven members of a far-right militia are charged with seditious conspiracy. Trump has promised pardons for rioters if he is elected again and admitted his aim was to overturn the election. On Friday, Pence reflected prevailing opinion among constitutional scholars when he said Trump was “wrong. I had no right to overturn the election.” Jamie Raskin, a Maryland Democrat who led Trump’s impeachment for inciting the insurrection and who sits on the 6 January committee, said: “It’s official. Lincoln’s party of ‘liberty and union’ is now Trump’s party of violence and disunion. “His cultists just called sedition, beating up cops and a coup ‘legitimate political discourse’. They censured Cheney and Kinzinger for not bowing to the orange autocrat. Disgrace.”Tui has said UK customers’ holiday bookings this summer are nearly a fifth higher than before the pandemic, with a rise in long-haul trips to the Caribbean and Cape Verde thanks in part to less strict Covid rules. The travel firm has had a total of 6m bookings for this winter and the summer. In November and December, bookings were affected by the spread of the Omicron variant and fresh Covid-19 restrictions, but Omicron is no longer an issue, its chief executive, Fritz Joussen, said. Holiday bookings have picked up since the start of the new year, as people grew more confident about travelling and the government relaxed testing requirements for travellers. UK summer bookings are up 19% on the summer of 2019 and Tui expects summer bookings overall to be close to pre-pandemic levels. Joussen said many UK households had accumulated high savings during the pandemic and were eager to travel. Long-haul destinations such as the Caribbean and Cape Verde were popular, he said, and customers were buying more upmarket holiday packages as they wanted to treat themselves after two years of the pandemic. “People are selecting holidays that are more expensive. Rather than going to the Canaries, they are going to the Caribbean,” Joussen said. Those destinations are also popular because restrictions are tougher in typical destinations such as Spain, which has banned unvaccinated travellers including children over 12. The worsening cost of living crisis “is of course an issue, but at the same time the savings ratio of households is incredibly high”, he added. He said last week bookings returned to the levels before the pandemic, and that many places would be fully booked at Easter. Germany and other European countries are lagging behind the UK. German bookings overall are 20% below pre-pandemic levels, while package holidays are 20% higher. Tui reported revenues of €3.4bn (£2.8bn) for the three months to 30 September, compared with €1.2bn a year earlier, as more people were vaccinated against Covid-19 across Europe and leisure travel bounced back. The company moved closer to breakeven, with a loss before tax of €71m compared with a €836m loss a year earlier.A few years ago I gave my girlfriend her first sex toy, a small metal vibrator she could wear on a necklace, and then later, a more powerful, waterproof version she could use in the shower. For Christmas, I gave her a third sex toy: an even more powerful model. While our sex life is great, she now struggles to climax just with me, and has become addicted to the quick powerful orgasms the machines give her. I liked our old, slower, sex life, but now I feel I’m in a dystopian climax contest with a hyper-sexualised vacuum cleaner. I’m all for democratising the orgasm, but am I even needed in the bedroom any more? It seems you have excluded yourself from your sexual dialogue, and I wouldn’t be surprised if you felt an urge to confiscate her toys until you two can connect erotically again. Talk gently to your girlfriend. Tell her frankly that you are feeling redundant. Some couples forget that sex between them should not be a competition, nor an arena for one-sided pleasure. Ask her to help you to better understand her body, her arousal and orgasmic needs – without mechanical aids. Help her to slow down and enjoy sensuality as a prelude to better, non-mechanical orgasms. This will be an important learning curve for both of you. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Sitting in the back of my parents’ Peugeot 504 as a child, we listened to songs by the likes of Mukesh, Mohammed Rafi and, of course, Lata Mangeshkar. We were too young to understand what they were about – love, loss, and romance – but we knew all the lyrics. Well, not quite all of them. During her 92 years, Mangeshkar recorded 50,000 songs in 18 languages, breaking records as the most recorded artist in human history. As a playback singer for Bollywood films, she was never seen on screen, but her voice, dubbed in place of the actors’, was unmistakable. She got her start in 1942, and for a woman to have a career this long and distinguished in India, Mangeshkar must have been steely beneath those silk saris – her voice, though, remained gentle, and she was known as “the nightingale”. Choosing just 10 songs from Mangeshkar’s repertoire isn’t easy, and not just because there are so many of them. For me, her catalogue is intertwined with my personal memories. Lag Jaa Gale Written by Madan Mohan in 1964 for the movie Woh Kaun Thi?, this song was picturised (portrayed on screen) by the actor Sadhana. She smoulders in a sleeveless sari and pearls as she sings to her lover; he’s in a tweed jacket, moving between branches of trees, as she tells him this may be the last time they embrace in this lifetime. The black-and-white images are full of longing looks and eyeliner that would make Cleopatra envious. Throughout my life, I’ve heard it on vinyl, cassette, CD, and now I ask Alexa to stream it in my house. The best songs evolve as we do, and though the melody remains the same, the lyrics about embracing the one you love have taken on new meaning. It makes me think of my dad, my first love, my husband, and my sons. I play it to my children every night – so frequently that my eldest, who doesn’t understand Hindi or Urdu, looked up at me during a recent trip to buy parathas and said: “Mama, they’re playing our song!” Chalo Dildar Chalo When I asked my Twitter followers to flood my timeline with Mangeshkar’s songs in the wake of her death, the film Pakeezah was mentioned many times. Made in 1972, it tells the story of star-crossed lovers, one a courtesan and the other a nawab (nobleman). He spots her bare feet as she sleeps on a train and he immediately falls in love. He leaves her a note and the story goes from there: through the twists and turns of fate they meet, separate, and meet again. As playback singers Mangeshkar and Mohammed Rafi pass the lyrics back and forth, the twinkly Chalo Dildar Chalo is picturised by Meena Kumari and Raj Kumar, who gaze into each other’s eyes on a rowing boat. The idea of sailing past the moon with one’s lover takes me back to a time when I was less jaded from folding laundry, and the melody, set against Urdu poetry, captures that period of 70s Hindi cinema. Tujhe Dekha To Yeh Jaana Sanam You can’t talk about Mangeshkar without mentioning the film Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge. Released in 1995, it became known by the acronym DDLJ and changed the face of Hindi cinema. It starred Shah Rukh Khan, who would go on to be the king of Bollywood, and the queen of comedic timing, Kajol. The story followed their serendipitous meetings as they interrailed across Europe, fell in love and fought age-old patriarchal ways. Mangeshkar had been singing for more than 50 years by the time of DDLJ, but we still believed her as the innocent voice of twentysomething Simran whom Raj romanced in a field full of yellow mustard flowers, her hair billowing freely. Ek Pyar Ka Nagma Hai This takes me back to being 13 years old and visiting family in Karachi. The song was more than a decade old by then, but this was one of the songs on my aunt’s well-worn cassette as we drove along the beach in Clifton. It was recorded for the film Shor in 1972, and incidentally was picturised on a beach. Tensions between Pakistan and India are well known, but with her proficiency in Urdu and Hindi, Mangeshkar was equally loved on both sides on the border. The love of her voice and songs was one of the things that united those of us who grew up in the diaspora together. And hearing her cite Pakistan’s Noor Jehan – who was known as “the queen of melody” – as one of her influences, and responsible for influencing her correct pronunciation of Urdu, cemented the connection. Dil Mein Ab Dard Mohabbat Ke Siva Kuch Bhi Nahin Though a devout Hindu, Mangeshkar’s music scope also spanned the Hindu-Muslim divide. While not devotional, this ghazal – a rhyming-couplet poem – is a conversation with God. I remember listening to this track endlessly in my late-20s as I nursed a broken heart. Like many people of Pakistani heritage, I was raised with a love of poetry. But growing up in England meant that I couldn’t read Urdu. The catalogue of ghazals, recorded by Mangeshakar, and Jagjit Singh with whom she recorded the iconic album, Sajda, allowed me to access a huge part of my cultural heritage. I can recite hundreds of couplets from poets ranging from Ghalib, to Waris Shah, and Mir Taqi Mir, thanks in part to artists such as Mangeshkar. The songs made me feel less alone, that someone else had felt the way I did in that moment, and hearing the language of my parents was soothing. O Paalanhaare This is from the acclaimed film Lagaan (2001), starring Aamir Khan, with Mangeshkar singing for Gracy Singh. The film is set in 1893, and the story revolves around a small village in central India, whose inhabitants, burdened by high taxes and several years of drought, find themselves in an extraordinary situation as an arrogant British army officer challenges them to a game of cricket as a wager to avoid paying the taxes they owe. Mangeshkar’s musical scope was as broad as the length of her career, and one must mention the bhajans she sang, like this one: a style of devotional, reverent Hindu song. Although I am Muslim, there is something about the tranquility of this track, alongside Mangeshkar’s and AR Rahman’s voices, that makes it spiritual to me. Kuch Na Kaho In 1994, a film called 1942: A Love Story, brought us the classic soundtrack that featured Kuch Na Kaho. Like all of the Bollywood films I adored as a teenager, it was all longing and smouldering eyes, but with a dash of patriotism. It starred the heart-throb Anil Kapoor, and Manisha Koirala in various chiffon outfits. I couldn’t tell you what the film was about, but I can sing every lyric to the songs from it. There were “happy” and “sad” versions of Kuch Na Kaho – I loved the first, the idea of falling in love, but the sad version made a home in my heart. Lyrics by Javed Akhtar mean it holds the gravitas of a ghazal, but RD Burman’s musical arrangement means it never feels heavy. As Mangeshkar sings about loss, the passing of time, and losing of dreams, she pauses in all the right places, and gives the song a feeling of resignation. Dikhai Diye Yun Ke Bekhud Kiya The first time I heard this song I was so overcome I had to stop the car. The lyrics are taken from the work of 18th-century poet Mir Taqi Mir, who is remembered as Khuda-e-Sukhan or the God of Poetry, and the resulting song is in the film Bazaar, starring the talented Naseeruddin Shah, Farooq Shaikh, and Smita Patil: the kind of film that made Indian cinema great because it cleverly handled the untold stories of what was going on in the underbelly of society. Aaj Phir Jeene Ki Tamana Hai This appears in Guide, produced in 1965 by Dev Anand who also starred alongside Waheeda Rehman. She plays Rosie, the daughter of a courtesan who leaves a bad marriage with the help of Raju, and becomes a successful dancer. The two fall in love along the way. This song was on the soundtrack to my late 20s after I too left a bad marriage, and found myself again. Rehman’s turquoise sari coupled with Mangeshkar’s voice are the epitome of joy to me; she sings about making the decision to live again, and on her terms, of all the things she’s overcome, and how that feels. The sound of the dholak makes me want to dance around the kitchen every single time. Plus the ghungroo in the background, the violins … it’s all so multilayered. Bring me my turquoise sari as I head to collect my kids from school! Aye Dil e Nadan If you listen to my heart, it’s as if it beats to this song from the film Razia Sultan. Made in 1983 and starring Hema Malini and Dharmendra, it tells the story of Razia Sultana, the first female Muslim ruler of the subcontinent, and the only female Muslim ruler of Delhi. The song is full intellectual questions about life and longing. It talks of the desert of life, the endless thirst of life: big questions that people may not expect from a song that has remained popular for decades, but Mangeshkar breathes life into something that could have been too heavy for popular culture. At a time when south Asian women were searching for role models, she allowed us to access past inspirations through music, poetry, and the sound of her flawless voice. She, too, is now part of that history.Rheiss Brown has been “around the block a bit” when it comes to his career, he says. The 30-year-old has had a range of interesting jobs, from working for the London 2012 Olympic Games, to setting up his own Caribbean takeaway shop. Brown launched his food business with a friend in 2018, selling modern Caribbean food such as burgers and wraps. But the work could be gruelling. “Food is demanding, there are no days off and long hours,” he says. Then the pandemic made it even more challenging. “You have to know when it’s time to walk away,” he says. So Brown took a break and planned his next move. After speaking to his cousin, an engineer at Openreach, which runs the UK’s digital network, he realised the organisation’s apprenticeship programme appealed to him. “I’m someone who’s a critical thinker and I’m ambitious,” he says. “I was looking for a new challenge, somewhere with stability and somewhere you can grow.” Brown secured a place on the trainee engineer apprenticeship and enjoyed the structure and routine, as well as meeting people from different backgrounds. “I look forward to going to work, I’m constantly learning, and it’s fulfilling.” A highlight was learning to climb a pole – even though he’s afraid of heights. “I used to enjoy climbing trees and garages as a kid, but the older I’ve got, the more fearful I’ve become. So the first time we did it I was shaking, but my trainer made me feel confident.” Openreach is one of the largest apprenticeship providers in the UK. “We’re recruiting in every town, every region, almost every village,” says Kevin Brady, a HR director at the company. “We’ve recruited more than 10,000 apprentices in the last three to four years and we underpin that with a massive investment in terms of training, with 11 regional training centres,” he says. Openreach is particularly keen to recruit Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) apprentices as BAME workers are underrepresented in the engineering workforce. “We are keen to attract people who reflect our customers,” says Brady. With four networks in place to bring people together from different backgrounds – Pride, Gender Equality, Ethnic Diversity, and Neurodiversity – which are run by, and for, colleagues, Openreach aims to become a fairer and more inclusive employer. The organisation also values people with maturity and life experience, such as Brown, and wants to encourage more women to apply. “We’re trying to change the perception that being a telecom engineer is a man’s job,” says Brady. “And we’ve been able to shift the dial and encourage a lot more women into engineering – for example, in 2021, we recruited more than 600 women engineers.” A recent study by Openreach that put the language used in job adverts under the microscope shows that gender-discriminatory language discourages as many as 50% of female candidates from applying for engineering roles. The study also found that when presented with a gender-inclusive advert, the number of women interested in a role increased by more than 200%, with 60% stating this was because of the way it was written. At Openreach, 20% of trainee engineer recruits are women – a number the company aims to retain as a minimum yearly target. One of Openreach’s women engineers, Anita Josephs, 32, joined as a trainee engineer in 2019, after working in an office for more than a decade. “I’d been with the same company for 11 years,” she says. “And I felt like I wanted to do something different.” So when a colleague shared a post on Facebook, she was immediately interested. “I thought: ‘That looks amazing,’ so I applied and everything was a whirlwind from there.” After an interview and assessment day, Josephs was offered a place. From learning how to use a gas detection unit, to working with customers, Josephs says she was constantly challenged in a supportive environment. Like Brown, she enjoyed learning to climb a pole. “I was nervous and excited,” she says. “It was my 30th birthday, so I thought: ‘It’s good I’m doing something exciting.’” Since finishing her apprenticeship, Josephs has shot up the career ladder and been promoted to field-based coordinator – Openreach employs more than 37,000 people and has a career pathway to give employees such as Josephs a chance to progress. She’s more than happy in her new role. “I don’t get that Sunday evening syndrome,” she says. “In a way, it doesn’t feel like work, it’s varied and I’m using my brain. I’m constantly thinking of solutions and getting out and about and travelling to places.” Usman Shabbir, 30, is currently doing his apprenticeship with Openreach in West Yorkshire, after working at a bank as a contractor. “I enjoyed it, but there was no job security,” he says. Shabbir heard about Openreach through word-of-mouth and it appealed to him for a number of reasons. “There’s flexibility and job security. You can continuously get upskilled. Every day is different. In the office, every day was the same – but now there are challenges.” Shabbir says it’s been great to work with inspiring engineers during the apprenticeship. “I’ve always had support when I need it,” he says. The apprenticeship at Openreach, with all its challenges, has given him more confidence in himself. He says he plans to continue upskilling and to move into new roles within the company once he finishes his apprenticeship. With 7-13 February being National Apprenticeship Week, what advice would the apprentices give others considering a career with Openreach? “I would say to be yourself,” says Brady. “If you’ve got a great attitude, are good with customers and like solving problems, then this is a career that you should think about.” “Go for it,” says Brown. “Life is too short for regrets.” Find out more about apprenticeship opportunities at Openreach, and how to apply hereWelcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. Welcome back to Pushing Buttons! First off, thank you very much to everyone who’s emailed me to ask a question, recommend a game or express their appreciation for the newsletter since it launched. This is fast becoming my favourite part of my job – and though I very passionately believe that video games ought to be taken seriously, I love that this newsletter provides a moment of enjoyable levity in the week for so many of you. That’s part of why games matter: they make us happy. One such email came from reader Iain Noble, who got me thinking about difficulty in video games – a rolling debate that is about to become topical again thanks to Sifu, an unconventional and by all accounts ridiculously hard kung fu game, out today. Ian asks: “As a ‘mature’ gamer aged 74, I find that my reflexes are not what they were. Increasingly I have to turn down the difficulty settings on games in order to play,” he says. “A recent example would be Kena: Bridge of Spirits. Much of the ‘debate’ on gamer forums centres on the difficulty of new games. Do you have any thoughts on this?” Look: I love a difficult game. I grew up at a time when most games were difficult (usually because they were a bit broken, rather than because of their creative intent), and so I developed a high frustration tolerance that usually sees me through games such as Dark Souls and Returnal, where the difficulty is part of the point. I derive immense joy from slaying giant dragons in Monster Hunter and facing up to horrifying bosses in Bloodborne. I find competitive play too stressful – multiplayer shooters and sports games get me too agitated to be enjoyable. But when it’s just me versus the game, I’m all about a challenge. I also think that barely any of these games would be adversely affected by offering some kind of easier mode for players who aren’t wired like I am. Some people derive absolutely no satisfaction from games that punish you for failure; others have disabilities that make games tough to play without adaptations. Also, plenty of players simply don’t have the time to master a game over the course of tens of hours, but might still like to experience its story. If you can offer players options, whether that’s an auto-aim, an easy mode or the ability to skip a scene if it’s too annoying, a la Grand Theft Auto 5, then why not? This particular discourse has become very spicy on social media over the years, with those standing up in favour of difficult games being accused of gatekeeping, and those in favour of universal accessibility accused of undermining developers’ creative vision. Of course not every game has to cater to every player; there are entire genres that have thrown out the idea that something has to be challenging to be fun, including the thriving and diverse world of narrative games and so-called “visual novels”, which put few or no barriers in the way of telling their stories. Nintendo is superb at mitigating the difficulty of newer Mario games by offering optional superpowers: if you flub a level a few times, a magic suit will appear that makes Mario invincible and improves his jump. Nobody’s enjoyment of the game is ruined, and kids can finish the level without actually crying in frustration like I used to over Super Mario Bros 3. I like to relate this to novels, largely because I once spent three painful months struggling through the over 1,000 pages and endless self-referential footnotes of David Foster Wallace’s Infinite Jest. Was it difficult? Yes. Could I have given up if I’d wanted to? Yes. But I found the reward to be worth it, so I kept going. The difference between a book and a game is that a book doesn’t physically close itself if you’re struggling with a paragraph. Games can be as challenging as they like, but they should also try to offer players a way through, where possible. Here’s a great illustration of this concept: a game often (wrongly) touted as one of the most difficult of all time, and one of my personal obsessions, Demon’s Souls (and the Dark Souls series that followed it). This game is hard, in that the combat is tough, you’re often sent a long way back when you die, and everything tries to kill you all the time. But it also mitigates that difficulty by letting you summon other players into your game to help you out. You need a certain amount of skill, but you don’t have to be amazing at the game to see it through. Greater challenges are there for those who seek them: people have played through Souls without taking a single hit, without levelling up, and using mad novelty controllers. But the game adapts to who’s playing it, as much as it can. By contrast, I must admit that I found the rather less adaptable samurai action game Sekiro (from the same developer) so impossibly hard that I had to reluctantly give up. What I wouldn’t have given to be able to call someone in to help me with Genichiro Ashina, the boss fight that marks the frustrating end of a lot of players’ tether. I like to think I’ll see the rest of that game one day, but it’ll require time and determination that I currently do not have. What to play I have been very busy playing a certain very big, very expensive game for a review next week, but I’m not supposed to talk about that just yet, so I’m going to recommend the recently released Life Is Strange: Remastered Collection. These narrative games tell the stories of Max and Chloe, two teenage best friends, and an impending tragedy in their home town of Arcadia Bay. Max has a power that any teen would surely kill for: the ability to rewind time, redo conversations and try to undo her mistakes. Some of the dialogue is a bit corny and contrived, and this kind of game isn’t as unusual now as it was seven years ago when Life Is Strange was first released. But the complicated best-friend relationships between Max and Chloe and Chloe and Amber, the real heart of the game, still stand up so well. In 2015, this was only the second time I’d ever seen female friendship and relationships portrayed like this in a video game, the first being The Last of Us: Left Behind. It’s totally worth revisiting, especially if you missed it at the time. Available on: PC, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, Xbox Approximate playtime: 8-10 hours What to read In the wake of the seven-figure Wordle buyout, our games correspondent Keith Stuart interviewed the New York Times’ head of games about the plan for the viral word game going forward. I learned from this that the NYT is pretty serious about gaming, having hired someone who used to run studios for EA and Zynga to head up their games and puzzles. Overall a reassuring interview, I feel. The Nintendo Switch console has now outsold the Wii, which dominated the 00s, at 103.5 million units. That’s a lot of people playing Mario Kart. In news that should really surprise nobody, development on Grand Theft Auto 6 is “well underway” at Rockstar. Given that GTA V isn’t far from ten years old, I think we’re all ready for something new from one of gaming’s most profitable and infamous series. What to click OlliOlli World review – vibey skater game offers a meditative ride Windjammers 2 review – resuscitated sports game brings back joy of the arcade Dying Light 2: Stay Human review – as dead inside as the zombie hordes Question Block I asked video game writer Alec Meer, who’s written on games for Creative Assembly, Devolver, Housemarque, Amplitude and more, to answer this week’s question: why do video game stories almost never work as films? “The primary reason is that Hollywood screenwriters consider video game writers to be goblinoid nerd-scum who, by their very existence, pollute and debase the noble art of storytelling. As such, it is only right and proper that as many of the filthy, squalid little ideas born from game writers’ twisted, sub-sentient, desperately underpaid minds should be discarded, and replaced with the wondrous fruit of Proper Writers’ superhuman and highly remunerated minds. Hence, the original game’s story is replaced with an entirely different story, devised solely by these latter-day gods. “Secondarily, it has long been perceived wisdom that a game story – which so often involves several hours of a man killing other men in corridors while those men repeatedly shout things like “die, you smelly rotter!” and “eat this extremely deadly grenade, my dude!” – is inherently incompatible with the three-act structure of a movie. This is, in fact, incorrect. Video game stories work brilliantly as films, but only if a) they’re not based on an actual video game and b) the film is called John Wick.” If you’ve got a question for Question Block or anything to say about the newsletter, email us on pushingbuttons@guardian.co.uk.Bamber Gascoigne, the scion of an aristocratic and military family who found fame as the quizmaster of University Challenge and hosted the show for 25 years, has died at the age of 87. Gascoigne, the originator of catchphrases such as “your starter for 10”, died at home in Richmond, south-west London, after a short illness. He was the first host of University Challenge when the cerebral quizshow began airing in 1962, and remained in the quizmaster’s chair for 913 episodes until 1987. Gascoigne was credited with the show’s unexpected success. Although the questions were often far beyond the knowledge of most viewers, his affable manner appealed to audiences, who adopted his hallmark phrases into everyday discourse. Seven years after the show ended its run on ITV, it was revived by the BBC with Jeremy Paxman in the chair. His wife, Christina, said Gascoigne was an “an incredibly generous man and everything he did was pointed towards sharing the gifts of his own life with others”. The couple had had a “fantastic 62 years together full of friends and adventures” and “we never had a quarrel”. She added: “It was 50 years ago that he hosted University Challenge, but that is what everyone remembers. That and his limitless thirst for knowledge, which he retained like a sponge.” The actor Stephen Fry tweeted: “Oh no, not Bamber. He was so kind and warm to us students who sat nervously at those desks. Such an elegant, intelligent man.” Referring to a sketch for the comedy series The Young Ones, Fry added: “He was charming about Griff’s [the actor Griff Rhys Jones] recreation of him as Bambi in The Young Ones too.” Monty Don, the broadcaster and gardening writer, wrote that Gascoigne was “for my generation an iconic TV figure”. Gascoigne came from a long line of top brass military men and landowners. His great-grandfathers included a marquess and a baron, and one uncle was a prime minister of Northern Ireland in the 1960s. His father, Derek Ernest Frederick Orby Gascoigne, was a lieutenant-colonel. Bamber Gascoigne was a pupil at Eton and, after national service, studied English literature at Cambridge. He became a theatre critic for the Observer and the Spectator before being chosen to host University Challenge. He also produced television documentaries, wrote novels and was a trustee of arts organisations including the National and Tate galleries, the Royal Opera House and the National Trust. He was appointed a CBE in 2018. In 2014, Gascoigne unexpectedly inherited West Horsley Place, – a 15th-century stately home in Surrey once owned by Henry VIII – via his aunt the Duchess of Roxburghe. Instead of selling the crumbing 50-room house, Gascoigne and his wife took on its £10m renovation, financed by selling much of its contents, and turned it into an arts centre. A 750-seat opera house was built in the grounds to house Grange Park Opera. Wasfi Kani, the founder of Grange Park Opera, said: “Bamber’s exceptional philanthropy is as extraordinary as the story of how Grange Park Opera came to build the opera house in his garden… “Every step of the way Bamber has been like a father to Grange Park Opera: advising, enthusing, encouraging. The opera house is his. Everyone who crosses its threshold must thank this amazing man.”Facebook and Instagram should tighten privacy rules to protect against the revealing of private residential addresses and images online, known as doxxing, according to the independent body that decides if content should be on the social media platforms. The Oversight Board of Meta, the parent company of Facebook and Instagram, has recommended that an exception to the company’s privacy rules that allows the sharing of private residential information when it is considered “publicly available” should be removed. Such a move “would help Meta better protect people’s private residential information”, the board said in its “policy advisory opinion” published on Tuesday. However, the board said Meta should allow the publication of addresses and imagery of official residences provided to high-ranking government officials, such as heads of state to allow the organisation of protests at official residences. Victims of doxing, include journalists, abortion providers and celebrities such as Scarlett Johansson, Kim Kardashian and Lady Gaga. Among its other recommendations, the board proposes that Meta create a communications channel for victims of doxing and give users more control over how they consent to sharing their private residential information. The Facebook Privacy Violations policy states that “private information may become publicly available through news coverage, court filings, press releases, or other sources”, so when that happens, Meta may allow the information to be posted. Currently, Meta’s internal guidance provided to content reviewers states that information “published by at least five news outlets” is no longer private information for the purposes of the Facebook Privacy Violations policy, the Oversight Board revealed. “Once this information is shared, the harms that can result, such as doxing, are difficult to remedy,” the board added. “Harms resulting from doxing disproportionately affect groups such as women, children and LGBTQIA+ people, and can include emotional distress, loss of employment and even physical harm or death.” As a result, the board recommended removing the exception that allows the sharing of private residential information when considered “publicly available.”. This means Meta would no longer allow otherwise violating content on Facebook and Instagram if it has been “published by at least five news outlets”. It would also no longer allow content if it contains residential addresses or imagery from financial records or statements of an organisation, court records, professional and business licenses, sex offender registries or press releases from government agencies, or law enforcement, the board added. However, the board stated that Meta’s “newsworthiness exception” should be consistently applied, which allows content reviewers to escalate for additional review “public interest content” that potentially violates privacy rules but may be eligible for the newsworthiness exception. The board recommended allowing the sharing of “imagery that displays the external view of private residences” when the property depicted is the focus of the news story but Meta should not allow the sharing of images of private residences when there is a “context of organising protests against the resident”. The board also said Meta should allow the publication of addresses and imagery of official residences provided to high-ranking government officials, such as heads of state, heads of federal or local government, ambassadors and consuls to allow the organisation of protests at publicly owned official residences. Meta declined to comment.Two suspected Islamic State recruits, one of them carrying a British passport, were seized by the Taliban when they tried to slip into Afghanistan last autumn through its northern border, the Guardian can reveal. The men, who were carrying more than £10,000 in cash, military fatigues and night-vision goggles in their bags, were arrested after a tipoff from Uzbekistan, according to a Taliban source with knowledge of the operation. “There was one passport from England and one from another country in Europe,” said the source. He discussed the men’s capture at the border crossing of Hairatan on condition of anonymity as he was not authorised to speak to journalists. An Uzbek source said both men were using British passports when they flew into the Uzbek capital, Tashkent – it is not clear whether one also had a European passport that he used at the Afghan border, or whether the Taliban source was confused – and both had Afghan heritage. Their interception was a stark reminder that while the west was able to end its war in Afghanistan by withdrawing troops, there is no such simple resolution to the security threat posed by international terror groups that shelter inside its borders. Hundreds of Britons went to live under Islamic State in Syria and Iraq, but this is the first time UK citizens have been intercepted allegedly trying to join the group in Afghanistan, and the first reported case of attempted international recruitment to IS since the Taliban took power in the country. Two French citizens are reported to have travelled from central Asia to join Islamic State in Afghanistan several years ago, and another was intercepted in 2017 by Tajik authorities, tried and jailed for five years. The Islamic State’s affiliate in Afghanistan – known as Islamic State Khorasan (ISK), after a historic name for the region – is well funded and resilient. It has carried out multiple large-scale suicide attacks in Kabul and other big cities since the Taliban took control of the country last year, and now has a presence in every province in Afghanistan, a senior UN official said in November. ISK is one of the few options left for westerners drawn to violent extremism in the name of Islam now that the Syrian civil war has largely been reduced to a bloody stalemate in a corner of the country. “One of the reasons people are heading to Afghanistan is simply that there is nowhere else to go. It is perhaps the most likely place for aspiring jihadists who want to see combat,” said Ashley Jackson, an expert in armed groups in Afghanistan and the author of Negotiating Survival, about civilian relations with the Taliban insurgency. Last week US special forces made a rare raid inside north-west Syria to kill Islamic State’s leader, Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi. The risky military operation makes clear that Washington still sees the group as a major threat worldwide. An Uzbek source confirmed that authorities there flagged up the two men to Afghan authorities for checks because they had triggered intelligence concerns but had not violated any Uzbek laws – the country has visa-free entry for UK passport holders – and were not on Interpol wanted lists. “In terms of visas, they were all in order,” he said. “We couldn’t prevent them entering because they are British. We couldn’t prevent them going on because they had Afghan visas.” They told border guards they had family ties to Jalalabad, the capital of eastern Nangarhar province, and initially claimed they were travelling to visit relatives, the Taliban source said. However, they struggled to explain their luggage. As well as cash and military fatigues, they had packed combat vests that the source described as “suicide vests without explosives”. When questioned, the men reportedly claimed these were just things they found “interesting”. They flew into Tashkent and then made the 430-mile (700km) journey to the border crossing by road, the Uzbek source said. They are thought to have collected at least some of the military gear on the way. Although a flight to Islamabad would have offered a much shorter overland journey to Afghanistan’s east, currently the main ISK stronghold in Afghanistan, the men would have needed a visa to enter Pakistan if travelling on UK passports. The Guardian saw photos of the men taken soon after their arrival in Afghanistan. Their appearance matched descriptions of two men whom Taliban members have accused of Islamic State links, independent Afghan sources said. Islamic State’s resurgence The 9/11 attacks in 2001 drew troops from the US and its allies to Afghanistan to topple the Taliban because they had offered safe haven to al-Qaida. Thousands of lives and billions of dollars later, the Taliban are back in power, and although al-Qaida’s leader Osama bin Laden is dead, his legacy lives on. British and US intelligence officials warned even before the Taliban took Kabul that the terror threat from Afghanistan was likely to grow with the group in charge, while western ability to monitor it declined precipitously. The Taliban promised Washington, in the deal that paved the way for America’s withdrawal, that they would not offer save haven to international terror groups. But it was a commitment beyond their power to keep, even if they wanted to. Islamic State and the Taliban have been at war since the group first emerged in the region in 2015, drawing recruits from other international extremist groups. It was beaten down by the combined efforts of US, Afghan government and Taliban forces until 2019 but has since rebuilt. It got a strong boost from Taliban-orchestrated prison breaks in the final days of the republic, which returned between 2,000 and 3,000 fighters to the battlefield, according to a recent report on the group’s resurgence. They included the man thought to have carried out the bloody attack on Kabul airport in the final days of the foreign evacuation last August. More than 400 were foreign fighters, from across central Asia and beyond, including a handful from Jordan and the Maldives, the report said. “My worst fear is that the Taliban underestimate the challenge of combating terrorism as a government,” Jackson said. “They were very effective at taking on Islamic State when they were fighting a rival insurgent group, but it is very different to be an incumbent state power. “It is not in Taliban’s interest to have these groups operate, but we should not underestimate their arrogance and incompetence. They don’t have money, capacity, resources to secure borders, surveil groups and respond.” Recent Islamic State suicide attacks have been a show of their reach, including ones targeting the Taliban leadership at a family funeral service, and another in Kandahar city, where the group has deep roots and solid support. Abdul Sayed, an analyst focused on extremism in Afghanistan, and co-author of the report on ISK, said: “It was an exhibition of strength carrying out for the first time a very brutal attack in Kandahar, stronghold of the Taliban, a message that if we can strike here, we can carry out attacks anywhere in the country.” For now, their focus is mostly domestic and regional. Although some westerners may try to find their way to the group, they are not being actively targeted. “I don’t think ISK will be inviting or welcoming foreign fighters at least until they have an area of territory more firmly under their control. Supporting foreign fighters is an expense and a liability for them,” Sayed said. “They claim to have global ambitions, but I haven’t seen any particular direct threat from their propaganda materials against the west or any western countries specifically. For now they are more directed to regional states.” They are recruiting widely in Afghanistan, from extremist Taliban disillusioned with compromises on hardline doctrine, from poor Taliban footsoldiers who need salaries the government cannot pay, and even from the ranks of former government forces who feel they need protection from Taliban revenge killings. In response the Taliban has deployed harsh tactics, reportedly including extrajudicial killings of young men in eastern strongholds. The two British men, who were taken to the regional capital of Mazar-e-Sharif from the border, may have faced similar treatment. “The mujahideen are very aware of Daesh and are working on this issue very hard,” said the Taliban source, when asked about how the men would be treated. He had no direct information on their future, but general policy for IS detainees was clear, he added. “The rules from our leader are to just finish them, don’t let them do anything. No mercy.” Afghanistan has a long history of human rights abuses committed by all sides in its long-running conflict, intended to stamp out opposition. They usually have the opposite effect, driving recruitment from angry and bereaved communities, and if Islamic State in Afghanistan gets stronger, it will not only be the Taliban’s concern. Vera Mironova contributed reportingThe energy industry regulator has admitted that British households would have been better off weathering the winter gas crisis if it had acted sooner to crack down on financially unstable energy suppliers. The Ofgem chief executive, Jonathan Brearley, told MPs that households could face a bill of about £200m to cover the costs left by a string of energy provider collapses since gas market prices rocketed to record highs last September. “We need a retail sector that’s more resilient and more able to deal with the kind of shock that we’ve seen,” Brearley told the Commons business select committee. “And to be clear, chair, we accept that had we done that earlier this would have been better for customers.” The Ofgem boss, who stepped into the role in February 2020, identified multiple missed opportunities to strengthen the rules for energy suppliers that could have helped to avoid the number of supplier collapses, and the related costs for bill payers and the Treasury. Instead, regulatory decisions had been “dominated” by the desire to create more competition by increasing the diversity of suppliers within the market but that new regulation to protect customers against poorly-run companies was not put forward “with the pace and scale that I think with hindsight that we needed”. “When you look back at the history of Ofgem’s decision-making … without doubt there was a perspective at the time that we needed to diversify the market, and challenge the dominance of the big incumbent companies. That’s what dominated thinking at the time. It’s my view that we should have combined that with greater financial resilience,” he said. The UK has had the largest number of energy company casualties across Europe, after a steady influx of energy startups to the market over recent years, many of which used their customers’ credit balances to provide working capital while offering heavily discounted energy deals. The cost of paying these credit balances back to customers after their supplier has gone bust, combined with the cost of sourcing gas and electricity from the market at current rates, is covered by imposing higher energy bills across the market. Although the regulator brought in plans to toughen financial checks on small suppliers at the beginning of 2020, it has taken action against only one, despite evidence that many in the market relied on their customers’ credit balances to stay afloat. It set out new rules in November last year that will test energy companies against a range of financial scenarios, and set an improvement plan for companies showing signs of financial weakness that could put their customers at risk. In a scathing report late last year, Citizens Advice said there had been evidence of financial weakness in the energy market “long before this year’s crisis”, but that Ofgem had failed to heed warnings, meaning households would bear the brunt of its “catalogue of errors”. Citizens Advice has called for an independent review of the causes of the market collapse, including Ofgem’s regulation and reforms, and action by the government and Ofgem to protect consumers from unnecessarily steep increases to bills to pay for the cost of supplier collapses.Thousands of people with obesity in England will be able to get a new weight loss drug on the NHS after a watchdog approved its use. Patients on the weekly injections have seen their weight fall by an average of 12% after one year, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) said. It has issued draft guidance recommending semaglutide, also known as Wegovy, for adults with at least one weight-related condition, such as obstructive sleep apnoea or heart disease, and a body mass index (BMI) of at least 35. In exceptional cases, some people with a BMI of 30 or more may also be able to access the drug, which is self-administered using a pen injector. More than one in four people in England have obesity, which means having a BMI of 30 or above. Obesity can be physically debilitating and lead to severe and potentially life-limiting conditions. It costs the NHS and the wider economy billions of pounds a year. The new drug suppresses the appetite through mimicking the hormone glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), which is released after eating. Patients inject themselves with semaglutide, which makes them feel full, meaning they eat less and lose weight. “We know that management of overweight and obesity is one of the biggest challenges our health service is facing, with nearly two-thirds of adults either overweight or obese,” said Helen Knight, the programme director in the centre for health technology evaluation at Nice. “It is a lifelong condition that needs medical intervention, has psychological and physical effects, and can affect quality of life. The Nice document says access to current drug treatments for obesity is limited to a specific population who have prediabetes and a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Other drug treatment options available are “poorly tolerated” and “rarely used”. It adds: “The committee concluded that there is a large unmet need for many people living with obesity, and that semaglutide would be a welcome new treatment option.” Nice said people from a south Asian, Chinese, and black African or Caribbean background would be able to access the drug at a lower BMI after advice from a medic. Patients will only be given semaglutide on prescription as part of a specialist weight management service involving input from several professionals, and for a maximum of two years. Clinical trial evidence shows that people lose more weight with semaglutide together with supervised weight loss coaching than with support alone. Experts have previously described the drug as “a gamechanger”, and suggested that for the first time people could achieve through drugs what was only previously possible through weight-loss surgery. In 2020 Boris Johnson launched the government’s anti-obesity strategy, which included plans for a ban on TV and online adverts for food high in fat, sugar and salt before 9pm and ending deals such as buy-one-get-one-free on unhealthy food high in salt, sugar and fat.Up to 40 world leaders are due to make “ambitious and concrete commitments” towards combating illegal fishing, decarbonising shipping and reducing plastic pollution at what is billed as the first high-level summit dedicated to the ocean. One Ocean summit, which opens on Wednesday in the French port of Brest, aims to mobilise “unprecedented international political engagement” for a wide range of pressing maritime issues, said its chief organiser, Olivier Poivre d’Arvor. “It is essential,” Poivre d’Arvor said. “The climate has its Cop process but there is no equivalent for the ocean, at a time when man’s relationship with the marine world has become more and more toxic, and global heating is causing extreme change.” Convened by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, as a highlight of France’s six-month EU presidency, the three-day summit will also focus on efforts to improve governance of the high seas and coordinating international scientific research. Poivre d’Arvor, France’s ambassador for the north and south poles and marine issues, noted that the ocean covers more than 70% of the Earth’s surface, is a vital climate regulator, rich in resources, key to trade and an essential link between nations. “But it’s routinely left aside in major summits, and is now under serious threat from a whole range of different pressures. So this initiative is about raising international ambition and getting concrete, measurable commitments to tangible action,” he said. Poivre d’Arvor, a keen sailor who recently published Voyage en Mers Françaises (Travels in France’s Seas), said France was the world’s second-biggest sea power after the US, with exclusive economic zones totalling more than 11m sq km. “There aren’t many countries that have legitimacy on this, but France is one of them,” he said. “There is a role for ‘blue diplomacy’ in a host of areas, from piracy to pollution to overfishing and carbon storage. I think that’s what interests the president.” Poivre d’Arvor said more than 55 countries would be represented in the Brittany port, with 18 or 19 heads of state and government attending in person and about the same number taking part by live video link or sending recorded messages. The summit will also bring together big shipping companies such as Maersk, CMA CGM and Hapag-Lloyd, which account for nearly 55% of the world’s maritime freight, as well as leading scientists, non-governmental organisations (NGO), policymakers and international bodies. “The principle is that those that are attending are coming with commitments,” Poivre d’Arvor said. “The president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, will announce EU-wide commitments. This is not about debating, it’s about doing.” The first two days of the summit are devoted to 30 public workshops and forums on topics including marine science, the Mediterranean, sustainable shipping, green ports, and cities at risk from rising sea levels, involving about 300 researchers, entrepreneurs and representatives of international organisations including the UN. The high-level summit on Friday morning will involve heads of state and government from all five continents, Poivre d’Arvor said, including leaders of several major world economies, although he would not be drawn on names. NGOs and campaigners have said the summit must deliver in several key areas if it is not to be seen as an exercise in “blue-washing”. Many, including Greenpeace, have said the most pressing problem is governance of the high seas – waters outside of national economic exclusion zones, which cover about half the globe. Here, the main goal is to protect biodiversity and marine ecosystems and make progress on some kind of legal order before a UN international conference in New York in March 2022. Campaigners have said they expect to see the summit produce “ambitious targets and solid progress” towards that meeting. Deep-sea exploration – below 200 metres – is another controversial topic, with mining companies, in particular, starting to show an interest in rare minerals, including nickel and cobalt, beneath parts of the ocean floor. France abstained from voting on a call at last September’s IUCN world conservation congress for a moratorium on deep-sea mining and Macron has since said he favours more deep-sea exploration. The Deep Sea Conservation Coalition has said France must formally back the mining moratorium, likening biodiversity at the bottom of the ocean to that in tropical rainforests. Credible pledges to place 30% of the world’s marine habitats in protected zones – compared with the current 7.7% – by 2030 is another international target campaigners want reinforced at the summit, as are concrete steps to tackle overfishing, a politically sensitive subject that some fear may not even be raised by the heads of state. Nineteen NGOs including the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition, Sea Shepherd, Greenpeace, the High Seas Alliance Environmental Justice Foundation wrote to the French newspaper Le Monde on Monday to demand “major political announcements that will allow significant progress for the health of the global ocean”. They called on delegates to “express their full support for the conclusion of a strong, ambitious and legally binding treaty for international waters in 2022”, as well as for a political decision to relaunch consultations with Russia and China and measurable progress on overfishing. “Decision-makers at the summit have a real political opportunity to raise the importance of the ocean’s health in international policymaking,” the signatories wrote. “The time is no longer for words and observations; the solutions exist, and all that is missing is the political will to put them in place.”Ethiopia has committed a wide range of human rights violations in its war against Tigrayan rebel forces, including mass killings, sexual violence and military targeting of civilians, according to a landmark legal complaint submitted to Africa’s top human rights body. Lawyers acting for Tigrayan civilians said the complaint, filed on Monday, marked the first time that the African Union’s human rights commission had been asked to look into the conduct of Ethiopian troops in their war with the northern region’s rebel forces. The alleged violations, “could amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity, but further investigation would be required”, said Antonia Mulvey, executive director of the rights organisation Legal Action Worldwide (Law), which submitted the complaint with the US legal firm Debevoise &amp; Plimpton and the Pan African Lawyers Union (Palu). “The African Commission [on Human and Peoples’ Rights] has a unique opportunity to stand by victims and survivors from this conflict, to order emergency measures to stop unlawful killing of civilians trapped in Tigray and to hold Ethiopia to account,” added Mulvey. Reporting to the 55-member African Union, the commission’s role is to investigate alleged human rights violations and make recommendations to heads of state and government. It can also make referrals to the African court on Human and Peoples’ Rights, the union’s judicial arm. The Law-Palu complaint alleges that since the conflict with the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) erupted in November 2020, federal forces in Ethiopia have committed widespread violations, including the military targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure; mass and extrajudicial killings; gender-based sexual violence; arbitrary arrest and detention; mass displacement of civilians; destruction of property, food, and religious sites and cultural heritage; ethnic discrimination; and enforced information blackouts. In a statement, lawyers said the allegations were based on the testimony of Tigrayan victims who could not be listed as complainants due to fear of reprisals from the government in Addis Ababa. One written testimony, seen by the Guardian, contains allegations that Ethiopian and Eritrean forces carried out killings and rapes in the Shire region of Tigray in November 2020. “We all heard witness accounts of underage girls and old women being raped and gang-raped by the joint forces. Priests and deacons were slaughtered by the soldiers,” the testimony says. “The Ethiopian government has called the military operation in Tigray a ‘law-enforcement operation’,” the testimony continues. “But what we saw in Shire … was quite different. We saw with our own eyes that the military campaign was not only about eliminating the TPLF, but also about destroying the people and development of Tigray.” A joint investigation released in November by the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission and the UN found there were “reasonable grounds” to believe that all parties to the conflict in Tigray had, to varying degrees, committed human rights violations. Some of those breaches, it added, might amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity. On Monday, Law said that, while reports suggested that abuses had been committed by different parties, Tigrayan civilians constituted “the overwhelming majority of victims”. Mulvey, a British solicitor who served on the UN’s fact-finding mission on Myanmar, said Law was keen to work alongside the commission’s existing inquiry into Tigray “to put an end to the impunity that has allowed these crimes to continue”. Donald Deya, chief executive officer of Palu, said: “The government of Ethiopia is obliged by both its constitution and international law to protect all its citizens and residents from mass atrocities and violations of their human rights. “Where it is unable or unwilling to uphold the same, as is the case here, we must seek recourse to competent international institutions. Hence, our urgent appeal to the African commission,” he said. There was no immediate comment on the complaint from the Ethiopian government or the commission, which is based in the Gambia. Ethiopia is not a state party to the founding statute of the international criminal court in The Hague, in effect making a trial there for alleged war crimes impossible without a referral from the UN security council. That possibility is considered highly unlikely due to objections from Russia and China, which can veto any such motion as permanent members of the council.Shoppers across the UK passing their local Primark were puzzled this weekend as they spotted Greggs steak bakes and vegan sausage rolls discreetly tucked into mannequins’ handbags and pockets in window displays. Their curiosity was piqued further on Primark’s social media accounts, which displayed a receipt showing items from the Gregg’s menu with a curious emoji. The secret has now been revealed as the two popular high street retailers announced a partnership on their social media channels in a carefully curated PR moment, announcing the launch of a new fashion line on 19 February and the opening of Tasty by Greggs, a new cafe in Birmingham’s Primark branch said to be the “world’s most Instagrammable Greggs”, a week before on 12 February. The launch video promised: “One does tidy food, one does tidy fashion. Together we’re unstoppable.” The errant baked goods prompted a lot of speculation about the collaboration on social media at the weekend. One commenter, whose tweet received thousands of likes, said: “Shoutout to whichever stone cold legend at Newcastle Primark has accidentally left a load of Greggs in the window display.” The 130-seater cafe will open in Primark’s largest store selling Gregg’s signature dishes including sausage rolls, bakes, pizza, desserts and coffee. It promises “the ultimate Greggs experience”, replete with tables decorated to look like doughnuts and a doughnut swing where the brand hopes customers will take photos to post on Instagram. Greggs has yet to reveal the clothing line, and whether it will feature prints of its iconic baked goods, however one PR image shows a simple hoodie featuring the Greggs logo. The limited-edition range of 11 pieces will be available in 60 stores. Raymond Reynolds, the Greggs business development director, said that customers had “continually asked” for Greggs branded clothing. “Fans can quite literally show their love for Greggs on their sleeves,” he said. Greggs and Primark will open a pop-up boutique in Soho between 17 and 18 February to “offer eager fashionistas the chance to get their hands on some of the new collection before the rest of the nation”, with two pieces available for free to those who manage to secure a slot when bookings open on 10 February. Tim Kelly, the director of new business development at Primark, said the retailer was looking to team with brands “we know [our customers] love” on clothing ranges and in-store experiences. Collaborations are increasingly popular among brands to enable them to reach two sets of customers at once. One of the most iconic brand partnerships is between Nike and Apple, which was formed in 2006 and includes Apple Watch Nike, a collaboration that brings together technology and fitness.Late on Saturday night in Edinburgh’s Old Town as we walked back to our hotel, the strains of a familiar tune floated past on the chill, gusty breeze. In the pub around the corner they were still having a grand old time and a loud rendition of “Take Me Home, Country Roads” was in full swing. Travelling revellers, fellowship, simple pleasures: if you were to bottle the essence of the Six Nations it was right there. The opening weekend of rugby was enjoyable, too, give or take the inclement weather. The grounds were sold out and the singing of the anthems was as heartfelt as ever. There were record viewing figures on French television, with seven million apparently tuning in to watch the end of Sunday’s game against Italy. The Monday papers were full of lively follow-up and round two cannot come around quickly enough. So the obvious question is this: how would you improve the men’s championship from here? Not in the parochial I-hope-our-lot-win sense but for the greater good. More teams? Fewer teams? Teams from the southern hemisphere? More John Denver? Or make no changes at all? Right now is the ideal moment to revisit the debate, with sodden clothes still drying and memories of a classic weekend still fresh. Let us start with the annual conversation about Italy, currently on 33 successive Six Nations defeats and counting. The former British &amp; Irish Lions captain Sam Warburton, speaking on the BBC’s revamped Rugby Special, reiterated his view that the “glass ceiling” protecting the Azzurri from dropping out of the championship and being replaced by, say, Georgia would not be permitted in any other forward-thinking business or industry. Then again, maybe Warburton should have checked out the weekend results from the Rugby Europe Championship. In Tbilisi on Sunday, in front of a far-from-capacity crowd, Georgia were held to a surprise 25-25 draw by Portugal. The Portuguese deserved it, too, their sharpness out wide cancelling out Georgia’s close-quarter strength. It was the first time Georgia have not won a game in the second-tier competition since 2017. Interesting, no? What a story it would be if Portugal go all the way and top the table next month. Or Romania, Spain or Russia for that matter. And imagine if such a victory were a passport to a Six Nations play-off against the bottom-placed Six Nations side? Are we sure there would be limited televisual value and public interest? If it were marketed properly across Europe and broadcast on a free-to-air channel, the viewing figures would surely be significant. Three, two, one … here come the naysayers. Ask the treasurers of Italy and Wales and they will roll their eyes, clutch their chests and warn of financial oblivion should the “cosy club” be revamped. The Six Nations hierarchy will also quietly remind you it is a privately run competition. They can invite – or retain – whoever they want. Diluting the quality of the tournament is in no one’s interests. But hang on. What about South Africa? Such is the financial clout of the Six Nations that adding the Springboks to the mix is regarded, in Johannesburg and Cape Town at least, as a no-brainer. Why would the Europeans not want the world champions supping at the top table and potentially enriching the rugby, the wine list and the weather? With the private equity firm CVC apparently talking to SA Rugby, having already invested in northern hemisphere competitions, the money might be persuasive as well. So what should happen next? A couple of immediate points need stressing. Simply axing Italy and reverting to the Five Nations would be a calamitous admission of collective failure. The Six Nations would also instantly surrender any claim to being a beacon of integrity and fair play if South Africa are suddenly fast-tracked with the rest of Europe still ostracised. The Boks, if they wish to enter, should debut in the second-tier tournament and fight their way up on merit. In that event, could the following be a feasible scenario? Step forward the Seven Nations, commencing in 2024. It would comprise the current six nations plus the winner of the 2023 Rugby Europe title. Thereafter there would be an annual promotion/relegation play-off, instantly breathing fresh hope into rugby across the continent. In 2025 it might be Georgia or Italy v South Africa in Tbilisi or Rome. The following year, who knows? The Seven Nations, too, would introduce a fairer split of three games at home and three away but retain the biennial home and away roster. True, there would be some extra fixtures to be squeezed in but it would take down Warburton’s glass ceiling. Crucially the emphasis would be on enhancing what already exists rather than selfishly ring-fencing the interests of a few. Then again, would the pluses ultimately outweigh the minuses? Adding South Africa would have major implications for the Lions, among others. How many people really want to spend a long weekend in Joburg or Pretoria rather than Rome? What about the increased carbon footprint? And would it not be logistically simpler for the championship to stay purely European and for the global element to be reserved for the July and November windows instead? Questions, questions, with no definitive answers as yet. But if, in 2032, you walk past a busy bar in Durban, Lisbon or Tbilisi and hear John Denver playing, it’ll be proof that international rugby is in rude health. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly rugby union email, The Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.If the polymathic Bamber Gascoigne was ever irked by the fact that he was best known to the British public for the phrase: “Fingers on buzzers … your starter for 10,” he never showed it. More than 30 years after his retirement as the quizmaster on University Challenge – a post he had held for a quarter of a century between 1962 and 1987 – the phrase still dogged his footsteps, despite everything else he did. Gascoigne, who has died aged 87, with his easy patrician manner, born of a family steeped in centuries of aristocratic connections, proved an inspired if incongruous choice to chair a television quiz show on a commercial channel, even in the early 1960s. He looked and spoke like a junior don, gradually evolving into an uncensorious professor. He did not mind being parodied by Griff Rhys Jones in the anarchic 80s Young Ones comedy series, or by Mark Gatiss in the film Starter for Ten in 2006 – about a student desperate to appear on the show – and he even played himself in an episode of the Jonathan Creek mystery series. His genial presence – fair, curly hair and tolerant smile – hovered over University Challenge long after it was revived in 1994 under his more acerbic successor, Jeremy Paxman, with his displays of incredulity at the ignorance of contestants. Gascoigne never showed such impatience. Gascoigne, who was not much older than the contestants when the quiz started (and did not look much older than them when Granada first ended it in 1987), had much to do with the show’s enduring success. Despite being pitched at a level of knowledge above the heads of many viewers, it did not patronise or condescend either to those taking part or those watching. The show, originally based on an American television quiz called College Bowl, required only 40 days a year of Gascoigne’s time, for which he was initially paid £40 a week. That meant he could indulge his wide-ranging other interests, including opera, theatre and the arts along with a number of serious historical studies, some linked to television documentary series. “University Challenge gave me economic freedom, although not much,” he told the Daily Telegraph in 2012. “I love playing games, the students were incredibly nice and it was great fun. I have only watched it two or three times since – but then I never watched myself either. We don’t watch television as early as 8.30 in the evening so I have only seen it very few times.” Gascoigne was the son of Lt Col Derick Gascoigne and his wife, Midi O’Neill. He was descended from a long line of military men and the Gascoignes traced their roots back through Yorkshire landowners to the 14th century. Bamber was a family name too – an 18th-century predecessor of the same name had been an MP. His uncle Terence O’Neill was the Ulster Unionist prime minister of Northern Ireland in the 60s. There were family connections also with the Cecils, Tudor and Victorian power-brokers and prime ministers. He was educated at Sunningdale prep school, Berkshire, and was a scholar at Eton. He claimed that the scholarship boys were looked on as impoverished scum and although he said he enjoyed his time at the college, he would not have sent a son there because he did not believe in the separation of social groups. National service in the Grenadier Guards was followed by an English literature degree at Magdalene College, Cambridge, and a year in the US at Yale. At Cambridge he reviewed plays for Granta and then became theatre critic of the Spectator and the Observer, from which he was plucked to chair the new university quiz show. At Cambridge he had written a revue, Share My Lettuce, which was produced in the West End, starring Maggie Smith and Kenneth Williams. Over the years it was followed by other plays: Leda Had a Little Swan made it to New York in 1968 (it had been refused a licence by the lord chamberlain, whose responsibilities then included censoring plays, in London the previous year); The Feydeau Farce Festival of 1909 was put on at Greenwich in 1972 and Big in Brazil was produced at the Old Vic in 1984. For television Gascoigne wrote and presented a major documentary series for Granada called The Christians in 1977, co-funded by Dutch and German channels. The series took three years to research and present and Gascoigne insisted – in the face of criticism from the church – that his lay status was precisely what was required: he said he wanted Christians to assume he was a believer and non-Christians to assume he was not. Further documentaries included Victorian Values in 1987, Man and Music in 1987 and The Great Moghuls in 1990. Usually these were accompanied by books. There were also novels, potboilers and short histories as well as Quest for the Golden Hare (1983), documenting the treasure hunt that followed the publication of the bestselling book Masquerade (1979) by Kit Williams, which set readers clues to finding a precious object hidden somewhere in Britain. From 2000 he became editor-in-chief of historyworld.net and he also accumulated trusteeships in the arts, at the National and Tate galleries, at the Royal Opera House and the National Trust. He was appointed CBE in 2018. Gascoigne was unexpectedly left a 16th-century stately home, West Horsley Place – once owned by Henry VIII – near Guildford, Surrey, by his great-aunt Mary Innes-Ker, the Duchess of Roxburgh, who died aged 99 in 2014. The house, with its 50 rooms and 380 acres of grounds, was in a dilapidated condition, as she had lived alone for many years and had not been able to maintain the building. “Every time there was a new drip, she thought: get a new bucket,” he said in 2018. Instead of selling the property, as the duchess had imagined he would, Gascoigne and his wife, Christina, decided it should be renovated and turned into a community arts centre. The £10m cost of repairs was largely met by selling much of the contents, including paintings by Edward Burne-Jones and a study for Lord Leighton’s famous Flaming June, at Sotheby’s. A 700-seat opera house was built by Grange Park Opera in the grounds and the house itself is intended to be used for conferences, classes and for filming. “We both felt it was a bit feeble not to give it a shot,” he explained. “A place that for several centuries has been entirely private, somewhere people did not even really know was there, can look forward to many centuries of people enjoying it. I think that’s a wonderful thing.” The duchess’s ashes are buried under the orchestra pit. Gascoigne had met Christina (nee Ditchburn), a photographer and ceramicist, at Cambridge, and they married in 1965. She survives him. • Arthur Bamber Gascoigne, writer and broadcaster, born 24 January 1935; died 8 February 2022 • This article was amended on 10 February 2022. The artworks sold from West Horsley Place included a study for Lord Leighton’s Flaming June, rather than the painting itself, as an earlier version stated. Flaming June has been in the collection of the Museo de Arte de Ponce in Puerto Rico since the 1960s.The 22-year-old skateboarder and rising social media star Josh Neuman was killed in a plane crash in Iceland along with the pilot and two other men, authorities have confirmed. Neuman created the most popular skateboarding videos of all time, and his YouTube channel had approximately 1.2 million followers. Nicola Bellavia, 32, a skydiver and social media influencer from Belgium, and Tim Alings, 27, sponsorship manager for the Belgian fashion brand Suspicious Antwerp – which Neuman was in Iceland to work with – were also killed along with the pilot, Haraldur Diego, 49, a prominent Icelandic aviators who ran photography tours. The bodies were discovered on Sunday in Lake Thingvallavatn using a remote submarine and sonar, though bad weather has prevented their retrieval, according to Sky News. The Cessna 172 disappeared from radar on Thursday without sending a distress signal. It was eventually found in Iceland’s second-largest lake, about 30 miles east of the capital, Reykjavik, after a hunt by more than 1,000 members of Iceland’s Search and Rescue organization. A Suspicious Antwerp spokesman, Bram Boriau, told Associated Press that the purpose of the flight was to capture footage of Iceland’s stunning scenery. “All persons present were hugely passionate about travel and content creation, hence these themes were the main focus of the trip,” Boriau said.Comedy is a barometer of popular attitudes. What people deem funny, and what they feel is acceptable to laugh at, tells us a lot about society. After the comedian Jimmy Carr “joked” that the Nazis’ industrialised extermination of Europe’s Roma population was a “positive”, several Tory ministers decided that a line did actually exist in public discourse, and that this time it had well and truly been crossed. Carr’s comments were “abhorrent and they just shouldn’t be on television,” declared the culture secretary and newly minted tribune of the oppressed, Nadine Dorries. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, denounced Carr’s “horrid” joke and called for audiences to boycott him. To paraphrase Luke 15:7, surely there is more joy in heaven over the repentance of one Tory woke-basher than 99 people who haven’t used public platforms to stigmatise minorities. Yet, as disturbing as Carr’s grotesque remarks were, the audience’s laughter – rather than, say, shocked silence or gasps – was at least as horrifying. Why did so many express public amusement at the enslavement, torture and gassing of a group of people? Because in the UK, Gypsies, Roma and Travellers are a minority that is acceptable, permissible and indeed fashionable to stigmatise and hate – and the ministers condemning Carr have played a role. Granted, the Tories are guilty of many sins, but inventing this ancient hatred is not one of them. Roma people have been subjected to profound persecution across Europe since the middle ages – from enslavement to expulsion to murder – and England’s so-called “Egyptians Act” of 1530 sought to remove them en masse. But the Tories continue to exploit and stoke this bigotry for political gain. Back in 2007, one Tory pundit congratulated Dorries for writing about “why Gypsies and Travellers aren’t welcome in her constituency”; in that post, the then backbencher detailed her “solution to the Traveller problem”, in which they should be legally forbidden from following a nomadic tradition which has been on these shores for centuries. When Javid was the home secretary, he was condemned in Travellers Times in 2019 for “drawing on a long tradition on Conservative politics of using Gypsy and Traveller families as a community of fear and blame”, after he drew up proposals to further criminalise them. Indeed, there was little outcry at the Tories’ attempts to exploit anti-GRT sentiment for political gain in the 2019 election. Michael Gove listed cracking down on “illegal Traveller incursions” as a key election priority. Tory candidates lined up to centre hostility to GRT camps in their election campaigns, while the Tory candidate for Crewe and Nantwich led a demonstration against the local GRT community. This ugly rhetoric has only continued since: the Tory MP for Ashfield, Lee Anderson – a former Labour councillor – denounced local Travellers as thieves likely to be “seen leaving your garden shed at 3 o’clock in the morning, probably with your lawnmower and half of your tools”. Meanwhile, when the Scottish Tory MP Douglas Ross was asked what he’d do if he was prime minister for a day, rather than choosing, say, housing the homeless or fighting child poverty, he opted instead for “tougher enforcement against Gypsies and Travellers”. There’s a long history of this – Michael Howard was condemned for “tapping into the deepest vein of bigotry in our society” when he made clearing unauthorised Gypsy camps a key plank of the Tories’ 2005 election campaign – but it’s not just the Tories who have mined this rich seam of prejudice. As Labour home secretary, Jack Straw once described Gypsies as people who “think that it’s perfectly OK for them to cause mayhem in an area, to go burgling, thieving, breaking into vehicles, causing all kinds of other trouble including defecating in the doorways of firms and so on”. (The Home Office later clarified he was attacking “criminal gangs” of Travellers rather than the group as a whole.) The New Labour stalwart David Blunkett was reprimanded by David Cameron after warning of riots if Roma people did not integrate more. But this Tory government has fused hateful rhetoric with laws that persecute. Their policing bill has not only sought to suppress peaceful protest by reclassifying trespass as a criminal rather than a civil offence; it would allow police to arrest GRT people – who are facing a woeful lack of authorised sites where they can settle – if they set up on unauthorised ones. Police could confiscate their homes, impose crippling fines and lock them up for up to three months. A hostile environment has been built for this intentionally marginalised minority by stripping them of legal spaces for them to move to, and then when they are driven by lack of options to illegally pitch, they face the full weight of the state crashing down on their backs. Against this backdrop, is the laughter at Carr’s mockery of genocide surprising, even as it shocks us? This is a country in which only four in 10 parents would be happy for their child to hang out at the home of a GRT friend, in large part because powerful people have sent a strong signal to the public: that the centuries-old bullying of this minority is not only understandable, it is acceptable. The real reason there has been little to no public education on the Nazi genocide of Europe’s Roma people is straightforward: it would mean a reckoning with a deep-rooted prejudice which continues to this day. That’s why Carr’s obscene “joke” was received by enthusiastic laughter – and the politicians now wringing their hands are partly to blame. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistRebekah Vardy said she would “love” to leak stories about Coleen Rooney to the media, according to messages disclosed at the high court. The court filings suggest Vardy and her former agent Caroline Watt had an ongoing relationship with reporters at the Sun newspaper and discussed at length how to leak stories to the tabloid. Vardy is suing Rooney for libel in the so-called “Wagatha Christie” case, over an allegation that Vardy was responsible for leaking a series of stories from Rooney’s private Instagram account to the Sun. Both women are married to footballers – respectively Leicester City’s Jamie Vardy and the Derby County manager, Wayne Rooney. The filings also show that Vardy described Rooney as a “nasty bitch” and a “cunt” who “needs to get over herself” in private messages disclosed at a court hearing on Tuesday. The court heard Vardy and Watt had discussed a post on Mrs Rooney’s private Instagram where her car had been damaged in January 2019. Vardy told Watt she “would love to leak those stories”. Rooney ran a sting operation in 2019 by putting three fake stories on her Instagram account and slowly reducing which accounts could view the posts. When only Vardy could see the Instagram posts, alleges Rooney, and the fake stories kept appearing in the Sun, she went public with the claim. Vardy strongly denies the accusation and has run up a multimillion-pound legal bill bringing a libel case. After one story from Rooney’s private Instagram appeared in the Sun, Rooney posted to her followers: “Someone on here is selling stories again to this scum of a paper. It’s sad to think someone who I have accepted to follow me is betraying [me] for either money or to keep a relationship with the press.” Discussing this post, Watt allegedly acknowledged a role in providing information to the Sun, according to messages disclosed to the court: “Such a victim. Poor Coleen … And it wasn’t someone she trusted. It was me.” The duo also raised concerns that Rooney increasingly suspected Vardy of leaking to the media and had unfollowed her on Instagram. Watt suggested that if any issues were raised they would claim that “one of the girls in the office has my old laptop that had your passwords saved on it, so it will have been them”. At one point, according to the messages, Vardy says she has no idea how Rooney would ever know who was responsible for providing information “unless halls [Sun journalist Andy Halls] has leaked it”. Vardy also complained that the Sun was not buying her photographs, telling Watt “we still need to make money” and suggesting they contact senior executives at the newspaper. Some of the private messages relating to the case are missing, for a variety of unfortunate reasons. Vardy’s former agent said her mobile phone was accidentally dropped in the North Sea shortly after Rooney’s lawyers requested access to the device. “Coincidentally, around the same time, all media files from Mrs Vardy’s WhatsApp conversation with Ms Watt also bizarrely disappeared (and from all backups), whilst apparently in the process of exporting it to her solicitors,” said Rooney’s lawyers. Jamie Vardy, the Leicester City striker, also said that his “WhatsApp was hacked and all conversations were deleted and could not be restored”, while declining to allow Rooney’s lawyers to examine his phone. The laptop used by Vardy during the crucial period also “no longer functions”, while messages between Rebekah Vardy and Halls appear to have been deleted. Rebekah Vardy’s own expert described the data recovery situation as “surprising” and “unusual”. The disclosures suggests Vardy and Watt had repeated conversations about stories going to the Sun. At one point they discussed whether to provide the newspaper with a story about an England footballer who had a secret child as a result of an affair. A month later the Sun published a story with the headline “Married England ace has lovechild”. Vardy has accepted that payments were made to her by the Sun in the run-up to Rooney’s accusation. Rooney’s lawyers are seeking disclosure of these payments. When Rooney went public with the accusation that Vardy was leaking articles to the Sun, Vardy texted her agent: “That’s war.” According to the messages disclosed at the court hearing, her agent replied: “You will have to say that you don’t speak to anyone about her but that recently your insta has even been following people you don’t follow … Just say you have allowed a company to access it for sponsored posts and a former social media agency that you worked with too.” Rooney’s lawyers claim that “Vardy was a repeated leaker of private information to the Sun”. Vardy denies this and her lawyers say there is no evidence that she leaked the key stories at the centre of the case. At the high court, they said the conversations between Vardy and Watt were evidence the duo were leaking messages from Instagram to the Sun: “It is clear from the disclosure that Ms Vardy knew what Ms Watt was doing. … She knew it was happening and the lack of any criticism that this was going on, let alone surprise, demonstrates that this was agreed.” The libel case is due to go to trial later this year.Amid the excitement generated at Aston Villa by the arrival of Steven Gerrard as manager in November and signings such as Philippe Coutinho in January, it is easy to forget that less than three months ago folks around Villa Park were wondering whether the club might slip into a relegation battle. If there is one match that encapsulates how badly pre-season plans went awry, it was the home game against West Ham on 31 October. There was a surprise before kick-off when the team sheet revealed that Dean Smith had dropped Tyrone Mings, who had been the linchpin of Villa’s defence since joining in 2019 when they were 10th in the Championship, becoming so influential that he was appointed club captain after Jack Grealish’s departure last summer. West Ham beat Villa 4-1, with Mings introduced as a second-half substitute after his usual partner in central defence, Ezri Konsa, was sent off. When Villa also lost their next match, against Southampton, the club took the difficult decision to jilt Smith, who had led them to promotion and survival. In advance of Wednesday’s match against Leeds United, Mings reflects with characteristic intelligence on a see-saw season, speaks of higher points to come and tells of how being dropped drove him to take stock. “Yes, it was a surprise,” he says. “Without bashing a man who doesn’t have the ability to defend himself any more because he’s no longer the manager – and respectfully because we went on an amazing journey together – I didn’t agree with the decision at the time. It felt like I was being scapegoated a little bit. But the manager is the manager and he felt that was the right moment to take me out of the team. “I used it as a time of reflection. I had to look at my performances and ask: ‘Have my performances been good enough? No, probably not.’ We were struggling as a team and I was struggling with my performances after a summer with a short break [because of Euro 2020]. So did I want to blame the manager for taking me out of the team or show the manager that he shouldn’t take me out again with my performances when I got back in? That was the route I took. Unfortunately for the manager he lost his job quite soon after that so we’ll never know what the journey would have looked like since then.” What, specifically, did Mings do to ensure he regained his best form? “I think I stopped worrying about other people so much,” he replies. “I was new into the role of captain at the time and my initial concerns were trying to get the team firing again because I felt, as I do now, such a weight of responsibility to get the team successful and to keep improving. Sometimes when you care so much, the losses and bad performances hurt even more. “I was probably trying too much to fix all the problems we had rather than just worrying about being a good centre-back. So when I was dropped it allowed me to strip everything back and say: ‘You know what, I’m going to be the best centre-back I can be and contribute to the team that way, give us a solid platform to build from, try to keep balls out of our net and do everything a good centre-back should do.’” When it comes to balancing captaincy duties with individual responsibilities, Mings could have few better advisers than Gerrard. “We have spoken about how he was as a captain. Of course I can’t emulate exactly how he was, nor would it be sensible for me to try to emulate any other person … but we spoke about the differences in how you lead, when the responsibility lies with you to speak to players off the pitch and how you empathise with people – all those different things that come with being captain or a senior player. “He’s given me some really insightful information about how he was. Some of it will stick and some of it will be unrelatable. At the moment I can’t relate to winning the Champions League or competing for stuff like that!” Villa hope such stuff lies ahead. Mings has certainly enjoyed working with Gerrard so far. “It’s absolutely brilliant,” he says. “There are times when you can see Steven Gerrard the captain. Sometimes when he joins in training he still has that winning mentality on the pitch. As a manager he’s fantastic. He’s crystal clear in terms of how he wants us to play, the team he wants us to be and the values he wants us to stand for. When the messaging is so clear, you know exactly what you’re buying into, how to buy into it and how to deliver what he wants. And then when you step on to the pitch, it’s up to you whether you do it or not. “Steven Gerrard the manager is pushing us to limits that maybe some of the team didn’t know we could go to. We’ve had the emergence of some really good young players, while for some more established players, their game has gone to another level.” And, of course, there has been the arrival of Coutinho. “It gives everybody a lift that Villa can attract that calibre of player. We see what a fantastic player, but more importantly, what a great human he is. He’s blended into the group seamlessly. I think it says a lot about him that he wanted to come and push himself again in the Premier League. “In the three years I’ve been here I’ve seen a huge turnover of players and now a managerial change but what hasn’t ever changed is the fact that this club needs to and should be back in the top half, and eventually the top quarter, of this league. The players we’re bringing in now show how far we’ve come but we’re still a fair way away from the team we want to be. And that is exciting in itself. It’s been far too long since Villa had silverware and a period of sustained success and I think that’s what the fans deserve and the owners and the club demand.”The Power of the Dog, Jane Campion’s Montana-set drama starring Benedict Cumberbatch as a threatening rancher, has swept the board at the Oscar nominations. The film is up for a dozen prizes, including best picture, best director, best adapted screenplay, best actor for Cumberbatch, best supporting actress for Kirsten Dunst and best supporting actor for both Kodi Smit-McPhee and Jesse Plemons. Campion last won an Oscar in 1994 for The Piano, which began its journey in Cannes, where it won the Palme d’Or. That film was nominated for best director and best picture but lost out to Schindler’s List, with Campion making do with best adapted screenplay. She now becomes the first female film-maker to have two best director nominations. If The Power of the Dog triumphs, it will be the second consecutive year a woman has won best picture and best director, following Chloé Zhao’s run with Nomadland. The only other female director to have taken either prize is Kathryn Bigelow for The Hurt Locker in 2010. The film’s dominance this season is a significant victory for Netflix, the streamer behind the film, as well as titles such as Adam McKay’s polarising satire Don’t Look Up (in the running for four awards) and Maggie Gyllenhaal’s The Lost Daughter (three nominations). Up for 10 awards is Dune, Denis Villeneuve’s adaptation of Frank Herbert’s sci-fi classic set in the distant future. Steven Spielberg’s take on West Side Story took seven nominations, as did Belfast, Kenneth Branagh’s black-and-white autobiographical coming-of-age tale. One of these was for Judi Dench, whose nod in the best supporting actress category makes her the second oldest acting Oscar nominee ever (following Christopher Plummer’s nod for All the Money in the World, when he was 88). Dench’s Belfast co-star, Ciarán Hinds, is also nominated for best supporting actor; Branagh is up for best director and best original screenplay. Branagh becomes the first person to secure Oscar nominations in seven different categories, having previously been up for live action short, best adapted screenplay, best supporting actor and best actor (for Henry V). Speaking on Tuesday, Branagh, who has yet to win an Academy Award, said he was thinking of “my mother and father, and my grandparents – how proud they were to be Irish, how much this city meant to them. “They would have been overwhelmed by this incredible honour – as am I. Given a story as personal as this one, it’s a hell of a day for my family, and the family of our film.” Olivia Colman, who won best actress in 2019 for The Favourite, is in contention in the same category this year for her role as a depressed author holidaying on a Greek island in The Lost Daughter. Jessie Buckley, who plays her character’s younger self, is also in the running for best supporting actress. Colman was snubbed in the equivalent Bafta shortlist last week, as was Kristen Stewart for her turn as Princess Diana in Spencer. Both women feature on the Oscars list, alongside Nicole Kidman as Lucille Ball in Being the Ricardos, Jessica Chastain in televangelist biopic The Eyes of Tammy Faye and Penélope Cruz for her latest collaboration with Pedro Almodóvar, Parallel Mothers. It is a first nomination for Stewart, 31. Lady Gaga has been nominated for her role in Ridley Scott’s true crime drama House of Gucci in almost every preceding awards lineup, but was absent here. Other surprise omissions include last year’s best actress winner, Frances McDormand, for best supporting actress in The Tragedy of Macbeth and Passing, Rebecca Hall’s acclaimed directorial debut, which was overlooked entirely. Will Smith moves into pole position for his first ever Oscar win for his performance as the ambitious father and tennis coach to a young Venus and Serena Williams in King Richard, which also picked up a nomination for his young co-star, Aunjanue Ellis, as best supporting actress. The best actor shortlist is rounded out by Cumberbatch, Andrew Garfield, who plays Rent creator Jonathan Larson in Lin-Manuel Miranda’s tick, tick … BOOM!, Denzel Washington for The Tragedy of Macbeth and Javier Bardem for Being the Ricardos. All five men are repeat nominees, and taken as a whole, the 2022 shortlist was light on new talent. Yet a few surprises did emerge, in particular the three nominations for Coda, a Sundance hit featuring a predominantly deaf cast. Troy Kotsur’s best supporting actor nomination makes him only the second ever deaf actor up for an Oscar, following his Coda co-star Marlee Matlin’s win in 1986 for Children of a Lesser God. Coda joins an eclectic best picture shortlist – the only category which at this stage all 9,500 Oscar members vote for – alongside The Power of the Dog, Dune, Belfast, West Side Story, Drive My Car, Don’t Look Up, King Richard, Licorice Pizza and Nightmare Alley. Drive My Car’s director, Ryûsuke Hamaguchi, is also nominated for best director, best adapted screenplay and best international feature – a breakthrough for a film not in the English language which would have felt more striking before the success in February 2020 of Bong Joon-ho’s Parasite. The nominations were announced by black-ish star Tracee Ellis Ross and comedian Leslie Jordan, a healthcare worker, a basketball-loving high schooler, a teacher and a New York firefighter. Voting closes in more than a month, before the ceremony itself on 27 March 2022. The Bafta awards take place a fortnight beforehand. Last year’s mid-pandemic ceremony was an experimental, socially distanced affair held at Los Angeles’s Union Station, which saw record-breakingly low TV audiences tuning in. Details of this year’s event are still to be confirmed, but the Academy has indicated that it will again feature a host. Names rumoured to be taking on the post include Conan O’Brien, Pete Davidson and Spider-Man star Tom Holland.The previously unknown subject of a Kurt Schwitters painting has been identified as Ludwig Warschauer, the subject of one of MI5’s very first anti-spy operations, who was sent to Britain to spy for the Gestapo. Simon Parkin made the discovery while researching his book The Island of Extraordinary Captives, a history of Hutchinson Camp, a second world war prison camp on the Isle of Man. Opened on 13 July 1940, the camp was home to around 1,200 Germans and Austrians who had fled to Britain to escape Nazism when war broke out. Its creation was part of the British government’s policy of mass internment of the so-called “enemy aliens” they had previously welcomed to the country – with prisoners including Schwitters, the celebrated German Dadaist, along with a host of other artists. Schwitters, said Parkin, produced “dozens” of portraits while interned, “either as favours to his friends, or to sell them as mementoes to eminent internees - £3 for a head and shoulders; £4 for head, shoulders and arms; £5 for a half figure”. Many of the portraits are well-known, but while Parkin was writing the book, he was sent a document showing thumbnails of all known Schwitters portraits by Dr Isabel Schulz, curator of the Kurt Schwitters archive at the Sprengel Museum in Hanover. One of them bore a “striking resemblance” to a photograph he had seen of Warschauer in MI5’s security files. Warschauer was a German national who fled to Britain shortly before war broke out. He claimed to be the inventor of the Tefifon, a recording device that functioned like a Dictaphone, and had powerful British allies, including the Conservative MP Herbert Williams, who was chairman of the company financing the Tefifon’s development, and the home secretary John Anderson, who came to his home to watch a demonstration. But MI5 agents suspected he had come to Britain as a Gestapo plant, and he became the subject of a long-running investigation. He went on to confess and was deported to Germany after the war ended. Warschauer had helped Elisabeth Kohsen and her children flee Nazi Germany shortly before the outbreak of war, in exchange for her hand in marriage. Parkin managed to contact her daughter, Monica Schubert, to ask if she recognised the man in the portrait. “She told me that not only did she recognise the man as Warschauer, but she also personally knew the painting itself: it had hung in the living room of the family home after the war,” said Parkin. “Her mother had only relinquished the portrait when, after the war Warschauer – whom she had by now divorced, because of his lies – requested the portrait be returned to him in Germany.” The portrait had been offered for auction at Horster Auktionshaus in March 2007 by an “anonymous artist”, but was withdrawn after the seller learned that it was a painting by Kurt Schwitters. A year later, it was offered again, but not sold, and its whereabouts are currently unknown. “To have the identity of a sitter in a Kurt Schwitters portrait was a tremendous high. When I passed all this information to Dr Schulz, she updated Schwitters’ catalogue raisonné,” said Parkin. “It only remains now to find out the current whereabouts of the portrait. I was already convinced the individual in the portrait was Warschauer before his stepdaughter confirmed the fact to me … The likeness is uncanny – even if the portrait gives the more flattering likeness.”Members of the Gypsy, Roma and Traveller community have accused the government of hypocrisy after ministers condemned a Holocaust joke by Jimmy Carr while pushing through a raft of legislation hostile to their way of life. The Traveller Movement, which represents the GRT community, said it had been “surprised” by the government’s promises to better protect the community against hate speech following the backlash to Carr’s joke, in which he said the genocide of Romany and Sinti gypsies in the Holocaust was ignored because people did not want to “focus on the positives”. Greg Sproston, the policy and campaigns manager for the Traveller Movement, said the government was currently trying to pass three bills – on policing, nationality and borders and elections – all of which woud “have disproportionately negative impacts” on the GRT community. He added that a national strategy to reduce inequality in the community announced over two years ago “still has not materialised”. “If the government is serious about protecting and supporting these communities, they would scrap this discriminatory legislation and bring forward the strategy without delay,” he said. The policing bill is especially controversial within the GRT community as it would give police powers to move Travellers’ camps if anyone complained, regardless of whether a crime had been committed. Billy Welch, a Gypsy leader, said he was consulting lawyers to see if Carr could be prosecuted for inciting racial hatred. He said the comedian’s joke was offensive in part because of the legacy of trauma after between 200,000 and 2 million Romany and Sinti gypsies were murdered in the Holocaust. “There are many still living who witnessed the brutality of what happened, and many more who lost their families in barbarous and sadistic murders. Making a joke of it is too painful,” he said. The Traveller Movement has called on Netflix, which aired the His Dark Material special containing the joke in December, to remove the gag and apologise. The group’s petition has gained thousands of signatories. The charity has also offered to help the platform amend its editorial guidelines to prevent a repeat of the incident. “It’s hard to over-stress the hurt and distress this causes,” Sproston said. Sproston said Carr’s joke demonstrated that the GRT community was consistently “seen as low-hanging fruit or a legitimate target”, and that many people did not understand that they were a defined ethnic minority whose rights were protected by law. He said one young Irish Traveller told him “no matter what he achieved or where he is in life, as soon as he hears a comment like that it diminishes his progress and he’s back to square one, because it reminds him of everything society thinks about him”. A recent survey by University of Birmingham researchers found that 44% of people in the UK had negative attitudes towards GRT people, making them the “least liked group”, nearly double the level for Muslims, who were the group to receive the next most prejudice. Research by the Traveller Movement in 2017 found that 91% of GRT people had experienced discrimination, which it described as “the last acceptable form of racism”. These attitudes have a profound impact on areas such as employment and education, where GRT people underperform, and the criminal justice system, where they are over-represented. Carr has defended the joke as raising awareness of the genocide of an estimated 25-50% of Europe’s population of Roma and Sinti gypsies, and some commenters have suggested it may have been intended ironically to highlight prejudice against the GRT community. However, Sproston said the audience’s laughter and some reactions on social media show that anti-GRT attitudes are so deeply entrenched that many took the joke at face value, which could further harm an already deeply disadvantaged community. Rosa Cisneros, a member of the GRT community who researches Romany culture at Coventry University, said she was “sad but not surprised” by Carr’s joke. “This situation has highlighted that anti-Gypsyism and Romaphobia still exists today. For me, it isn’t about censoring Jimmy Carr or being offended or me being part of the ‘woke’ brigade that I want to just cancel a show or infringe on someone’s freedom of speech and his rights. No, I am utterly horrified that we live in a space where such harmful and hateful speech is accepted and seen as a joke.” A Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities spokesperson said the government was “committed” to the national strategy to support the GRT community, and was supporting councils to build more authorised Traveller sites, which he said had increased by 46% since 2010. He added: “But it is only right to give councils and the police powers to tackle the small minority of Travellers breaking the rules on unauthorised sites, which undermine good community relations.”Thousands of mental health patients in England are being treated in buildings that are “dangerous” and unfit for purpose, Britain’s most senior psychiatrist has warned. Dr Adrian James, the president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, urged the government to fund six new mental health hospitals as part of its promise to build 48 new hospitals by 2030. Crumbling NHS buildings, leaky roofs and faulty equipment are putting the most seriously mentally ill people in the country at risk of harm and hindering their chances of recovery, James said. The government has pledged billions in funding to build 48 hospitals by 2030. Of the first 40 hospital projects announced, only two were for mental health, according to the college. The final eight projects have not yet been named but James said at least six of these should be for mental health patients, in order “to address the imbalance of the programme”. “Thousands of people with a mental illness in England are being treated in mental health hospitals that are dangerously old and not fit for purpose,” James said. “Up and down the country psychiatrists are having to assess and treat patients in buildings that are falling apart and crumbling away. “People with a mental illness will be let down unless we have buildings that are fit for purpose. The government can no longer afford to pay lip-service to parity of esteem and treat mental health as an after-thought. We need a firm commitment from government that at least six of the new hospitals will be for mental health.” A total of 269 psychiatrist colleagues of James have written a letter to their MP highlighting their concerns over the dire state of mental health hospitals. They have also issued a warning that the number of people requiring mental health support is unlikely to fall to pre-pandemic levels. Data shows record numbers are seeking help while NHS staff are struggling to deal with the huge backlog of care. The Covid crisis has led to a wave of new or worsening cases of mental ill-health. Mental healthcare has also deteriorated during the pandemic, with people not getting the support they need and not knowing where to turn in a crisis, which has itself further damaged some people’s mental health. The most recent survey from the Care Quality Commission (CQC) of 17,322 people who used NHS community mental health services in England in 2020 and 2021 found people’s experience of some areas of care is at its lowest point for eight years. While the NHS estate as a whole needs urgent attention, mental health facilities are in greater need than most, says the letter from psychiatrists to MPs. “In comparison with the general acute estate, nearly twice as much of the mental health estate in use today was built prior to 1948. “These crumbling NHS buildings, with leaking roofs and faulty equipment – paired with the inability to implement Covid safety measures such as social distancing – are endangering patients and hindering their recovery.” According to the most recently available NHS data, the “high risk” maintenance backlog across mental health and learning disability sites increased by 34% compared with the previous year, and by 336% compared with four years ago, the college said. One retired psychiatrist told their MP: “Do you realise that over my professional life the availability and quality of psychiatric inpatient facilities in the UK have deteriorated drastically? “Many people wrongly imagine that ‘things must be getting better’ but the opposite is the case. Only serious action by government can end this slide into a total failure to provide care for people with severe forms of mental ill-health.” The Department of Health and Social Care has been approached for comment.I love mushrooms, but my partner hates their texture. How can I make her see the error of her ways? Ollie, London As with any difficult relationship, Ollie, it can take work, but there is hope. “When you say, ‘I don’t like mushrooms’, it’s like saying you don’t like wine,” says self-confessed fungus obsessive Will Murray. “There are so many varieties out there, and they all behave in different ways.” The chef and co-founder of Fallow in London, who even grows his own at the restaurant, adds: “If, for example, you brine and deep-fry grey oyster mushrooms, they take on the texture of fried chicken.” Perhaps a simpler strategy in the fight against squishy, spongy mushrooms, however, is to fry them on a high heat. “You need to be in danger of setting off the smoke alarm, or you’re not doing it properly,” Murray says. Then, as in life, it pays to be patient – and use more butter than seems reasonable. “Mushrooms hold a lot of liquid, so you need to fry them for quite a while to get them crisp,” says Helen Graham, head chef of veg-led Bubala in London. “If you don’t take them to the colour you want before adding other stuff to the pan, the mushrooms will never catch up.” You could also try replicating Bubala’s charred oyster mushroom skewers. “We marinate the mushrooms in soy sauce, agave, coriander seeds, garlic and vegetable oil, then thread on to skewers and grill,” Graham says. “The agave helps to caramelise them, and obviously the oil helps to give crispiness and a really nice texture.” Alternatively, pop a portobello in a bun. “I grew up in the Middle East, where it’s always barbecue weather,” says Noor Murad, who heads up the Ottolenghi Test Kitchen. “I love throwing mushrooms on the grill and slathering them in barbecue sauce [homemade or store-bought].” Melt a square of cheese on top, if you fancy, and serve with slaw. It’s also worth considering how you prep the mushrooms. “You want to keep their meaty integrity, so you can really get your teeth into them, which means don’t chop them too small,” Murad explains. That said, a duxelles [finely chopped mushrooms cooked in butter with onions or shallots and herbs] might be a good gateway. “If she doesn’t enjoy the texture of mushrooms, make a very finely chopped duxelles,” Murray says. “The mushrooms dissolve into the sauce and add a rich undercurrent of earthy umami.” Spread on toast, add to omelettes or mashed potato, or go all out with a wellington. You could also, of course, do away with cooking them altogether. “Raw mushrooms aren’t slimy,” says Murray, who suggests thinly slicing chestnuts or portobellos, dressing them with sherry vinegar (“or even a little sherry”), dijon mustard, olive oil, fresh herbs and minced garlic, then adding to salads. Dried mushrooms, meanwhile, have “second chance” written all over them. “They’re amazing, especially in the base of soups and stews,” Murad says. “You don’t get the texture, but you’ll get that umaminess – maybe that’s a good way to get Ollie’s partner to like mushrooms.” Graham agrees. She adds shiitake (“porcini would be equally delicious”) and kombu to stock, reduces down “with something tangy like pomegranate molasses”, then uses it as a sauce for cabbage. Happily, it’s good with other veg, too, so there’s shroom to manoeuvre. *groans* • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comAmy Koppelman directs this movie, which she has adapted from her 2003 novel: a painful, intimate, sincerely intended study of a young woman’s postnatal depression. Amanda Seyfried plays Julie, a children’s author who had a self-harming episode while she was looking after her infant son and after the birth of her second child is reluctant to take antidepressants. The tone is unsubtly set when Julie’s psychiatrist, played by Paul Giamatti, quotes Sylvia Plath’s poem Balloons. Was that a well-chosen author to invoke in the circumstances? Finn Wittrock plays Julie’s too-good-to-be-true dreamboat of a partner Ethan and Amy Irving has a cameo as Julie’s mother, separated from Julie’s father – whose own history of mental illness is supposed be a contributory factor, though the coy, blurry Super-8 memory flashback-sequences don’t give any clear hint of how exactly his disorder manifested itself. At one stage, Ethan complains that he is walking on eggshells around Julie. So is the movie. In between her first and second pregnancy, Julie is nervous and upset at the idea of moving out of their apartment to a lovely house in the country, an issue which takes the film a little close to #FirstWorldProblems territory. The upsetting main events take place off camera, which is arguably the most responsible way to approach the subject. (News media are bound by rules on this subject, much more strictly than movies.) But I found something a little avoidant here; the film floats in a haze of ethereal lite-tragedy towards its end point, which the drama tactfully – but ingeniously – leapfrogs with a flashforward taking us to a point 20 years further on, when Julie’s daughter has a baby of her own. The film needed less sensitive good taste and more explicit storytelling passion. • A Mouthful of Air is released on 14 February on digital platforms.Having been instrumental in forcing the last two prime ministers out of office, Boris Johnson is on a hat-trick. Can he do it? Can Big Dog play his cards in such a way that a third prime ministerial scalp will be his – his in more ways than one? The answer feels like a hard yes, but this never-ending Greek tragedy is certainly taking its time. How’s your stamina? Like me, you maybe feel the Boristeia is dragging on a bit. Seemingly three plays in, Shagamemnon is still with us. Anyway: we go again. One calendar week after Johnson tried to wriggle off the “partygate” hook by shouting something grim about Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile, Keir Starmer was beset in the street by a mob shouting something grim about him and Jimmy Savile. It’s important to be clear that they were shouting a load of other grim stuff, too – but I’m afraid that isn’t the get-out Downing Street seems to think it is. In fact, it just underlines why no prime minister, ever, should be feeding dangerous conspiracy theories, which run the gamut from anti-vax all the way to antisemitism, via a selection of paedophile-based nonsense and much else besides. If recent rallies and demos have taught us anything, it’s that there is, increasingly, plenty of overlap. These days, all sorts of persuasions are fellow travellers. You need to be against ALL this stuff, elementally, not just the bits that can’t get you out of a hole in the House of Commons. It’s the same with mobs: the mob that targeted Jacob Rees-Mogg and his son a while back was just as bad as the mob that surrounded Starmer and David Lammy on Monday, as was the mob that repeatedly abused Dominic Cummings in his own street. They’re all a pox and a signpost of worse to come, and no politician who truly cares about their country should pander to them. Moving on to No 10 Clowning Street, it’s been a lively few days of long knives, not all of which have been wielded by the prime minister. I imagine Johnson has always had to spread out Valentine’s Day – you can’t be in that many places at once – so perhaps it’s fitting that his St Valentine’s Day massacre started in early February and is still going. Some aides have been sacked, some more significant ones have sacked themselves, and there’s some kind of mini-reshuffle under way. Yes, as loyalists keep explaining, the PM is “rebooting” his Downing Street operation. I love the idea that this full-scale meltdown can somehow be rebooted. Like standing in the ruins of the reactor building at Chernobyl and going, “Have you tried switching it off and on again?” Or, as one No 10 aide explained of the personnel moves: “What this weekend was about is bringing in capable, grownup people who will make sure the machine works better. What we’re doing is … creating a structure which attracts professional grownups … ” Oh dear. I tend to shudder when people in politics decide to tell you they’re the “grownups”. There was a Labour conference a few years ago where most of Jeremy Corbyn’s frontbench repeatedly boasted they were “the grownups”, with Starmer going for the full Principal Skinner by styling Labour as “the grownups in the room”. Yes and no, mate. Yes and no. At present, Johnson’s greatest advantage is the quality of his Brutuses (Bruti?). Reading another non-story about Liz Truss this morning – she had a birthday party for Thérèse Coffey a couple of weekends ago, apparently – leaves me more awestruck than ever at the 1D chess being played by Team Sunak. Unless Rishi’s grandmasters get it together, he’s going to have an uphill struggle to emerge as the Fortinbras in all this. As for the new grownups in Downing Street, it is impossible to have an opinion, one way or the other, about multi-hyphenate Steve Barclay, which is presumably the point. Until Monday, I would have said the same about the new spin doctor, Guto Harri. For years, Harri has been one of those people in public life who make you think you can get away with never finding out who they are. Like Topher Grace, or the Duchess of Kent. It’s a kind of give-a-toss triage, where the mind registers the name but reflexively declines to investigate. Do imagine my distress, then, to realise yesterday that as far as Guto Harri is concerned, this state of blissful indifference can’t continue. Here he comes, gurning up Downing Street with a bag from Tesco and considerable baggage from his time lobbying for Huawei. First impressions of the new No 10 comms chief? Harri looks a bit like what might happen if you put Charles Moore through an Instagram filter. Competence-wise, unfortunately, he looks to be firing at the same level as an unfiltered Charles Moore, with his first day in the job unfolding with the same tactical skill and foresight as the latter’s plan to save Owen Paterson. Seemingly the only person excited about Guto Harri’s appointment is trackie-bummed antihero Dominic Cummings, who – and I’m going to shock you – takes a dim view of it. That said, Cummings will never allow anything to divert him for long from his nuclear attacks on Carrie Johnson, which now seem diurnal. Clearly, Mrs Johnson has made a number of mistakes, but it does feel way past time for acting like the buck stops with her. Why then, we have to ask, has that message yet to be got by Cummings? He increasingly comes off as someone using Carrie to sublimate the peculiar nature of his anger towards his former preciousssss, Boris. The way Dom sees it, Johnson’s problem was basically that “he got a wrong ‘un pregnant”. How revealing of Cummings that he should alight on that styling, with its hideous old-fashioned echoes of a time where men were described as being “caught” by the women they impregnated, as though all their wonderful promise had been sapped out of them by some two-bit succubus. What crap. You really don’t hear this kind of talk very much these days from people with half a brain, and no matter how often Dominic Cummings remembers he needs to mention this or that “brilliant woman” on his blog, I am not the only one to notice what a sad little relic this self-styled futurist so often resembles. As we move into act 25 of the shitshow, then, it’s worth course-correcting to remember that the only person responsible for messing up Boris Johnson’s life and dream job is Boris Johnson. The rest are just bit parts – whatever they’d like to think. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace Join Marina Hyde and John Crace looking back at the latest events in Westminster on Monday, 7 March, at 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book ticket here If you’d like to hear this piece narrated, listen to The Guardian’s brand new podcast, Weekend. Subscribe on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts.Best supporting actress Jessie Buckley (The Lost Daughter) Ariana Debose (West Side Story) Judi Dench (Belfast) Kirsten Dunst (The Power of the Dog) Aunjanue Ellis (King Richard) Best costume design Cruella Cyrano Dune Nightmare Alley West Side Story Best sound Belfast Dune No Time to Die The Power of the Dog West Side Story Best original score Don’t Look Up Dune Encanto Parallel Mothers The Power of the Dog Best adapted screenplay Coda (Sian Heder) Drive My Car (Ryusuke Hamaguchi, Takamasa Oe) Dune (Eric Roth, Jon Spaihts &amp; Denis Villeneuve) The Lost Daughter (Maggie Gyllenhaal) The Power of the Dog (Jane Campion) Best original screenplay Belfast (Kenneth Branagh) Don’t Look Up (Adam McKay, David Sirota) Licorice Pizza (Paul Thomas Anderson) King Richard (Zach Baylin) The Worst Person in the World (Eskil Vogt, Joachim Trier) Best animated short Affairs of the Art Bestia Boxballet Robin Robin The Windshield Wiper Best live action short Ala Kachuu – Take and Run The Dress The Long Goodbye On My Mind Please Hold Best supporting actor Ciarán Hinds (Belfast) Troy Kotsur (Coda) Jesse Plemons (The Power of the Dog) JK Simmons (Being the Ricardos) Kodi Smit-McPhee (The Power of the Dog) Best film editing Don’t Look Up Dune King Richard The Power of the Dog tick, tick… BOOM! Best makeup &amp; hairstyling Coming 2 America Cruella Dune The Eyes of Tammy Faye House of Gucci Best animated feature Encanto Flee Luca The Mitchells Vs the Machines Raya and the Last Dragon Best documentary feature Ascension Attica Flee Summer of Soul Writing With Fire Best documentary short Audible Lead Me Home The Queen of Basketball Three Songs for Benazir When We Were Bullies Best original song Be Alive (King Richard) Dos Oruguitas (Encanto) Down to Joy (Belfast) No Time to Die (No Time to Die) Somehow You Do (Four Good Days) Best cinematography Dune Nightmare Alley The Power of the Dog The Tragedy of Macbeth West Side Story Best international feature Drive My Car Flee The Hand of God Lunana: A Yak in the Classroom The Worst Person in the World Best production design Dune Nightmare Alley The Power of the Dog The Tragedy of Macbeth West Side Story Best visual effects Dune Free Guy Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings No Time to Die Spider-Man: No Way Home Best actress Jessica Chastain (The Eyes of Tammy Faye) Olivia Colman (The Lost Daughter) Penélope Cruz (Parallel Mothers) Nicole Kidman (Being the Ricardos) Kristen Stewart (Spencer) Best actor Javier Bardem (Being the Ricardos) Benedict Cumberbatch (The Power of the Dog) Andrew Garfield (tick, tick … BOOM!) Will Smith (King Richard) Denzel Washington (The Tragedy of Macbeth) Best director Kenneth Branagh (Belfast) Drive My Car (Ryûsuke Hamaguchi) Paul Thomas Anderson (Licorice Pizza) Jane Campion (The Power of the Dog) Steven Spielberg (West Side Story) Best picture Belfast Coda Don’t Look Up Drive My Car Dune King Richard Licorice Pizza Nightmare Alley The Power of the Dog West Side StoryDomestic critics of Emmanuel Macron, Nato hardliners and the leadership in Ukraine will be suspiciously examining the French president’s late-night remarks at his Moscow press conference on Monday for signs of freelancing. At one level, Macron, three months from a re-election campaign, stuck pretty faithfully to the script he had exhaustively agreed with his Nato partners before his meeting with Vladimir Putin, but at another level his particular view of Russia as a European nation, and lofty talk of a new security guarantees, will have set alarm bells ringing. The specifics of the five hours of discussions between the French and Russian leaders, and points of convergence, were kept from the world at the press conference, but that did not stop Macron hinting at shifts in Nato’s outlook that some members say should never be made in response to military intimidation. The French president started by stressing the historically unacceptable presence of Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders. He also faithfully repeated the offers made by Nato and the US concerning mutual limitation of military deployments, more transparency for military activities or even a limitation of the deployment of short-range and intermediate missiles. He said in these areas Moscow and the west had the same demands. Moscow has already said it is ready to discuss these points but considers a commitment from Nato to cease all enlargement its primary demand. Here, Macron hinted at the need to acknowledge Russian concerns. He states: “There is no security for Europeans if there is no security for Russia”, a formulation of respect but one that also legitimises Moscow’s demands for a new security architecture based on the Russian concept of “indivisible security”. But what Macron meant was unclear. He said he firmly opposed repeating “the mistakes of the past about spheres of influence”, but then said “Russia is European. Whoever believes in Europe must know how to work with Russia and find the ways and the means to construct the European future among Europeans.” French officials at briefings spoke about the “Finlandisation” of Ukraine, a form of neutrality, an idea that has been floated before. Speaking in Ukraine on Tuesday, Macron denied that he had uttered the word either to journalists or political leaders. Finland, which shares a 830-mile (1,335km) border with Russia, chose in 1947 not to become a Nato member and signed a “friendship treaty” with Russia that included limits on the size of Finland’s army, and other restrictions on its sovereignty. The so-called Paasikivi doctrine – named after Juho Kusti Paasikivi, its president at the time – nevertheless created a political consensus in Finland until the issue was ironically reopened by the current Finnish president, Sauli Niinistö, concerned by what Russia was doing to threaten national sovereignty. But there is a critical difference between Ukraine and Finland. Ukraine would in effect be required by outside powers to take up the status of a neutral state. Given Ukraine’s stormy relationship with Russia, and the violence in the east of the country, it seems unlikely that Ukraine could ever be willing to become Finland 2. A lesser alternative would be that Ukraine’s right to join the defence pact of its choice could be restated but in practice shelved. Such a formulation could be squared by Macron’s assertion at the press conference that a new security architecture in Europe should not be created by cancelling the right of states to join the Nato alliance. Ukraine’s possible Nato status is something of a mirage since the country is nowhere near the opening stages of Nato membership, and the discussion of the topic probably obscures the true point of conflict – Russia’s desire to bring Ukraine not to a form of neutrality but back into its sphere of influence on the basis that the Kyiv government is illegitimate. Macron’s final proposal was “the strict and total” implementation of the Minsk accord, the 2014-15 agreement that contains the groundwork for a final settlement in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region, parts of which have been under the control of pro-Russian separatists since April 2014. Since the separatists and Kyiv disagree on what Minsk requires, especially over sequencing, “strict implementation” clarifies only to the extent that it signals world powers are going to put renewed pressure on both sides to reach an agreement on the withdrawal of forces, free elections and the constitutional status for the rebel regions. The Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, last week ruled out special status. Russia by contrast would like special status to include a veto over national foreign policy, something Kyiv would see only as a western-endorsed dismemberment of its country by force. But Macron at the least may try to pin the Ukrainian government to a set of steps on how local elections in Donbas and the withdrawal of forces could occur. But it is an issue that has frustrated diplomats since 2015. Macron, as he himself concedes, may find it is not just Putin’s absurdly large table that is keeping the west and Russia so far apart.Thousands of demonstrators have successfully occupied Canada’s frigid capital for days, and say they plan on staying as long as it takes to thwart the country’s vaccine requirements. The brazen occupation of Ottawa came as a result of unprecedented coordination between various anti-vaccine and anti-government organizations and activists, and has been seized on by similar groups around the world. It may herald the revenge of the anti-vaxxers. The so-called “freedom convoy” – which departed for Ottawa on 23 January – was the brainchild of James Bauder, an admitted conspiracy theorist who has endorsed the QAnon movement and called Covid-19 “the biggest political scam in history”. Bauder’s group, Canada Unity, contends that vaccine mandates and passports are illegal under Canada’s constitution, the Nuremberg Code and a host of other international conventions. Bauder has long been a fringe figure, but his movement caught a gulf stream of support after the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, announced last year that truckers crossing the US-Canada border would need to be fully vaccinated against Covid-19. The supposed plight of the truckers proved to be a compelling public relations angle and attracted an array of fellow travelers. Until now, a litany of organizations had protested Canada’s strict public health measures, but largely in isolation. One such group, Hold Fast Canada, had organized pickets of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation’s headquarters, where they claimed that concentration camps had already been introduced in the country. Another group, Action4Canada, launched legal challenges to mask and vaccine mandates. In one 400-page court filing, they allege that the “false pronouncement of a Covid-19 ‘pandemic’” was carried out, at least in part, by Bill Gates and a “New World (Economic) Order” to facilitate the injection of 5G-enabled microchips into the population. Both groups are listed as “participating groups” on the Canada Unity website, and sent vehicles and personnel to join the convoy. Other organizers joined Bauder, including Chris Barber, a Saskatchewan trucker who was fined $14,000 in October for violating provincial public health measures; Tamara Lich, an activist for a fringe political party advocating that western Canada should become an independent state; Benjamin Dichter, who has warned of the “growing Islamization of Canada”; and Pat King, an anti-government agitator who has repeatedly called for Trudeau to be arrested. Since they have arrived in Ottawa, the extreme elements of the protest have been visible: neo-Nazi and Confederate flags were seen flying, QAnon logos were emblazoned on trucks and signs and stickers were pasted to telephone poles around the occupied area bear Trudeau’s face, reading: “Wanted for crimes against humanity.” The official line from Bauder and his co-organizers, however, has remained focused; in a Facebook live broadcast, Bauder instructed his supporters to “stop talking about the vaccine” and instead stick to message of “freedom”. Such strict message control has attracted mainstream support. Numerous members of the Conservative party, Canada’s official opposition, have come out to meet the protesters. Elon Musk and Donald Trump have both endorsed the convoy. Fox broadcasters Sean Hannity and Tucker Carlson have provided glowing updates on the continuing occupation. Bauder vowed the convoy would camp out in Ottawa until their demands are met, insisting to his followers that a “memorandum of understanding” would force the government’s hand, possibly even triggering fresh elections, if enough people sign. A Canada Unity organizer went further, saying it would require the Senate to “go after the prime minister” for “corruption” and “fascism”. There is no legal basis for those claims. King has laid out a more direct plan of action to the occupiers: “What we want to focus on is our politicians, their houses, their locations,” he said in a January Facebook stream. If political pressure doesn’t work, King said, blocking major supply chains “will be later on”. Soon after, the head of security for parliament issued an extraordinary warning to members of parliament to avoid the protest entirely, for their own safety. The occupiers have deliberately made life difficult for anyone in Ottawa’s downtown core. Trucks have been laying on their air horns throughout the day, often well into the early morning hours. An Ottawa court granted an injunction on Monday afternoon, ordering that the honking must cease. In the shadow of parliament, a flatbed truck was converted into a stage – functioning as a speaker’s corner during the day, where far-right politicians and occupiers took the microphone to decry Trudeau and Covid vaccines. At night, the stage functions as a DJ booth for raucous dance parties. Technology has made the occupation even easier: drivers share information on routes and the best ways to evade police barricades via the walkie-talkie app Zello. Organizers in other cities use the secure messaging app Telegram to share information, coordinate messaging and plan solidarity protests. The occupiers now have the resources to stay for an extended period of time: they have raised more than C$6m (US$4.7m) through various crowdfunding platforms, in cash and bitcoin, despite having been booted from GoFundMe’s platform after raising over C$10m. The Ottawa occupation is proof that a few thousand determined protesters can overwhelm police and shut down major cities with enough vehicles and coordination. Solidarity convoys have shut down the busy Coutts border crossing between Alberta and Montana, strained police resources in Toronto and Quebec City, and activists as far away as Helsinki, Canberra, London and Brussels have taken note. On the convoy channels, protesters warn this is just the beginning.The new mayor of New York City has caused a mix of amusement and serious consternation by comparing cheese to heroin. “Food is like a drug,” Eric Adams said. “And in fact, the studies show the same level of brain that encourages you to use drugs also addicts you to food. “Food is addictive. You take someone on heroin, put them in one room, and someone hooked on cheese, put ’em in another room, and you take it away, I challenge you to tell me the person who’s hooked on heroin and who’s hooked on cheese.” The mayor identifies as a vegan, though on Monday he officially admitted sometimes eating fish. He was speaking as part of an effort to convince New Yorkers to switch to a more plant-based diet. “The more you eat plants [and] fruits, the more you have a healthy lifestyle away from over-processed food, the healthier you are going to be,” he said. “I know how I feel every day, and I want you to feel the same way every day.” Adams did not say which studies he was referring to. In 2015, researchers at the University of Michigan found that cheese was among foods people found hard to give up. But the study did not merit some of the headlines it generated, among them “This Explains a Lot: Study Finds That Cheese Is Just as Addictive as Drugs” and “Headed to Roquefort Rehab: Cheese Is as Addictive as Crack Cocaine”. Predictably, the internet did not take kindly to Adams’s words. Writer Tom Ricks said: “I’m into the hard stuff – aged parmesan and old gouda. Is there anywhere I can get help?” Among more serious responses, Dr Kim Sue, medical director for the National Harm Reduction Coalition and an addiction physician-anthropologist at Yale School of Medicine, said: “Weighing in from addiction medicine to ask [Adams] to please not make these claims about either heroin or cheese. “The stigma and moralising is rife and not useful.” Some New Yorkers would agree. On Monday, the Daily News cited “a source close to the mayor” when it said Adams “has been spotted chowing down on beef and chicken in addition to fish”. “Representatives for Adams did not return requests for comment on the beef and chicken details,” it added. Speaking to reporters about what New Yorkers should eat, Adams said his constituents should “ignore the noise” and not “worry about what’s on Mayor Adams’s plate”.I remember the first violent message I received on Instagram. It was a veritable bingo of hate: he mocked me, told me no one would want to look at my “dirty” crotch – though his language was worse, of course. He asked if “sluts” like me, moaning until they “get what they want”, was “what our country was coming to”, before reminding me that nothing was going to change. He finished by saying he hoped I was gang-raped “senseless” by 20 men. But, he didn’t use the word “men”. He used a racist slur instead, finishing the message with five middle-finger emojis. I remember how my chest tightened and I grew hot with fear. That day had marked my first appearance on a big, mainstream television channel. I was three months into a campaign I’d launched to raise awareness about non-consensual upskirt photographs, something that I’d fallen victim to that summer at a music festival. While I waited patiently for a band to come on stage, a man had stuck his hands between my legs, up my skirt and taken photos of my crotch, sharing it with his friends around him. I heard laughter and sensed that they were looking at me. One of the guys was standing in front of me, head down, laughing at something on his phone. I looked around his back and saw he was on WhatsApp, looking at a picture of my crotch. I was standing in the middle of a crowd of tens of thousands, but somehow I managed to snatch the phone from his hands and run through the throngs of people to security. The man with the phone had chased me, swiping at me to get the phone, but, with the help of security, I eventually managed to hand him and the phone over to police officers. The male officer told me that it was unlikely that I’d hear much from the police: since I was wearing knickers, he said, the image wouldn’t be considered graphic. I left the festival feeling dejected. After doing research, I found out that upskirting was not a sexual offence in England and Wales, but had been in Scotland for a decade. The next two years of my life comprised constant media interviews, building a political strategy, running a social media campaign, meeting with survivors and victims and collecting thousands of stories – eventually leading to the Voyeurism (Offences) Act 2019 coming into force. I hadn’t been surprised to become the target of online hate. Misogynistic abuse online is everywhere. If you’re a woman, or someone who presents themselves in a feminine way, with a platform of any size, you have probably received it. If you’re critiquing rape culture and misogyny itself, as I was, you tend to upset exactly the type of people who would happily hit send on a message like that. When abuse fills up your DMs and your inbox, there’s no way to escape it. I knew that if I logged out and deleted the apps it would still be sitting there waiting for me. I knew that I’d have to get used to receiving it: something I don’t believe is at all fair. Somehow, I felt more in control having read it, because surely if someone threatened me, I’d be safer and more prepared knowing what might be about to happen. In our culture we’re despondent – apathetic, even – about the scale of the problem, not just in Britain but across the globe; 46% of women and non-binary respondents to a 2020 survey reported experiencing online abuse. We know underage girls are being “cyber-flashed” by grown men on Snapchat. We know that the racist and misogynistic abuse pouring into black feminists’ inboxes is never ending. And yet, we treat this culture as an unintended consequence of the digital world, instead of a problem of our own making. Instead of something that we can dismantle. Those in charge of tackling of this abuse are usually men. They don’t really understand the impact it has on victims and survivors. They haven’t been in our shoes. They haven’t lain in bed at night figuring out how they would escape if one of the men who hates them breaks in. They haven’t had to run home because their nervous system feels like it’s on fire and they’re convinced that the men they just saw leering and talking on the mobile are plotting their kidnap. They haven’t moved through a society rife with sexual violence, as a woman. Online abuse didn’t come out of nowhere, it’s the new form of a historical problem: the controlling of women and marginalised genders through fear. The difference is that it now happens on devices with serial numbers, browsers with IP addresses and platforms with digital breadcrumb trails, so we do have the ability to track down and crack down. The issue is where our priorities lie. So, while the lawmakers who don’t even run their own social media accounts, and CEOs like Mark Zuckerberg, refuse to make accountability a priority, those of us fighting for a fairer society will stay exhausted. No single bill from parliament will solve this, and no single software update will either. A holistic and collaborative effort from the platforms, lawmakers and independent initiatives who know the reality of the issue, not just the theory, would be a positive start. Until then, we’ll share our locations with friends, add another dick pic to our screenshots folder and delete messages with trembling hands, hoping that one day our safety will finally become a priority. Gina Martin is a campaigner and writer. She will be part of a Guardian Live panel event to discuss tackling the online abuse of women on Wednesday 9 February, 8pm GMT. Book tickets hereOne of the best-known personal art collections ever amassed will reopen to the public in Glasgow next month after a six-year refurbishment costing £68m. The Burrell Collection, which consists of more than 9,000 objects spanning six millennia, uses digital innovation to connect 21st-century viewers to ancient artefacts. The redevelopment, which many consider a cornerstone of the city’s cultural recovery from the pandemic, also commits to integrating the museum with the surrounding natural environment in Pollok Country Park, Glasgow’s largest green space. There is also a new emphasis on community, including the acknowledgment of the collection’s links to the slave trade, an examination of objects’ connections to LGBT history and a redisplay developed with the input of 15,000 locals. The shipping magnate and philanthropist Sir William Burrell, along with his wife, Constance, collected thousands of works, including Chinese ceramics, stained glass, tapestries and fine art. They donated them to the City of Glasgow in 1944 on the proviso that the collection be housed in a rural setting. The original gallery was opened by the Queen in Pollok Park in 1983, but was built with a single public entrance. The refurbishment adds a 1,000 sq-metre concourse, with a playscape and cafe terrace, making the building more accessible to park visitors. Duncan Dornan, Glasgow Life’s head of museums and collections, says the Burrell’s closure offered an opportunity to re-examine the provenance of its collection, at a time when the rest of the UK sector was doing likewise, resulting in new wording for displays, for example, where art was created to mark the wealth of European plantation owners. “Language is moving on, and we’re much more conscious of the provenance of objects and being transparent about these connections where they exist,” he said. This transparency extends to the whole collection, according to Burrell curators, with visitors having access to a third more of the building, including the basement stores, where, for the first time, they may book to see a particular object. This allows the museum to put on its first permanent display of the Wagner garden carpet, a depiction of Paradise from the Qur’an and one of the earliest surviving Persian garden carpets in the world. It is so large that an entire gallery has been designed specifically for it. Digital is promoted as the primary mode of interpretation, with a particular emphasis on younger visitors – 25% of digital displays are aimed at children under five – and ranging from tablet-based information to 16-metre wide immersive video projections, including images of the Burrells themselves walking through the streets of Glasgow. Nearly half of the funding for the redevelopment was committed by Glasgow city council, with more than a quarter coming from the National Lottery Heritage Fund and significant grants from the Scottish and UK governments. As Scotland emerges from the latest restrictions resulting from the Omicron variant of Covid-19, Dornan says the Burrell’s spring opening places the museum at the heart of the city’s recovery. “As people come back to enjoy museums and social settings again, clearly we are in a park and it’s a very open building, so it is a nice safe-feeling environment,” he said. “As the Burrell did in 1983, when it was really the first step in Glasgow’s reinvention, it can play a part again in 2022 in the city recovering from the pandemic and again rebuilding it economy.” The Burrell Collection will reopen to the public on 29 March.With the pressure of more than a billion people on her shoulders, Eileen Gu soared and spun high into the Beijing sky before landing a stunning double cork 1620 to take Winter Olympic gold. Then, in another considerable feat of nimbleness, the 18-year-old deftly avoided attempts by the world’s media to drag her into a diplomatic incident with the skill of a UN veteran. It amounted to the performance of these Games, on and off the snow. And across China it also led to an immediate outpouring of support and joy for Gu, who was born in the US before controversially transferring her allegiance to China three years ago. China Daily hailed Gu as a “hexagonal all-around warrior”, pointing out that she finished her high school course a year early, was admitted to Stanford University and is favoured by the fashion industry. Meanwhile the Chinese news agency Xinhua called her victory of “great significance” given it was the first by a Chinese woman in a snow event at the Winter Olympics. There was also widespread praise for Gu on Chinese social media, with some noting approvingly that she had answered questions in fluent Mandarin with a Beijing accent absorbed from her mother. But to western ears, the way Gu navigated the trickiest geopolitical questions without upsetting the Chinese government was remarkable. Three times she was asked whether she had renounced her US citizenship to compete for China. Three times she adroitly sidestepped answering. “I feel just as American as I am Chinese,” she told reporters. “I grew up spending 25-30% of every year in China. Actually, the tower here I can see from my house in Beijing. My mission is to use sport as a force for unity.” And when asked about the allegations regarding the wellbeing of Peng Shuai, the Chinese tennis star who has been the subject of considerable speculation and concern after she posted a claim that a government official coerced her into sex, Gu deftly focused on the fact Peng had turned up to watch her. “It is a big honour when athletes from other sports come and pay attention to smaller sports like free skiing,” she said. “I am really grateful that she is happy and healthy and out here doing her thing again.” This delicate attempt to straddle two countries and two cultures has certainly not harmed Gu’s bank balance. Already she has racked up millions in endorsements from more than 20 sponsors, ranging from the Bank of China to Louis Vuitton and Victoria’s Secret. But, inevitably, her decision to compete under the flag of China has led to criticism and worse. On Tuesday, with the US team still without a gold medal at these Games, the hashtag #EileenGuTraitor was trending on US social media. Asked by the Guardian about her critics, Gu was impressively forthright. “I’m an 18-year-old out here living my best life,” she replied. “I know I have a good heart. And I know my reasons for making the decisions I do. They are based on something I feel like is for the greater good. “I’m not going to waste my time trying to placate people who are uneducated, and don’t experience the gratitude and love I have on a daily basis.” Then a twist of the knife. “If they don’t believe me, and if people don’t like me, that is their loss: they are never going to win the Olympics.” Earlier Gu told an adoring Chinese media that her mother had also called her before her final trick to tell her to play it safe – advice she said that she had ignored, prompting many smiles. However, Gu’s story is not the only one of a US-born athlete competing for China that is playing out at these Winter Games at a time of rising cyber-nationalism. On Sunday, the 19-year-old Zhu Yi, who was born in California, fell flat on the ice during her routine. Immediately, “Zhu Yi Has Fallen” became a trending topic on Weibo, gaining millions of views. “Shame on you,” one wrote. “How dare you skate for China?!” another angry viewer said. That didn’t quite tell the whole story. Even after Zhu slipped, audiences in the venue clapped for her. However, on social media the tone was harsher, with some pointing out her lack of fluency in Chinese language and urged her to learn Mandarin properly. There was even discussion of her family background, including her father’s profession, with some suggesting her selection was down to her family connections. “I just felt very sad that I couldn’t do better and help during this team event but I’m very grateful to have them, and have them cheering for me,” Zhu said afterwards. It led Hu Xijin, the former editor of the nationalistic Global Times, to urge people not to cyberbully her online. “To vent emotions on this young athlete, using social media to throw rocks down a well when she makes mistakes – that’s cyberbullying, and no matter what it’s going too far,” he wrote in a long post on Weibo. On the Chinese internet a new narrative is stirring: that it is the US media stirring up negativity on Zhu, who also fell twice in her programme on Monday. However it is telling that the topic “Zhu Yi Has Fallen” is no longer in existence on Weibo – with censors perhaps realising the seriousness of the matter. Meanwhile, Gu’s Games is far from over. Over the next week she will set her sights on a historic treble of freeski gold medals. It will require her to show yet more remarkable skill and adroitness. But few would bet against her delivering again. And again. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian ZhuPep Guardiola has claimed that Jack Grealish, Kyle Walker and Riyad Mahrez were “perfect” during a night out enjoyed by the Manchester City players and some backroom staff on Sunday. Video footage that went viral on social media showed the players apparently being turned away from a bar in Manchester, with the person who filmed it claiming Grealish was “drunk”. The club denied this and said no rules had been broken with regard to the timing of the evening because Monday was a day off. Guardiola brushed off the incident by joking: “I’m so upset because they didn’t invite me. I don’t like it – hopefully next time they can invite me for dinner. The video didn’t show exactly what happened.” The manager was clear he had no issue with any of the players. “[They all had] dinner together sober, enjoying it with their mates and backroom staff. The players know the risk when they go out because of social media but all of them – Riyad, Kyle, Jack – were perfect.” He added playfully: “But they will be fined because they didn’t invite me.” Guardiola was asked whether his players can be treated unfairly on social media and in the wider media. “In this case yes,” he said. City host Brentford on Wednesday night, with the champions holding a nine-point lead over Liverpool, who have a game in hand over them. Next Tuesday City are at Sporting for the Champions League last-16 first leg and the club are also in contention for the FA Cup, visiting Peterborough in the fifth round. “It’s a long run until the big prizes, a long time,” Guardiola said. “We had an incredible January in terms of game, rest, game, rest, one week off; yet the players came back really well from this and played really well against Fulham [winning 4-1 on Saturday] – they came back with our principles. “But, yes, we arrive now at the important point of the season and we know how many points we have to win [to defend the title], because especially Liverpool will lose only a few points, so we have to be ready.”Name: The croissant dress. Age: Three. Appearance: Well, a croissant. I don’t know what you’re talking about. Not a Sex and the City fan then, eh? Good Lord, is that still going? Not really. The series ran until 2004, and then it was followed by two films, and now there is the spin-off series And Just Like That. OK, and what does this have to do with croissants? In the final episode of And Just Like That, Carrie Bradshaw, played by Sarah Jessica Parker, wore a dress that looked a bit like a croissant. Why? She was in Paris. Makes sense. In fairness, she didn’t deliberately try to dress up like a croissant. That would be pathologically stupid. Instead, she chose to mark the climactic moments of the series by wearing a spring/summer 2019 Valentino couture gown. It just happened to look like a croissant. Definitely wasn’t deliberate, then? No, absolutely not. Only the worst kind of berserk tourist would visit a country and adopt its iconography as fashion. Carrie Bradshaw isn’t that stupid. Although … Although what? Although she was also holding a handbag shaped like the Eiffel Tower. I take it all back. Maybe this is the start of a trend. Maybe the trend already exists. Cast your mind back to the 2015 Met Gala, when Rihanna rocked up in a yellow dress with a huge circular train that the internet quickly decided looked like an omelette, or a pizza? No. Well, it happened. And this sort of thing happens so much that a Thai clothing store owner named Sine Benjaphorn will often recreate celebrity dresses out of food. Most notoriously, she once recreated a Rihanna dress out of nothing but sliced ham. I wonder what she’d make Carrie Bradshaw’s dress out of. A croissant, obviously. A really big croissant. Because that’s what the dress looks like. And Just Like That must be pretty embarrassed that this is all it will be remembered for. On the contrary, the show has suffered through several catastrophes during its brief run. Its first episode crashed Peloton’s stock price, for instance, and the show has suffered constant criticism for its clumsy attempts at wokeness. Plus there’s still the lingering void left by Kim Cattrall’s absence to worry about. That’s a lot of stuff for one show. It is. And Just Like That has proved to be one of the most divisive on television. So why is the internet talking about a dress? Look, it’s the internet. Why does it do anything? Do say: “Carrie Bradshaw went to Paris and wore a dress that looks like a croissant.” Don’t say: “Next season she’ll come to the UK and wear a dress that looks like a £3 Tesco meal deal.”And that’s the day done. Thanks for your company - can’t wait to do it all again tomorrow on the first Wednesday of these Beijing Winter Games. I’ll leave you with a look at the best photos of the day. Bye! Eileen Gu is already one of the stories of these Games. Sean Ingle explains after her spectacular women’s freeski big air victory. With the pressure of more than a billion people on her shoulders, Eileen Gu soared and spun high into the Beijing sky before landing a stunning double cork 1620 to take Winter Olympics gold. Then, in another considerable feat of nimbleness, the 18-year-old deftly avoided attempts by the world’s media to drag her into a diplomatic incident with the skill of a UN veteran. Sweden stay on top of the medal table. They can thank Joanna Sundling for that, who won the women’s cross-country skiiing sprint in some style, Maja Dahlqvist making it a Swedish quinella. All three of The Netherlands’ gold medals so far have been in the speed skating, banking a one-two of their own in the men’s 1500m with Kjeld Nuis defending his title ahead of Thomas Krol who took silver. Checking in to see how today played out? Look no further than the brilliant daily briefing with Martin Belam. Better still, sign up here so you get it sent straight to your inbox every day of the Games. Ice Hockey: Denmark level it up, they’re 1-1 with Sweden with just over five minutes remaining in the second period. Finland, meanwhile, are in cruise control leading the ROC 5-0. This is the last of the live action in Beijing so we’ll start to slowly wrap up the day. Luge: Well, it wasn’t the most dramatic final run in the women’s luge but what a mighty result. Geisenberger only returned to the sled last September and six months on, enjoys this moment once more. Adding a couple of team gold medals in Sochi and Pyeongchang, that’s five of them she now owns, in addition to the bronze secured way back in 2010 at Vancouver in the event she’s since dominated. Geisenberg now overtakes Tobias Arlt and Tobias Wendl as the most successful luge athlete of all time. And guess what? She’s given every impression so far that she’ll keep going through until 2026. It’s three in a row for Natalie Geisenberger! And she does it easy - winning by half a second. The 34-year-old German salutes in 2022 as she did in 2018 and 2014. Between times, she gave birth in 2020 - it’s a wonderful story, one of the Winter Games’ greatest champions. Luge: Berreiter 58.5! She’s in tears - that’s a silver medal at worst, or gold if Natalie Geisenberger fluffs her lines. It’s the German superstar set to go last - loads of latitude, relatively speaking. If she nails this, it’s a third gold medal on the trot in this event. Go, go go! Luge: Ivanova (ROC) does it well! She overtakes Egle; Russia’s first medal in this event for 32 years. The 13th-ranked slider in the world has a bronze at worst! And here comes the first German, Anna Berreiter, in second place. She’s 22-years-old, at her first Winter Games, and is 0.330 behind Geisenberger after the third run. Luge: Egle holds on! She’s fourth at worst with Prock just behind after missing her time by 0.15. Tatiana Ivanova (ROC) is the third last to release now - she’s starting 0.826 behind Geisenberger. Onwards! Luge: A late bump from Schulte! She sits second on paper but falls behind Egle, which means she’ll be out of the medals. The third Austrian now, Hannah Prock, who begins about 0.2 from the medals. Luge: 58.42 from Egle (AUT) - not far off the track record from earlier. If not for her horrible first run yesterday, she’d be right there with Geisenberger. Even so, she’s in the provisional lead with Lisa Schulte, the other Austrian in the top five, ready to slide next. Luge: The tension is building as we wait for the top five, realistically those in medal contention. The top three for now: the mighty Geisenberger, her young-gun countrywoman Anna Berreiter and the ROC’s Tatyana Ivanova, who won a bronze eight years ago in the team event. Then come the two Austrians, the experienced Madeleine Egle up now. Find a telly for the next 15 minutes! Ice Hockey: We’re into the second period of the two women’s hockey games, Sweden leading Denmark 1-0 in Group B and Finland getting the jump on Not Russia, ahead 2-0. Of those aforementioned four teams, only Not Russia can make the quarter-finals. Indeed, Finland would need to beat them by 15 goals to oust the ROC. I think! Luge: Six sliders down, 14 to go. I’ve been saying it all day but if Natalie Geisenberger finishes the job - currently in gold medal position, set to go last - it will be a truly great Olympic moment. Curling: Back to Mosaner and he finds his line and length this time, knocking Norway’s shot out of place. They have one final stone to roll, Skaslien needs to knock Italy away now and does. So, Constantini has to roll her final stone down - an open house - to ensure they take victory. She takes the time out, then goes, and knocks Norway’s away! Shot to Italy! Gold for Italy! They have been absolutely magnificent, their first time in this competition and have won the lot without losing a match. Amos Mosaner and Stefania Constantini are Olympic champions. Quite outstanding. Curling: Ooooh! A big miss from the Italian man Amos Mosaner; he goes for the drive and misses the Norweagian target. Given this is a power play, there is room all over the house. But Norway don’t take advantage of it! Nedregotten’s stone is long - well long - and now they’re back to square one. The Italian can play it safe now. Luge: At the same time as the final end of the curling mixed doubles gold medal match, the fourth and deciding run of the women’s luge begins. The fastest 20 sliders now go in reverse order. Buckle up! Curling: Skaslien doesn’t wait, she goes right away - can she turn two into three? She’s happy with two. Well played - they’re still in it! One end to go, Italy lead 7-5. Two would take it to overtime (an extra end), but there are headwinds: Italy have their power play, and they are going to use it. They also have the hammer for this final end. Curling: Halfway through the penultimate end, stones all over the button. And Italy add another. How to Norway, with the hammer, play this? They need to walk away with at least two shots here. So, they’ve called for their time out to really take it in - good move. Curling: Huge stone for Constantini to complete the sixth end with Norway in position to gain a point. She gets a good look from right to left and nail it to knock out the shot stone, Italy taking it instead with the hammer. They advance the lead 7-3 with two ends to go. Curling: That could be the decisive end for Italy in this gold medal game, restricting Norway to just one point in their power play. The deficit is now three (6-3) with three ends to go and they still have their power play to deploy and the hammer (the final stone) twice. Luge: A huge smile from Elsa Desmond (IRE) to complete the third run of the women’s event. She finishes last in 33rd position, some 12 seconds behind the leader, but she’s elated all the same. “I made it! I finished!” she says to her coach. As the commentary explains, Desmond, who is 24, was born and raised in England but eligible to compete for Ireland and took up luge just four years ago. She’s a doctor too, having studied at King’s College at London, starting work at Southend Hospital last year. There’s the Olympic spirit. Curling: Norway are using their power play. What does that mean? Italy’s have to push their stones to the side to begin, opening up the dancefloor, so to speak. If done well, this helps with quick scoring. Curling: A perfect final stone to complete the fourth end from Constantini, putting a third shot in position for Italy. Skaslien delivered from similar pressure situations against Team GB in the semi-final yesterday but doesn’t here, missing her mark. That’s a big play for the Italians, jumping out to a 6-2 lead at the halfway mark. A highlight of any Olympic day on the blog: when the photos come in. Some of the best snappers in the world delivering their finest. Curling: Italy take the lead in the third end of the mixed doubles final, leading Norway 3-2. Nice recovery after a nervous start. Luge: Halfway through the third of four runs in the women’s competition with the top three overnight remaining in their positions after pacy runs. Sure enough, Natalie Geisenberger (GER) set the track record. What a special evening it will be if she wins a third gold in a row here, to go with bronze in the event at Vancouver back in 2010. Going into the fourth run, which the top 20 sliders for, she’s 0.330 of a second beyond fellow German Anna Berreiter. They’re so far ahead, it would take something to go seriously wrong to deny them a gold-silver finish in a couple of hours from now. Curling: Italy bounce back with two shots of their own in the second end; 2-2 after two. A reminder that Stefania Constantini and Amos Mosaner, competing at the Winter Games for the first time, reached this final undefeated after hammering Sweden 8-0 in the semi. A trio of friendly rivals up top of the medal tally. The Dutch went into the lead after Kjeld Nuis’ triumph in the speed skating but Sweden return straight back to the top 20 minutes later via Joanna Sundlingin the cross-country skiing. Norway a chance to join them on top with four gold medals if the curling mixed doubles final continues as it has started, the married couple of Kristin Skaslien and Magnus Nedregotten going 2-0 up against the Italians in the opening end in their gold megal match. We’ll move there now. Johannes Høsflot Klæbo has done it again! He’s a back-to-back Olympic champion, leading from start to end! The big challenge came from Pellegrino but he was strong enough to hold him off; the Italian wins silver for the second time in a row. And Bronze to Alexander Terentyev (ROC), a medal at his first Winter Games. Cross-country-skiing: As expected, it’s Klæbo (NOR) then Pellegrino (ITA) as they get to the two climbs. Terentyev is right there too! Cross-country skiing: they’re off in the men’s final! Cross-country skiiing: Time for the men’s final in the sprint! 6 - Federico Pellegrino (ITA) 12 - Alexander Terentyev (ROC) 3 - Johannes Høsflot Klæbo (NOR) 23 - Joni Mäki (FIN) 17 - Oskar Svensson (SWE) 10 - Artem Maltsev (ROC) It was Høsflot Klæbo won gold in 2018 and Pellegrino silver. On the basis of what we’ve seen so far, it could be a race in two again. But Maki and Terentyev have both also laid down quick times tonight. Jonna Sundling does it in style! “Have we ever seen a win as convincing as that in a gold medal race?” asks the commentator - she’s won it easily. And Maja Dahlqvist holds on for silver - another quinella! Then Bronze for Team USA with Jessie Diggins. Country-country skiiing: It’s Sweden one, two and three at the halfway mark! Goodness me, what a statement. Dundling, Dahlqvist and Ribom is the order. The fastest qualifier today is extending her lead with 600m to go; the two climbs to come then the line! Cross-country skiiing: they’re off in the women’s final! This is all over in just over three minutes if you want to find a telly quickly. Cross-country skiing: Here are the six women who have advanced to the medal race over the 1500m sprint course, scheduled as soon as the men’s semis are complete. 1 - Joanna Sundling (SWE) 2 - Nadine Fahndrich (SWI) 3 - Maja Dahlqvist (SWE) 4 - Rosie Brennan (USA) 5 - Emma Ribom (SWE) 6 - Jessie Diggins (USA) So, neither of the highly-fancied Russians, Natalya Nepryayeva or Yuliya Stupad, made it through. Nor did silver medal winner in 2018, Maiken Caspersen of Norway. No Norwegians in the final at all. Cross-country skiing: Here are the six women who have advanced to the medal race over the 1500m sprint course, scheduled as soon as the men’s semis are complete. 1 - Joanna Sundling (SWE) 2 - Nadine Fahndrich (SWI) 3 - Maja Dahlqvist (SWE) 4 - Rosie Brennan (USA) 5 - Emma Ribom (SWE) 6 - Jessie Diggins (USA) So, neither of the highly-fancied Russians, Natalya Nepryayeva or Yuliya Stupad, made it through. Nor did silver medal winner in 2018, Maiken Caspersen of Norway. No Norwegians in the final at all. Cross-country skiiing: Over to the Zhangjiakou National Cross-Country Skiing Centre where the semi-finals have been run in the women’s sprint - I’ll get the start list for the decider shortly. The men are now about to jump in their semis. Medal races coming shortly. Kjeld Nuis defends his Olympic title in the 1500m! He’s beaten world champion Thomas Krol into second - two brilliant skates, both Dutchmen lowering the Olympic record in the process. Outstanding. The Netherlands have won three of the four gold medals in The Oval so far at these Games. Many more to go. (The final pair were nowhere near them) Speed skating: two pairs to go! And a great start from both Zhongyan Ning (CHN) and Takuro Oda (JAP), both 0.03 behind Nuis at the first check point. But they’ve fallen well behind with 400m to go - they aren’t getting ahead of the Dutch one, two here - Ning sixth. One pair left to deny a Netherlands quinella. It will be Connor Howe (CAN), the explosive young gun who was sixth in the worlds, against Allan Dahl Johansson (NOR) who, on form, looks off the pace. Go! Speed skating: Joey Mantia (USA) v Seitaro Ichinohe (JAP); the former won bronze at the world champs and should be in the hunt here. And he is early, just 0.07 behind Nuis’ mark. But that blows out to nearly two seconds with a lap to go before crossing in fifth spot. Speed skating: Pair 12, Kristian Ulekeiv (NOR) v Bart Swings (BEL), but neither skater get close to the times of the Dutch flyers. Evidently, the reason they skated so early - and were seeded so low - is because they opted out of the traditional lead-up event. Speed skating: The Olympic Record goes again, with Nuis lowering it by 0.34 seconds. WOW. He’s into in gold medal position with the Dutch first and second with four pairs still to skate. Thrilling stuff! Speed skating: It’s gold v bronze from 2018 with Kjeld Nuis (NED) up against Minesok Kim (KOR) in this 11th pair. The Dutchman is 0.36 seconds behind his countryman with a couple of laps left. Make that 0.08 with one lap to go! Speed skating: Thomas Krol (NED) into gold medal position with a bullet! He lodges an Olympic Record 1:43.55 and with it, the world champion in the lead by 1.77 seconds. Graceful, powerful, brilliant. Speed skating: A reminder that there are 15 pairs in this final, seeded with the men most likely towards the back of the pack. Krol is on Olympic debut at age 28 and is already burning up the ice, 1.13 seconds ahead at the first check at 400m. He’s well on track. Wow, make that two seconds ahead with two laps to go! Speed skating: Sergei Troflimov (ROC) takes the lead in the men’s 1500m. He was fourth in the 5000m earlier in the week and is right where he needs to be ahead of the favourites. Up next is Thomas Krol (NED) in pair ten, the current world champion in this event. Ice Hockey: Japan’s women get the Czech Republic in overtime, saluting 3-2. First and second in the group, they will both advance to the quarter finals starting later in the week. Thanks, Luke. Hello again – back for another exciting night session with the clock just now striking 7pm in the Olympic city. Good morning (afternoon, evening) to you all. I’ve arrived at the interval of the men’s 1500m speedskating final at The Oval - with 15 pairs to skate in total, seven are to come. In the tenth, the gold medallist from 2018, Kjeld Nuis, after his Dutch countryman Thomas Krol, goes in the tenth - the current world champ. Young gun Canadian Connor Howe will take off last, alongside Norway’s Allan Dahl Johansson. This should be fun. In about 25 minutes, we’ll reach the cross country skiing sprint semi-finals and medal runs. The men’s defending champion is Johannes Høsflot Klæbo (NOR) with the two other members from that Pyeongchang podium - Federico Pellegrino (ITA) and Alexander Bolshunov (Not Russia) – still in the mix as well. In the women’s race, we’ll be wartching for Maiken Caspersen (NOR), who was runner up in 2018 but doesn’t have Stina Hilsson (SWE) to deal with this time as she’s switched to the biathlon. But the favourite looks to be Natalya Nepryayeva (ROC), leader in the cross country world cup standings over the last couple of years. In 50 minutes we’ll be at the luge as well for the pointy end of the women’s singles – runs three then four. This could be the event of the day with all-timer Natalie Geisenberger (GER), who won the event in 2018 and 2014 after winning bronze in 2010, leading the way after two runs. She’s 34 now and had a baby in 2019. She looked to have serious competition in Julia Taubitz, also from Germany, who won the most recent World Cup then broke the track record in the first run yesterday but crashed out in the second. Instead it is third German, 22-year-old Anna Berreiter, who is second in the standings at the halfway mark. Tatiana Ivanova (ROC) starts the second half of the competition in third, who has an Olympic medal from the team event eight years ago. In just over an hour, the mixed curling final begins between Italy, who won their semi 8-0 over Sweden, and Norway, who broke Team GB’s heart in a thriller. Then when the medals for the night have been decided, we’ll finish at the women’s ice hockey where Denmark are up against Sweden and Finland take on Not Russia. Drop me a line any time. Twitter works too, if that’s more your style. Here are the Winter Olympics stories we’ve published so far today – with Eileen Gu’s big air glory and Great Britain’s curling woe the headlines. And with that, I’ll hand you over to Adam Collins, who will take you through to stumps. China will invite more spectators to attend the Winter Olympics as the Covid-19 situation is under control within the “closed-loop” bubble, which separates all event personnel from the public, an official from the Beijing organisers said on Tuesday. China did not sell tickets to the public amid concerns over the spread of the pandemic but selected a number of spectators from targeted groups of people who are required to undertake strict Covid prevention measures. The Tokyo Summer Games took place without spectators due to a surge in coronavirus cases. Before the Winter Olympics organisers hoped for capacities of at least 30% at venues with some events, such as the opening ceremony and some outdoor sports, having larger numbers. “In the next step, we will bring in more spectators based on demand, because the current Covid-19 situation within the ‘closed loop’ is under control,” Huang Chun, a director from the Beijing organisers’ pandemic prevention and control office, said at a press briefing on Tuesday. (Reuters) China’s Olympic committee has pledged to increase production of merchandise after unexpected demand from people looking for a way to get involved in the Games led to shortages of the local mascot. Marcel Bosker of the Netherlands currently leads the way in the men’s 1500m speed skating, with a time of 1min 45.42sec. Daniil Aldoshkin and Ruslan Zakharov (both ROC) sit second and third. Bosker leads Aldoshkin by 0.91sec – which is a hefty advantage. Latest score: Japan 2-2 Czech Republic in the women’s ice hockey! Natalie Mlynkova levels it up for the Czechs, and they will go to overtime in a match that could determine who finishes top of Group B. Sounds like a great game, but sadly not available to watch here in UK as far as I can see. Not even in the Eurosport app. If you missed it – our report from earlier on Great Britain’s failure to capture a curling medal: Coming up next: Women’s sprint freestyle cross-country skiing: quarter-final 1. Not to mention men’s speed skating, the 1500m final, which should be good to watch. The estimable Carlton Kirby, often heard commentating on pro cycling, is on the mic for Eurosport for the speed skating. Donovan Carrillo of Mexico advanced to the free skate portion of the figure skating competition at the Beijing Games on Tuesday, a first for the country, which had not had an Olympic skater in three decades. All it took was the best performance of his life. “I didn’t want it to end,” Carrillo said. “I wanted to keep skating and living the Olympic dream.” Carrillo said he was so excited when he landed his first jump, a quad toe loop, that he had to tell himself to refocus in order to finish his routine. He also pulled off his difficult triple axel, though he was penalised for a triple lutz-triple toe when he took an extra step, but that turned out to be the only real blemish in an otherwise strong program. “I was super happy,” Carrillo said of his opening jumping pass. “I tried to calm a little bit because I had the whole program.” Carrillo showed off his national pride throughout his performance, which was set to music by the band Santana. His blade covers displayed the green, white and red colors of the Mexican flag, and he wore a sparkly black and gold costume custom-made by Mexican fashion designer Edgar Lozzano, who offered it to Carrillo for free. (AP) Japan are back in front in the women’s ice hockey against Czech Republic. Haruka Toko got the goal again, and they lead 2-1 in the third period. Tess Ledeux of France (left), who was the heavy favourite going into the women’s freeski big air, is comforted by the gold medalist Eileen Gu (centre) and bronze medalist Mathilde Gremaud (right) at the conclusion of the event. Denisa Krizova has levelled things up for Czech Republic against Japan in the women’s ice hockey. It’s 1-1 there at the end of the second period. On BBC1, they are currently revisiting the women’s freeski big air from earlier today ... it’s well worth watching, if you were asleep. Kirsty Muir of Great Britain performed admirably to finish fifth. The medal places, it would seem, are all wrapped up in the men’s 20km biathlon: Quentin Fillon Maillet (France) takes gold, Anton Smolski (Belarus) silver and the defending champion, Johannes Thinges Boe of Norway, takes bronze. The sun is setting in Hualindong, and it’s a pretty parky -11C at the biathlon venue right now. Skeleton training for men and women - featuring some seriously creative outfits - is now ongoing. Anton Smolski of Belarus goes second in the 20km biathlon! He comes in 14.8sec down on Fillon Maillet, having recorded 20/20 at the range. Sharp shooting. In the women’s ice hockey, Japan lead Czech Republic 1-0 in their Group B top-of-the-table encounter, in the second period. Haruka Toko got the goal in the first period. Before this match, Japan topped the group with seven points from two matches, Czech Republic sit second with six points. Sean Ingle and Vincent Ni with a fashion update from China: The wait for Britain’s first gold medal at these Winter Olympics goes on, but Team GB has become a surprise success off the snow and ice after its opening ceremony kit became a sensation on Weibo, the most widely used social media platform in China. Reaction to the British team, who wore a Ben Sherman duffle coat and Chelsea boots during the ceremony, reached No 8 on the Weibo Hot Topic section, with the Olympics and the start of the Chinese lunar new year the most popular. Fillon Maillet, of France, roars home 31.1sec ahead of the defending Olympic champion, Boe! Surely no one is going to catch him, and he will take gold in the 20km men’s biathlon? He slides to the ground, not having the energy to take his skis off, and gasps for air. What an effort. He started the final lap 30 or so seconds behind, so that was some phenomenally fast skiing. Johannes Thingnes Boe finishes in 49’18”. He’s the first across the line ... and Tsevetkov comes home second overall! Can Fillon Maillet overhaul them both? Tsevetkov takes off his skis, and crashes to the snow in exhaustion. Boe is right there, too, but the two athletes don’t acknowledge each other. In the biathlon, Johannes Thingnes Boe misses a shot on his fourth visit to the range! That’s his second miss ... and then Tsvetkov misses with his 20th and final shot! He was one away from ‘shooting clean’. Tarjei Boe is third, Fillon Maillet of France in fourth as it stands. Marie-Philip Poulin capped a three-goal run by scoring on a penalty shot with 2‘35“ left in the second period, and Canada upended the defending Olympic champion United States 4-2 on Tuesday to claim the women’s hockey tournament’s top seed entering the playoff round. Maxim Tsvetkov (ROC) now tops the live standings in the 20km biathlon. Boe (JT) and Boe (T), both of Norway, are second and third respectively. “For me it is a puppet theatre ... I am unbelievably angry and I don’t understand it.” A story from last night, on the chaos that unfolded at the ski jumping yesterday: Christian Gow of Canada nails five out of five on his first visit to the range, and moves second in the live standings ... but is then knocked down to third by Quentin Fillon Maillet of France, who goes top. Johannes Thingnes Boe of Norway, the defending champion in the 20km biathlon, shoots four out of five first up. So he can ill afford another miss in his next 15 shots if he is going to have any chance of defending his title. Defending champion Matthias Mayer of Austria won the men’s super-G at the Beijing Games, capturing a third Olympic gold medal on Tuesday. Ryan Cochran-Siegle of the United States won a shock silver medal, finishing 0.04 seconds behind in second. World Cup super-G leader Aleksander Aamodt Kilde of Norway was 0.42 behind in third. After sealing her gold medal in the women’s freeski big air, Reuters reports that Eileen Gu was asked by journalists whether she holds dual nationality: San Francisco-born Eileen Gu, who lifted the host country to the top of the medals table at the Beijing Olympics with a freeski Big Air gold on Tuesday, remained evasive on whether she was still holding an American passport. China does not allow dual nationality, and state media have previously reported that the 18-year-old renounced her US citizenship after she became a Chinese national at the age of 15. Gu would not confirm that on Tuesday. “So I grew up spending 25-30% (of my time) in China. I’m fluent in Mandarin and English and fluent culturally in both,” she answered, when asked if she was still an American citizen. “So coming here, I really feel there was a sense of coming home. I feel just as American as Chinese. I don’t feel I’m taking advantage of one or another. They understand that my mission is to foster a connection between countries and not a divisive force.” When the reporter asked again, the news conference moderator interjected: “Next question, please.” (Reuters) Great Britain missed out on their first medal of Beijing 2022 after Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat suffered a crushing defeat to the Swedish team in their mixed curling bronze medal match. Less than 24 hours after their gold medal dreams were snatched away in a final stone loss to Norway, Dodds and Mouat were unable to recover after going 4-1 down in the second end and lost 9-3. The men’s 20km biathlon is coming up very shortly, which should be fun to watch, and suitably hellish for the competitors. Eileen Gu stood atop the purpose-built ramp, sitting in third place entering the final run of the Olympic women’s freestyle big air. The seconds felt like minutes as she embraced her coach and stood in position waiting for the green light. One of the first lean-forward moments of the Beijing Games was afoot, the weight of two countries borne squarely on her 18-year-old shoulders. And then she dropped in. In the women’s sprint freestyle cross-country skiing qualifier, Jonna Sundling of Sweden leads the current heat, with a time of 3min 09secs. Thank you Jonathan and hello everyone. Eileen Gu delivered in some style earlier today in the women’s freeski big air, pulling off an incredible final jump, scoring 94.50 with the judges, to beat Tess Ledeux (France) and Mathilde Gremaud (Switzerland) into silver and bronze respectively. Kirsty Muir of Great Britain finished fifth. On the Menu Before I pass the baton to Luke McLaughlin in sunny England, we’re about to go cross country skiing, before we don our rifles and head over to the men’s 20km Biathlon. Just wrapping up, Canada prevailed 4-2 over the United States in the Women’s Hockey in what will surely be the gold medal game, while Great Britain’s mixed doubles curlers met their match in the clinical, ruthless Swedes. Over to you Luke! Slovenia’s Tim Mastnak seemingly had it in the bag but got the wobbles when it mattered. Snowboarding is often thought of as a young person’s caper, but it was a battle of the veterans in the final. The 36-year-old in his Fourth Olympics has come up trumps and can scarcely believe his good fortune. It the end, it was a walk in the park for the Czech superstar in her pet event. Three of her opponents failed to finish in the lead up, and the 26-year-old made mincemeat of Austria’s Daniela Ubling in the final. Now she switches the snowboard for the skis as she chases her fourth Olympic Gold. Snowboard Giant Slalom Finals Minutes Away They move quickly in the snowboarding competition! Ester Ledecka takes on Daniela Ubling in the women’s comp, while Austria’s Benjamin Karl tackles Slovenia’s Tim Mastak in the men’s. Sweden 9 – Great Britain 3 It’s all over in the mixed doubles, with the respective pairs shaking hands and the Swedes taking Bronze. Bruce Mouat and Jennifer Dodds had a great few days but the Swedes got the jump on them early and never looked back. Women’s Snowboarding – Parallel Giant Slalom Ledecka Into Final Four The Czech star has had two runs today, and both her opponents have come a cropper, with Poland’s Aleksandra Krol falling in the quarter finals. We’re now onto the men’s quarters. Curling – Mixed Doubles Great Britain 1 – Sweden 9 We’re on the 6th End, and the Swedes are having a complete lend. Oscar Eriksson, in particular, is in fine fettle. They’ve all but sown up the Bronze. ICYMI, Nathan Chen put on a clinic earlier Curling – Mixed Doubles Great Britain 1 – Sweden 8 The Swedish pair are pitiless. The Power Play will kick off the second half. Men’s Snowboarding – Parallel Giant Slalom To the uninitiated, this is such a great sport to watch. It’s one-on-one, with plenty of mind games and technical brilliance. Ester Ledecka was safely through in the women’s quarters and now we’re on to the fellas. Russia’s Dmiitri Loginov has just been rolled and is Loginout of these Olympics. The Guardian’s take on the extraordinary Eileen Gu, one of the genuine superstars of these Games. Curling – Mixed Doubles Great Britain 1 – Sweden 7 A steal of three to the pesky Swedes. ‘Shop Early’ as they say in Curling circles. Women’s and Men’s Snowboarding – Parallel Giant Slalom The second snowboarding medal event is now underway, with the men’s and women’s events running simultaneously, and the final being decided just two hours after qualifying. Ester Ledecka is the reigning champ and the hottest of favourites in the women’s event. She was the first athlete to compete in alpine skiing and snowboarding at an Olympics. She was also the first woman to win gold in two different disciplines at a Winter Olympics. This is her pet event. She was two seconds clear of anyone else in qualifying and appears to have a mortgage on the gold. Her stiffest competition is expected to come from Ramona Therasia Hosmeister (Germany), Daniela Ubling (Austria) and Ladina Jenny (Switzerland). In the men’s competition, South Korea’s Lee Sangho was the fastest qualifier, while 22-year-old Russian Dmitri Loginov is looking to become the youngest man to win a medal in alpine snowboarding. I’ll be Loginov myself in about two hours. Sorry. To snare gold, he’ll have to top Benkamin Karl (Austria), Nevin Galmarini (Switzerland) and Zan Kosit (Slovenia). Curling – Mixed Doubles Great Britain 1 – Sweden 4 I have cursed the Brits. Half a second after pressing ‘go’ on that last update, the Swedes say ‘stuff you’ and unleash a 4 pointer! Curling – Mixed Doubles Bronze Medal Game Great Britain 1 – Sweden 0 Thanks Beau, let’s kick off with some Curling, traditionally not my strong suit, but a crucial match nonetheless. At one point, the Brits were 4-2 the better of the husband and wife Norwegian pair. But Norway’s Kristin Skaslien had ice in her veins, and secured a berth in the big one. They’ll take on Italy, who gave Sweden a hiding, winning 8-1. Early in proceedings, the Brits are up 1-0 but the Swedes have conditions to suit (so I’m assured). Worth repeating: This game won’t decide the gold medal. Both teams should still easily advance to face each other again. But you have to wonder if Ann Marie Desbiens and the shot-blocking Canadian defense are in the USA’s heads now. Desbiens made 51 saves. Someone surely counted the number of blocks, and it’ll be equally staggering. And on that note -- all yours, Jonathan. Good night from the USA. Quick look at the mailbag: Sandra Weingart: “Cranky person is wrong. Quip away, especially if it’s snarky. Yes, I was watching Nathan Chen and the wonderful Jason Brown, who is extremely unlikely to medal but skates so beautifully, but its only 11 pm in the Mountain Time Zone and 10 out on the left coast, so the western half of America is still awake.” Jason Brown’s program was beautiful. Without quads, he won’t medal, but he’s fun to watch. Barbara Roden: “Cute quips’? Love them; keep them coming! We Canucks take our hockey a bit too seriously sometimes, and it’s fun to read something that doesn’t treat every international game involving a Canadian hockey team as if we’re at mission control trying to get Apollo 13 back to Earth safely.” You should see what happens on US soccer Twitter when the men lose. (When the women lose, it’s always someone else’s fault or bad luck.) US power play, 1:50 left. At the end of this game, I’ll be handing off to Jonathan Horn, checking in from Australia. 2:40 left. Time to pull the goalie? And a rugby game has broken out along the boards. American commentators often call such action a “scrum,” but it’s more accurately a “ruck.” Still the same story -- plenty of US possession, no goal. 4:00 left. This game is playing out a bit like the USA-Canada men’s soccer World Cup qualifier. The USA has the lion’s share of possession. But Canada’s defense is stout (six blocked shots on the last power play, by NBC’s count), their goalie makes the big save when necessary, and their counterattack is deadly. The USA has outshot Canada 50-25. They’ve taken only two penalty minutes to Canada’s 10. And it’s still 4-2 Canada with 6:02 left. There’s literally nothing going on right now, though the curling mixed doubles bronze-medal game between Sweden and Team GB will be starting soon. Greetings to all those waking up to watch across the Atlantic from me. The snowboard parallel giant slalom knockout rounds start soon after that. Cross-country skiing and biathlon are a couple of hours from now. Meanwhile, the USA is outshooting Canada 10-3 in the third period. Also, here’s my story asking whether women’s hockey can finally build a pro league in these two great women’s hockey countries. And here’s a picture of famous Canadians on an American TV show. From the email inbox: A nasty email telling me to knock off the biased coverage and cute quips and just write about the game. But don’t quote him or name him. You’d think putting in a picture of Rush (my favorite band) and gushing about curling (my favorite sport -- I oversaw a rental at our club earlier today) would win me some Canadian cred. I also love Metric, July Talk, Kids in the Hall, Whistler (even though I can’t stay), and Canada’s health-care system. All that’s left is for me to apply for citizenship. So anyway -- the USA is getting a couple of good shots, but former University of Wisconsin goalie Ann Renee Desbiens is having a monster game as usual. And here are two Canadian colleagues for whom I have immense respect debating the merits of the penalty call. We’ve neglected one sport so far today, and it’s parallel giant slalom snowboarding. Remember Ester Ledecka? The Czech skier/snowboarding pulled off a ridiculous feat in 2018, winning this event and the Alpine skiing super-G. Let’s repeat. She won gold in snowboarding and Alpine skiing. That’s like winning bobsled and luge. Or cycling and ... I don’t know, rollerblading? They’re similar modes of transportation but not the same thing. Today, she placed first in qualification for the parallel giant slalom knockout rounds that will take place later today/tonight. South Korea’s Lee Sangho took the top spot in men’s qualification by a wide margin. Is it time for curling yet? Goal! Canada 3-2 USA (Rattray 34:25) If Canada scores a goal while all Americans who are still awake are watching Nathan Chen, did it really happen? Goal to Jamie Lee Rattray, assists to Natalie Spooner and Micah Zandee-Hart. But the US took revenge by ... whacking Canadian referee Cianna Lieffers in the face. Accidental, of course, but the high stick gets under the referee’s face mask, and bleeding ensues. Then Canada and the referees get revenge by ... awarding a penalty shot after goalie Maddie Rooney stopped a shorthanded breakaway. Whatever. Marie-Philip Poulin scores, and Canadian Twitter reacts as if it’s the Miracle on Ice. Goal! Canada 4-2 USA (Poulin 37:25, penalty shot) If you’re wondering why a Canada-USA game has three referees from Canada and two linespeople from the USA, well, join the club. Sure, it’s a relatively meaningless game, but isn’t this still the Olympics? This isn’t their exhibition tour any more, is it? Does no other country in the world have referees? The American scored 113.97, the best ever recorded. Granted, the current scoring system has only been in place for a few years, but it’s still something else. (Yes, Canada, I see you just scored another goal. Give me a minute.) Chen got an unreal 21.21 score on his quad lutz-triple toeloop combination. He also had a quad flip worth 15.40. His component scores were all over 9.5 except “transitions,” which was 9.39. As he finished, he gritted his teeth to bring home the final spin and exulted when the music finished. Goal! Canada 1-2 USA (Carpenter 31:34) The veteran scores from nearly the same spot as Cameranesi. Goal! Canada 2-2 USA (Jenner 32:00) The US defense gives away the puck in their own third. Sarah Nurse snares it and flips it over Brianne Jenner, who easily rips it straight ahead for the equalizer. NATHAN CHEN! NATHAN CHEN! NATHAN CHEN! He has done everything in figure skating except winning an individual Olympic medal. He just took a giant step toward changing that with a short program that included a staggeringly difficult quad lutz-triple toeloop. We’ll get the score after noting another goal in hockey. Goal! Canada 1-1 USA (Cameranesi 29:17) The second period has been more event in terms of shots after the USA dominated play in the first, but the Americans are on the board thanks to Dani Cameranesi pouncing on her own rebound to blast it into the net from an acute angle. Assists to Kelly Panek and Cayla Barnes. The goal comes just as American Nathan Chen takes to the ice for his short program ... Whoa. Japan’s Yuma Kagiyama just brought the house down in the short program. Skating to an ebullient Michael Buble tune (Johnny Weir calls his musical choices “pedestrian,” a rare case in which I’ll disagree), his fast spins defy physical comprehension. His technical score bests Uno, and his component scores are through the roof. Total: 108.12. First for now. Canada’s Keegan Messing was stuck in Vancouver for a week after a positive Covid test. He was finally cleared in Canada and had to fly through Montreal and Milan to Beijing, where he was cleared to compete barely one full day before the short program. He nailed his quad toeloop-triple toeloop combination at the beginning of his routine but faded on his spins near the end. He’ll finish the short program in the top 10, well placed to improve upon his 12th-place finish in 2018. Apologies for neglecting Australia’s Brendan Kerry in the figure skating. He’s currently 12th and will easily qualify for the free skate. Australia is also represented musically here, with Canada’s Keegan Messing skating to a cover of the INXS classic Never Tear Us Apart. And your full story on the super-G ... Mayer has never claimed a World Cup season title in super-G, downhill or overall, nor has he reached the podium in the World Cup. But in the Olympics? Downhill gold in 2014. Super-G gold in 2018. Downhill bronze yesterday. Super-G gold today. Norway’s Aleksander Aamodt Kilde has his first Olympic medal, a bronze, to go with his overall World Cup title in 2020 and possible super-G and downhill titles this season. But the man you’ll see on all the talk shows is Ryan Cochran-Siegle, the American journeyman who came out of nowhere to take silver 50 years after his mother won slalom gold -- also in Asia (Sapporo, Japan). The US women have dominated, but their one penalty was costly in this Massive Game That Doesn’t Actually Matter in the Long Run. Defending figure skating champion Yuzuru Hanyu has put himself in a big hole, pulling out of his first jump. He stands fourth with seven skaters left. Fellow Japanese skater Shoma Uno, the defending silver medalist, put a hand down on the ice but still posted a personal-best 105.46. The rest of the program was just that strong. GOAL! Canada 1-0 USA (Jenner 14:10) A cross-check by the USA’s Caroline Harvey gives Canada a power play, and Brianne Jenner lofts a close-range shot into the top of the net. That’s Canada’s third shot. The USA has 14. OFF THE POST! It’s all USA right now, with Abbey Murphy’s backhander hitting the post, hitting Canadian goalie Ann-Renee Desbiens’s back, then hitting the post again. The USA has outshot Canada 11-2. USA-Canada women’s hockey is underway. One of the surest thing in the Winter Olympics is that these two teams will face off in the final. Due to idiosyncratic formatting, they also play in the round robin. An organist is playing the Rush classic The Spirit of Radio, which the Canadians should appreciate. EDIT: Nope. Seger’s out. One more of the top 30 to come. He’s Mila Hrobat of Slovenia, who has never come close to the top 10. And he won’t ... And he’s out. The podium is roughly 99.9% certain. France’s Blaise Giezendanner seems to be making a good run at the podium until sailing too far off a jump. He’s stable when he lands but just doesn’t look the same, losing speed the rest of the way. Two of the top 30 are still to come. Canada’s Brodie Seger has never finished higher than 13th in a World Cup race but took an improbable fourth in last year’s world championship. Can he overachieve again? Jansrud is nowhere close to the podium. In fact, he’s last among the 18 finishers. We can almost declare the podium complete. Coming into this race, we figured the only American interest would be Norway’s Aleksander Aamodt Kilde, who’s dating Mikaela Shiffrin and therefore could be awarded kind-of sort-of American status. He’s on the podium as expected. Austria’s Matthias Mayer is the defending champion, and he has racked up World Cup podium finishes this season. No surprise that he’s leading. The big story, as detailed in too many stats below, is Ryan Cochran-Siegle. If you’re writing a Cinderella story, what’s the opposite of midnight? The clock is about to strike, and when it does, he stays at the ball forever. France’s Nils Allegre just won the award for “most entertaining run of the first 27 skiers,” which I just made up. He was all but splayed out across the snow but managed to regain his footing and take a wild path through the next two gates and finish on his feet. Bravo. Back at figure skating ... The penultimate group is getting underway in the men’s short program. This is where the big-time skaters start. Currently: 95.76 Evgeni Semenenko (ROC) 93.00 Kevin Aymoz (FRA) 90.98 Jin Boyang (CHN) Have to flip back to super-G. Here comes Jansrud, trying to turn back the clock in multiple ways ... How unlikely would a Cochran-Siegle medal be? The 29-year-old American has been no better than 11th in any world championship or Olympic competition. He has never finished higher than 10th in any discipline in the World Cup season standings. He has two podium finishes in World Cup races, both in December 2020, when he finished second in a downhill and won a super-G. His best finish this season is fourth, though he does have a total of five top 10s. And he’s in position for Olympic silver. Quick wire report on the women’s freestyle skiing big air. It doesn’t mention the scoring controversy. ANOTHER Austrian skis offs the court. Max Franz is out. The intriguing name left on the start list is Norway’s Kjetil Jansrud. He won this event in 2014 and took bronze in 2018. He also has one super-G win this year. Twenty skiers have gone. He’s No. 24. Trivia time: The next two to go in the super-G: Canada’s James Crawford has a good run going but makes a late mistake and loses a lot of time. Italy’s Christoph Innerhofer goes out of control and skids away. Next, two dangerous Austrians in Raphael Haaser and Max Franz. OK, never mind on Haaser. He got into the air on an early jump and landed on the wrong side of a gate. Current podium in the men’s super-G ... 1:19.94 Matthias Mayer (AUT) +0.04 Ryan Cochran-Siegle (USA) +0.42 Aleksander Aamodt Kilde (NOR) Sixteen skiers are done. If this holds through the next four skiers, the excitement may really take hold among that trio. US skier Ryan Cochran-Siegle is 0.09 seconds ahead of Mayer at the first split. Then 0.01 behind, then 0.14 seconds ahead! Will we see a massive upset? Not quite, BUT he’s on the podium for now! What a huge run by the unheralded American! Still to come, though: downhill champion Beat Feuz and a couple of Austrians. Oops ... Feuz misses a gate. Austria’s Matthias Mayer is one of the biggest threats to Kilde’s position atop the podium. He won this event in 2018. He won the downhill in 2014. He’s third in the super-G standings this year, and No. 2 Marco Odermatt has already gone and didn’t finish. Mayer is just 0.11 seconds behind at the first split time, but he drops to 0.24 back at the second. As he goes through the unique canyon section, he .. ... GOES 0.42 SECONDS AHEAD! That may be your winner, and who knows how he did it? Over to men’s super-G ... And it’s one extreme to another, as Tess Ledeux sobs after taking silver but Norway’s Adrian Smiseth Sejersted is yelling “Yeah! ... Yeah! ... Yeah! ...” after moving into ... second, behind fellow Norwegian Aleksander Aamodt Kilde. Kilde is the favorite, ranking first in the downhill and super-G on this year’s World Cup circuit. (And yes, he’s the one dating Mikaela Shiffrin.) Here’s the breakdown, and this is why I disagree with the judges ... Gu and Ledeux each landed a 1440. Gu got 93.75; Ledeux 93.00. Two of the six judges rated the jumps equally. The other four gave the nod to Gu. Gu and Ledeux also each landed a 1620. That’s amazing. They each got a 94.50. But from what I recall, Ledeux’s landing on her 1620 was considerably better than Gu’s. Is it possible that the judges were swayed by the home crowd’s reaction? This is an outdoor venue, and several sections of the stands are nearly full. Again -- I’m no expert. But I’m not convinced. And apparently, I’m not alone. I’m no expert, but I disagree. Ledeux’s third jump didn’t get it done. She landed on one ski, which is only appropriate in the film Better Off Dead. She knew it, and she looks glum as she awaits confirmation. That’s unusual in X Games-ish sports, where the athletes often celebrate each other’s successes as much as their own. She collapses in tears and is consoled by her fellow medalists. Mathilde Gremaud is going for a ... didn’t I say I was going to mute if they said that again? Anyway, she doesn’t land it, and she’ll take bronze. One more to go, and Tess Ledeux has to land her third jump of 93 or better. Specifically, 94. By my math, Gu needs to match her first jump of 93.75 to tie Ledeux, pending the leader’s last jump. An 89 would put her in second. Gu screams after she lands a 1620. I thought she bobbled on the landing and let go of the grab too soon. The judges disagreed or just didn’t care. It’s a 94.50, and she’s in the lead. Gremaud needs a ... 95? No medal for Muir, who needed a score in the 90s and probably wasn’t going to get it even if she hadn’t crashed. She’ll finish fifth. Not bad for a 17-year-old. Not bad for anyone, really. Canada’s Megan Oldham doesn’t quite do enough to land on the podium. So we know our medalists -- Eileen Gu (China), Mathilde Gremaud (Switzerland) and Tess Ledeux (France). What order? Defending slopestyle champion Sarah Hoefflin of Switzerland departs the big air competition with a respectable final run of 76.25. She’ll finish sixth. Now we’ll have the top five, starting with one Kirsty Muir ... And back to the big air -- the skiers go in reverse order of their two-jump scores in the last round, and those who are out of contention are having some fun. Norway’s Sandra Eie landed upright at last. The USA’s Darian Stevens did not, going for a 5000 septuple cork inverted stalefish meat-grinder scrum-half flippy floppy and bouncing up with a big smile and shrug after failing to finish it on her skis. Canada’s Olivia Asselin picks up an 85.50 and may jump up in the final standings. Back to the figure skating, Nikolaj Majorov has qualified for the free skate! We can only hope it’s half as entertaining as his short program. Jin Boyang is still leading by quite some distance. Twenty skaters to go. France’s Tess Ledeux spun like a top in the air to post a 93.00, just behind her first jump of 94.50 for a total of 187.50. Top two count, so she’ll need to go bigger than 93 to improve on that, but she might not need to. Canada’s Megan Oldham slots into fourth ahead of Kirsty Muir, who will need to be more aggressive on her last jump to get onto the podium. Standings after two jumps 187.50 Ledeux (FRA) 182.50 Gremaud (SUI) 182.25 Gu (CHN) 174.25 Oldham (CAN) 169.00 Muir (GBR) 146.25 Killi (NOR) In related news, if I hear “she’s going big” one more time from our commentators, I’m hitting mute. Not a mute grab. Mute. World champion Anastasia Tatalina is mathematically eliminated from gold medal contention in the big air after a big crash. She’s unhurt but upset. Norway’s Sandra Eie has now accounted for the other two crashes. That’s gotta hurt. Eileen Gu has moved into second place ahead of Muir, which seems strange to me because she just didn’t do that much in the air. Big amplitude, sure, but the ski jumps are elsewhere. Here’s another look at this postmodern facility. Kirsty Muir’s second jump is less, um, rotational than her first one, going 900 instead of 1280. But it’s as clean as a new sheet on a lint roller, and she’s rewarded with a strong 78.75, far better than the first five to go. Skiers must have two scores with different rotational directions, and she opted to go conservative with this one. She’s bumped out of the top spot by Switzerland’s Mathilde Gremaud. The first crash of the big air event belongs to Norway’s Sandra Eie, who seemed to have a bit of a hiccup on the takeoff and just didn’t have enough hang time to do whatever she was attempting. She’s OK. World champion Anastasia Tatalina of Not Russia has a sketchy landing. But then France’s Tess Ledeux lands a double cork 1620, the equivalent of a quad axel in figure skating. She takes the lead from Gu. Canada’s Megan Oldham, who posted the top score in qualifying, is a little less sensation this time. Reminder: Three jumps, top two count. Standings after one jump 94.50 Ledeux (FRA) 93.75 Gu (CHN) 90.25 Muir (GBR) 89.25 Gremaud (SUI) Scratch that, Killi has the lead no more, because 17-year-old Team GB skier Kirsty Muir landed a beautiful double cork (off axis) 1260 to score 90.25. Two athletes later, it’s China and Stanford’s Eileen Gu, who has dominated this event internationally this year. She holds up at the top of the ramp for a very long time, then swerves down the ramp and ... one, two, three, four rotations? Apparently so. Four times 360 is 1440, so that’s what that is. That’s a 93.75, bumping Muir to second place. Meanwhile, in figure skating, the Zamboni has finished. Canada’s Olivia Asselin has landed the best of the first five jumps in the freestyle skiing big air final. That is according to ... me. But I’m not a judge, so she’s actually fourth. The USA’s Darian Stevens does worse. Apparently something about not holding a grab long enough. Norway’s Johanne Killi has the lead. The big air venue, which sits next to a big power plant, is one or all of these things ... 1. A cool use of an urban landscape. 2. A dystopian nightmare. 3. A revised cover for the Pink Floyd album Animals. China’s Jin Boyang displaces Nikolaj Majorov atop the figure skating leaderboard by landing a couple of big quads. Boooo! Nah, he earned it. Quick reminder that the women’s freestyle skiing big air final starts in 10 minutes, with the USA’s Darian Stevens, Canada’s Megan Oldham and Britain’s Kirsty Muir in the final 12. The favorite is China’s Eileen Gu, who grew up in San Francisco and has deferred admission to Stanford University but has opted to compete for her mother’s home country. Switzerland’s Luka Britschgi lands a quad but can’t catch Majorov. The goal for a lot of these early skaters is to finish in the top 24 so they get to do a free skate in two days. Thirty skaters entered, but we’re down to 29 due to Vincent Zhou’s unfortunate exit. Incidentally, Majorov’s “interpretation of the music” score was a mere 7.61, because figure skating judges are terrible. Well, that was pretty good. Majorov doesn’t plan a quad jump, but his triples are smooth, except for one. He emotes with the music about as well as anyone you’ll see in figure skating. While we’re talking about that -- why do so few figure skaters do anything that relates to the music? So many routines could easily be replaced by Cowboy Mouth singing Jenny Says, and it’d be the same, just louder. Anyway, Majorov does one gymnastics-style half-cartwheel thing on one hand that you don’t usually see in this sport. By the time he’s done, he has already burst into tears of joy. I think I have a new favorite figure skater. The good news for Canadian Roman Sadovsky is that he didn’t fall. The bad news is that he didn’t fall because he didn’t do a couple of his planned jumps. Spins looked nice, though. He also wiped his nose on his hand several times, so if you see him in Beijing, maybe avoid the fist bump for now. On to Majorov ... You can tell Nikolaj Majorov is excited about being in Beijing. He’s up second tonight after Canada’s Roman Sadovsky, who struggled in the team event. Kurt Perleberg asks, “Why was Day 3 so bad for Team USA?” I don’t know, so I’ll just blame Christian Pulisic. Ten minutes to the men’s short program, and the most interesting performance in the early going may belong to Sweden’s Nikolaj Majorov. Not because he’s a contender, but because he’s skating to Disturbed’s cover of The Sounds of Silence. The post-Covid pre-race race: US speed skater Casey Dawson is finishing a mad dash to get to his event on time later today. But what about Team GB? First up is Kirsty Muir in the big air final. The mixed doubles curlers play for bronze against Sweden, and there are cross-country sprinters and one speed skater as the day goes on. But what about Australia? Day 3 was quiet. Day 4 will be a bit more interesting, with Brendan Kerry due up in figure skating and a bunch of cross-country skiers ready to sprint at 3 am Eastern time, which I believe is March 2039 in Australia. (More precisely, it’ll be 7 pm.) To tide you over until then, here are your medalists .. Hello all, and to my fellow Americans, condolences on a not-so-good horrible Day 3. From Mikaela Shiffrin wiping out to Red Gerard just missing out on another slopestyle medal to Brittany Bowe finishing 10th to most women’s freestyle skiers missing out in qualification ... yeah, it wasn’t a very good day. And even the good news, silver in the figure skating team event, had a dark lining, with Vincent Zhou taking his team medal as consolation after a Covid test ruled him out of the individual competition. Farther north, Canada had a simply outstanding day, with two medals in the slopestyle, one in short-track speed skating and the stunner, a bronze in the mixed team ski jumping event. That event was marred by controversy, because when you think “controversial Winter Olympic sport,” you of course think “ski jumping.” But the USA! USA! USA! will have its shot at revenge against Canada in women’s hockey, where the two teams have combined to win nearly every gold and silver medal since the dawn of time. There’s little at stake here other than an infinitesimally easier path to the final, but they don’t do “friendly” in this rivalry. The USA also will have Nathan Chen in the men’s short program figure skating and Darian Stevens as the last woman standing in freestyle big air. If you’re staying up all night, you can see Jessie Diggins, whose sprint for gold was one of the most exhilarating moments of the 2018 Games, trying to capture another medal in the individual sprint. Today’s highlights Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 10am Freestyle skiing – another new event as it is the first ever Olympic women’s Freeski Big Air contest 🥇 10.40am – 3.43pm Snowboard – both the men’s and women’s parallel giant slalom will be decided today 🥇 11am Alpine skiing – the men’s Super-G 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – the day opens with the US and Canada clashing in the preliminary round. Both countries are guaranteed a place in the quarter-finals but will be wanting to lay down a marker 🏒 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – the bronze medal match and then the final in the mixed doubles could deliver Team GB’s first medal of the Games 🥇 4pm – 8pm Cross-country skiing – the women’s and men’s sprint free competition runs all afternoon and into the early evening in Beijing 🥇 4.30pm Biathlon – today it is the turn of the men to do their 20km individual race 🥇 6.30pm Speed skating – on Tuesday the men race in the 1,500m🥇 7.50pm and 9.35pm Luge – runs three and four of the women’s singles will decide the medals 🥇 The full schedule, which will automatically update for your timezone, can be found here.The US urgently needs a smarter, multi-pronged strategy and cabinet-level leadership to tackle an escalating overdose epidemic which poses an unacceptable threat to national security and the economy, a bipartisan congressional commission has found. The long-awaited report by the Commission on Combating Synthetic Opioid Trafficking calls for a major shift in policy to combat rising fatal overdoses, with much greater focus on reducing demand through public health measures and better treatment options. About a million Americans have died from drug overdoses since 1999, with around 100,000 deaths in the past year. About two-thirds of the recent fatalities – about 170 a day, mostly working-age Americans – have involved synthetic or human-made opioids like fentanyl, which is 50 times more potent than heroin. The pandemic has contributed to a surge in substance misuse including fatal overdoses. At least one in 10 Americans initiated or increased drug use amid rising anxiety, depression and trauma, and reduced access to services. The social and psychological impact has been devastating, but economic costs are also high: drug overdoses cost the US economy about $1tn annually, the commission estimated. “In terms of loss of life and damage to the economy, illicit synthetic opioids have the effect of a slow-motion weapon of mass destruction in pill form,” the 70-page report to Congress said. The commission’s findings echo Joe Biden’s declaration last December that the trafficking of fentanyl and other synthetic opioids constitutes a national emergency. The report acknowledges that the crisis has its roots in an FDA decision to approve the highly addictive painkiller Oxycontin in 1995, fueling a rise in opioid addiction exploited by criminal gangs, at first with heroin but since 2014 with more profitable and deadly synthetics like fentanyl. Amid inadequate prevention and drug treatment services, gangs have adapted fentanyl to American tastes by creating pills which for many are less stigmatised than snorting, injecting and smoking. It is of the “highest concern”, according to the commission, that most users are not at least initially seeking fentanyl, rather that it is laced into heroin and brand-name pills like Vicodin and Oxycontin, driving overdoses. Synthetic opioids are highly potent, far easier and cheaper to produce and transport than heroin – which requires poppies grown in mountainous regions – and much harder to detect as the supply chain is simpler. Law enforcement has been outpaced and outmanoeuvred by criminal networks. At first, synthetic opioids were mostly trafficked into the US from China. But since 2019, Mexico has become the dominant source, drugs manufactured in labs using easy to purchase precursors from China. The vast majority of the drugs enter the US across the southern border, after which powder and pills are increasingly moved by regular postal and courier services. Many vendors use online platforms including social media to connect with buyers including Mexican traffickers, then use encrypted telecoms systems. The commission concludes that it is “impossible” to combat the flow of synthetics and reduce fatal overdoses by focusing efforts only on supply, thus challenging the mainstay principle of America’s ill-fated 50-year “war on drugs”. In order to save American lives, the report says, the government must increase public awareness of the dangers and pervasiveness of synthetic opioids and improve and expand access to treatment options including outpatient care, harm reduction interventions and rehab. “Failure to intervene in ways that appropriately reduce demand and decrease the risk of fatal overdose will almost certainly result in the death of hundreds of thousands of more Americans and will imperil the country’s economic and social wellbeing,” the report says. A recent Lancet study warned that without radical change, the US synthetic opioid death toll could rise to 1.2 million by 2029. The report, which makes 76 recommendations, concludes that serious geopolitical issues are impeding disruption of the drug trade. It is particularly critical of the Mexican president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, who began his term in 2018 promising “hugs not bullets” for the cartels. Since then, the murder rate has increased and the country has been militarized, while the production and trafficking of illicit drugs like fentanyl has increased. President López Obrador “must do more in the coming months and years to more directly address the threat cartels pose to the health and safety of both the people in Mexico and the United States”, the report said.It appeared one winter’s night on a steelworker’s garage, a wondrous piece of street art making points about the innocence of childhood, industrial decay and air pollution. After a three-year sojourn in the town of Port Talbot, Season’s Greetings, Wales’ first and only Banksy, was craned on to the back of a flatbed lorry and trucked out of the country. As the work headed towards the M4, there was anger and sadness from many townsfolk, who argued that the piece, destined for a secure storage unit in England, was a gift from Bansky and should not be lost. “I’ll definitely miss it,” said retired chef Lynne Thomas, one of those who turned out to bid a melancholy farewell to the Banksy – spray paint on half a tonne of concrete blocks. “I get off the bus just here every day and always have a look. It’s a real shame we couldn’t hang on to it.” Paul Reynolds, who owns the motorbike shop Kickstart, said the town should have done more to save its Banksy. “It was made for Port Talbot,” he said. “It should stay in Port Talbot.” The owner of the garage, close to the Tata steelworks, sold the Banksy to an Essex art dealer, John Brandler, shortly after it materialised in December 2018. Brandler said it could stay for three years and it was moved for safe-keeping to a former police station in the town. Last year, Brandler told Neath Port Talbot council that the town could keep the work for longer – but the loan fee would be £100,000 a year. The council declined and on Tuesday a team of removal experts arrived to take it away. “I wanted it to stay here but spent months banging my head against a brick wall,” said Brandler, who was on site to make sure his multimillion pound piece came to no harm. Brandler said the £100,000 figure was “a starting point” in a negotiation and he had been keen to work with the council to find a way of keeping it in south Wales and turning it into a more permanent attraction. “This is not a rich place,” he said. “Nobody stops here out of choice. I wanted to make Port Talbot a go-to place, not a go-through place.” From behind the fence set up around the removal operation, steelworker Simon Lewis challenged Brandler, claiming that moving the work from Port Talbot made it meaningless. “Isn’t street art meant to be in the street?” he asked. “Not necessarily,” Brandler replied. The dealer said he was in discussion with an English city about building a museum around the Banksy. But plans are also afoot to sell off unique digital pieces of it to fans, who would then own a tiny virtual piece of Season’s Greetings. Under pressure on moving day was John Frankiewicz, the executive chairman of the Egg Group, the fit-out and refurbish company in charge of safely transporting the Banksy (nobody could be found to insure the operation). “It’s a fragile thing, we don’t want it in bits, do we?” It took seven hours to get the work out and strapped on to a lorry. A crowd gathered to wave it goodbye as it headed out past Taibach, the neighbourhood where it appeared. Bev Simmonds-Owen, a leading light in a trail called ARTwalk that has grown up around the Banksy, was sad but said: “The Bansky being here has shone a light on art and culture in the town. A lot of great stuff has bubbled to the surface. “The Banksy itself and everything that goes with it has turned into a bit of a circus. In a way it’s good that the circus is leaving town. It’s time to look forward.”The morning after Keir Starmer was barracked by anti-vaxxers and accused of being a “paedophile protector”, there was surprisingly little sympathy for the Labour leader in Talacre Town Green, in the heart of his Holborn and St Pancras constituency. Starmer plays football in the park most weeks, but there was no sign of the supporters who gave him almost a 28,000 majority at the last election. “If I see him playing I’ll boo him,” said Tony Walters, 62, who was out walking Coco, his staffordshire bull terrier. With no prompting about the Jimmy Savile slur, Walters said: “No politicians are any good – Starmer couldn’t even prosecute Jimmy Savile, and Jimmy Savile abused a lot of people. It was all covered up.” When it was pointed out that it was false for Boris Johnson to claim Starmer failed to prosecute Savile when he was director of public prosecutions, Walters replied: “Well, how did Jimmy Savile get off then?” Walters, a former cabby turned full-time carer, said he was suspicious of all politicians. “I picked up a few politicians when I was a taxi driver and I used to tell them the government is corrupt, and they would laugh at me. They haven’t got any common sense. Johnson hasn’t got common sense, he may be educated but common sense is one thing he ain’t got.” Only one in five people in the park were aware that the Labour leader had been mobbed on Monday by angry protesters, some of whom were shouting Savile’s name. It was Johnson’s false Savile claim that appeared to have had more impact with Starmer’s constituents. Eddie Byrne, 62, a retired hotel manager, said he had read online about Starmer’s treatment on Monday. He asked: “Is it true? That would be my first question: did he fail to prosecute Jimmy Savile, because Jimmy Savile got away with stuff for so long. And a lot of stuff has come up since about what was known at the time when Starmer was head of public prosecutions. If it’s true then he shouldn’t be the leader of a political party.” Byrne remained suspicious even when it was explained that Savile’s case was not Starmer’s responsibility. “You see, that’s passing the buck. They’re so good at that – they all blame each other,” he said. But Byrne was in no doubt that Johnson had deliberately made the Savile allegation to divert attention from criticism over lockdown parties. He said: “Johnson was getting all the aggro about parties, so he tried to deflect on to Starmer. All he did was take a little pressure off himself. That was the whole idea of the Savile comments.” Andy Apostolu, 65, the owner of the nearby Andy’s cafe, agreed. “Everything is Boris Johnson’s fault at the moment, which is why he said Jimmy Savile.” Preparing a double order of bacon and sausage sandwiches, Apostolu added: “He was trying to get out of what he’s being doing for the last two years with the parties and everything. I don’t think it was Starmer’s fault that Savile got off.” One of Andy’s regular customers, Louise Lambe, chipped in to express anger at Johnson’s remarks. “What happened to Starmer is directly a result of what Boris Johnson said last week,” the 38-year-old dressmaker said. But she thought the Labour leader could be doing more to attack Johnson. “Starmer seems like the only adult in the room but I think he holds back a little bit – he could be tearing into Johnson a lot more than he does.”Several Italian mayors have been left seething after a rival hamlet with just 142 residents clinched €20m (£16.9m) as part of a nationwide project to revive Italy’s battered economy. Trevinano, an ancient hilltop hamlet in Lazio from where residents can also marvel at the views of the rolling hills of Umbria and Tuscany, beat 13 other candidates to secure the windfall from the EU’s post-pandemic recovery fund. Italy is the biggest beneficiary of the fund, and of the €191bn the country is to receive, €1bn will be spent on salvaging 200 villages on the brink of becoming ghost towns owing to depopulation. But just one lucky village in each of Italy’s 20 regions is eligible for a €20m slice of the funds. Trevinano, which falls under the Lazio municipality of Acquapendente, was the first winner to be announced after wooing judges with plans to transform the hamlet into a student training hub linked to the nearby Tuscia University, in Viterbo, and restoring houses for tourist accommodation. Alessandra Terrosi, the mayor of Acquapendente, told La Repubblica: “The idea is that this village can be transformed into a place for training, capable of attracting young people, for programmes including landscape studies and reforestation, and thus favouring not only repopulation, but the economic revitalisation of the whole area.” Trevinano was settled by the Etruscans and had about 1,000 residents in the 1960s before the population decline took hold. But as the few inhabitants celebrate their win, the mayors of the candidates that missed out argue that such a huge amount of money ought to have been distributed more evenly. Luca Profili, the mayor of Civita di Bagnoregio, a hamlet perched on a plateau of volcanic rock surrounded by steep ravines at risk of landslides, told the Guardian he was disappointed. “€20m for one village is too much,” he said. “It would have been better to share it between several projects in Lazio. The other problem is that often it’s difficult for small towns to spend such a high amount of money. Trevinano has until 2026, so let’s see if it’s a success.” On the bright side, the neighbouring areas would probably benefit from Trevinano’s success, added Profili. Civita di Bagnoregio only has a handful of permanent residents, but has gained tremendously from tourism in recent years. “We are in a good position, but we will apply for other projects from the rest of the funding, so despite the disappointment, we are optimistic.” Maranola, a hub for luthiers and other artisans, was also among the losers. “I regret that the money is all going in one direction,” the mayor, Gianluca Taddeo, told La Repubblica. “But we will continue to work on our relaunch plans.” • This article was amended on 9 February 2022. In an earlier version, an image caption incorrectly stated that Civita di Bagnoregio was in Umbria.For those at the top, decor and furniture can be tools to impress, charm, and intimidate. The terrifying seat of power in Game of Thrones is a towering iron chair, forged from the melted swords of defeated enemies. In the James Bond series, villains are known for decorating their headquarters with shark aquariums. In real life, however, there is Vladimir Putin and his confusingly massive white table. Russia’s leader has started hosting one-on-one meetings with foreign dignitaries at a gargantuan oval table, roughly five metres long and held up by three thick pillars. A sole bouquet of flowers rests in the middle. He is not alone among world leaders when it comes to showy furnishings. North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, has enough bookcases to rival a small library. And during the pandemic, China’s Xi Jinping has taken to hosting video calls in front of an imposing painting of the Great Wall of China. The former Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi held meetings with other leaders in a large and colourful tent, perhaps as a ploy to win them over with hints of his humble Bedouin origins. Gaddafi travelled the world with his tent and pitched it in several cities, including at the Villa Doria Pamphili park in Rome and Donald Trump’s estate in suburban New York. The former Malaysian prime minister Mahathir Mohamad also had an impressive office with an imposingly large desk, although that may have been for other reasons – he is said to have taken afternoon naps underneath it. But what is the message behind Putin’s table, if there is one? On Monday, he hosted Emmanuel Macron at the three-legged colossus. The French president had flown to Moscow with a puffed chest, promising an “intense” talk with Putin, where he said he would seek a “historic solution” to the impending threat of war between Russia and Ukraine. Yet after five hours of talks at the white table, Macron failed to extract any public concessions from Putin. Speculation has risen that the table was a show of power to subdue Macron, perhaps even the physical expression of a snub. However, it is also possible the mega-table is not making a political statement at all, or if there is one, it is of secondary relevance to Putin’s primary aim: avoiding Covid. Earlier this month, Putin hosted the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, at the same table. At that time, the message Moscow sought to portray was of close and friendly ties between the two leaders, even if they were sitting shouting distance apart. A very similar table also appeared pre-pandemic but with several people sitting at it. Today, Putin is clearly using the table to socially distance from foreign leaders, as he does in press conferences afterwards where their podiums are kept unusually far apart. The 69-year-old president is notoriously paranoid about Covid-19 and has largely remained in an isolated cocoon throughout the pandemic, taking measures far beyond his global counterparts. The Kremlin continues to require those meeting with Putin to quarantine for two weeks despite claiming that the Russian leader has received his vaccinations and booster shot. The requirements can be disruptive. Before the opening of a major art centre in Moscow, the director and main financier were said to have quarantined for two weeks in order to give Putin a short tour of the building. There is one person Putin has got close to, despite his Covid concerns. At the opening of the Winter Olympics in Beijing this month, he and Xi Jinping stood for the cameras within hugging distance of each other, a symbol of their powerful alliance as tensions rise with the west. Still, for their sit-down meeting, Chinese officials had arranged for an extremely large dark wooden table to be in place – one even bigger than Putin’s. Additional reporting by Andrew Roth in MoscowA Mauritian-chartered survey ship carrying Chagos Islanders exiled from their homeland by the UK government 50 years ago has left Seychelles bound for the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT). The 1,130-mile voyage marks the first time Chagossians have been allowed to enter the remote archipelago – cleared of its entire population in the early 1970s to make way for a US military base on Diego Garcia – without being under close British military escort. The trip is going ahead amid a diplomatic face-off between the UK and Mauritius over ownership of the islands. By an overwhelming majority, the UN general assembly accepted in 2019 an opinion by the international court of justice that the Chagos Islands were unlawfully detached from Mauritius by the UK when it granted Mauritius independence in 1968. The survey will measure the height of Blenheim Reef, one of the outlying Chagos islands, to obtain evidence for a separate hearing before the UN’s international law of the sea tribunal. The case involves a dispute over demarcating the seabed between Mauritius and the Maldives; the tribunal has ruled that the UK has no legitimate claims in the area. The chartered vessel, Bleu De Nîmes, is a converted former British minesweeper. Onboard are five Chagossians who cannot return permanently to their homes. The head of the delegation is Mauritius’s ambassador to the UN, Jagdish Dharamchand Koonjul. Prof Philippe Sands QC, the leading lawyer retained by Mauritius, is also on the vessel, as are journalists from the BBC, the Guardian, the Atlantic magazine and Mauritian media. There appear to have been attempts to muzzle publicity about the voyage. It will take up to five days from Seychelles. The trip was delayed because of a cyclone. As Seychelles disappeared astern, Olivier Bancoult, who has taken a series of landmark cases in UK courts over Chagossians’ right to return to their native islands, said: “We are so excited to be travelling to our birthplace. In previous ‘heritage’ visits [supervised by UK officials], we have always been escorted by British policemen or the army. This time we will be much more free. It’s the first visit organised by the Mauritian government. “I have brought the birth certificates of my mother and father and my family. I will celebrate my 58th birthday on 15 February. I left my beautiful island, Peros Banhos, when I was four years old. We used to live as one large family; it was paradise. I have spent [decades] in exile. “I have never given up taking legal cases because I believe our struggle is a just cause. My dream is to be able to settle in my birthplace. The oldest survivor among our exiles is now 100 years old.” Bancoult said he suspected that the treatment of the Chagossians amounted to racism. “The British government says it is in favour of human rights yet they make a difference between the treatment of Falkland Islanders, for example, and Chagossians,” he said. “Is it because we are black?” On the quayside before departure, Sands told the Guardian: “I’m amazed. I was hired in 2010 when I was on holiday and got a call from the Mauritian prime minister. He wanted to devise a legal strategy for the return of the Chagos Islands. “If you would have told me 10 years ago that Mauritius would win three international judgments [against the UK], I would not have been over-optimistic. If you’d said we would be travelling to Chagos in 2022, I’d have been astounded. I will believe it when we set foot on Blenheim Reef, Salomon and Peros Banhos Islands [in the Chagos].” Originally the voyage was due to have started in the Maldives, which is only 500 miles away – a one-and-a-half day trip, as opposed to the five days required from Seychelles. Sands explained: “Early in December, Mauritius informed the UK that it would be visiting the Chagos archipelago, to follow up a case before the international law of the sea tribunal. It asked for confirmation from the UK that it would not impede the visit. “The Mauritius government made clear that if that information was not received by 20 December, it would start fresh proceedings against the UK. The UK blinked and sent a note back saying they would not impede the voyage. “The Maldives initially said it would have no problems with the trip but then informed Mauritius that it would exercise a right of veto over the delegation and made it clear that journalists would not be permitted. One can assume that the UK had a role in encouraging the Maldives to take steps to limit who participated.” Sands believes the UK’s hardline resistance is partially because it fears that handing over the BIOT would set a precedent for the loss of the Falklands and Gibraltar. “But there’s no other UK [territory] that involves a case of [territorial] dismemberment [before independence],” he said. As the ship left, the ambassador Koonjul said: “Our relations with the UK have always remained excellent. We agree to disagree. But we don’t understand how the UK can still claim morally and legally that this is their territory.” The Foreign Office has been asked for comment.Refuelling and warming up at a cosy mountain cafe or restaurant is part of the fun of a winter mountain holiday – whether it’s a traditional cafe in Austria or a stylish French eaterie. We want to hear about your favourite discovery on an Alpine break – tell us where it was and why you loved it. Perhaps it was the incredible views, the best hot chocolate, the friendly staff or the heartiest homemade cuisine that made it special. It can be anywhere in the Alps. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 15 February at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereIt was a Singaporean news report on the Winter Olympics opening ceremony, live from a Beijing bar filled with eager fans. Yet it was two men – who burst into the view of the camera, sharing a dramatic kiss – who stole the show. The clip has since gone viral in Singapore, where broadcasting codes restrict content that promotes LGBT “lifestyles”, and where sexual relationships between men are outlawed. The kiss does not feature in a version of the report published by Channel News Asia (CNA) on its website. But on TikTok a clip of the kiss has been viewed more than 825,000 times. “This is actually an act of revolution,” one user wrote. It has also been shared widely on Weibo, a popular social media platform in China. It is the look given by one of the men, who poses directly to camera post-kiss, that has caught many people’s attention, said a representative of Kaleidoscope NTU, a group formed by students at Nanyang Technological university to raise awareness of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, as well as gender, race and class. “We don’t know who this guy is, of course, so we don’t know if he knew they were kissing for CNA specifically or just a camera in general. But the defiance of it, the joy that comes with being able to show off your partner and the confidence in getting to be yourself as well, the combination would have naturally spoken to a lot of queer people within the country as well,” they said. China decriminalised same-sex relationships in 1997, but same-sex marriage is not legal there and the LGBTQ+ community continues to face discrimination and censorship. Activists say the clip, and the reaction it has provoked, illustrates how outdated Singapore’s laws are. “Singapore is considered a developed country, but we are really backwards when it comes to LGBT rights,” said Jean Chong, a co-founder of Sayoni, an LGBT rights organisation. Guidelines from Singapore’s Infocomm Media Development Authority for free-to-air and subscription television state that films that“depict alternative sexualities, eg, homosexuality, should be sensitive to community values”, and that films that promote homosexuality will be denied classification. A content code for free-to-air radio services lists LGBT content alongside “paedophilia and incest”, stating that programmes referring to such “lifestyles” should be treated with utmost caution. “Their treatment should not in any way promote, justify or encourage such lifestyles,” it states. Speeches by high-profile figures have been censored under broadcasting rules, including Barack Obama’s 2016 appearance on the Ellen DeGeneres Show, in which he praised the host as a role model. Benjamin Xue, a co-founder of the LGBT youth support group Young Out Here, said such censorship failed to control the media consumed by younger generations. Instead of tuning into free-to-air TV, young people were watching YouTube and online streaming services. Attitudes among young people had changed significantly in the 15 years that Young Out Here has operated, he added. “They are coming out a lot younger these days and are a lot more sure about their identity – especially trans and non-binary young people,” Xue said. Yet the gap between online media and local television, which is consumed by older generations, risked contributing to a growing divide in opinions. “Their parents, their grandparents and the rest of society are not viewing the same lens,” Xue said.When I call my dog, she comes automatically. It’s a compulsion activated by dopamine, a chemical that ignites the brain’s pleasure centers with anticipation, the possibility of some reward. In Sex and the City, it was the possibility that Mr Big might finally commit that kept an obedient Carrie Bradshaw running back for six consecutive seasons. The euphoric rush of dopamine lies at the heart of compulsive behaviors like these, sending dogs faithfully back to their owners, and otherwise intelligent women into the arms of emotionally unavailable financiers. It’s the science behind watching a television show you categorically dislike, solely for the possibility that maybe, eventually, you’ll get a good episode. We’re talking about And Just Like That, the SATC reboot that, over the last 10 weeks, might have delivered two, maybe three good episodes tops. Audiences spent the majority of its run voicing outrage at the misadventures of Miranda Hobbes, the abandoned plotlines and abrupt character reversals, and most of all, the implausible dialogue of “Miranda! I’ve done a ton of weed.” Despite their disappointment, however, viewers couldn’t stop tuning in. The reboot represented a former great love that they were committed to rekindling, and every so often, the spark would resurface. The joys and razor-sharp dialogue of the original series appeared in glimmers of Miranda’s familiar feminist realism (see: her refusal to insult Natasha’s flats, or her distaste for Carrie’s belief in the afterlife); Carrie’s enduring, neurotic obsession with Natasha; the trio’s chemistry at every meal; or a newly important question: are you a hollower or a sagger? In our collective inability to look away, And Just Like That became HBO Max’s most-watched original ever, bringing about the possibility of a second season. Would we watch it? Absolutely – Carrie Bradshaw’s greatest lesson was that we should wait out our toxic relationships and assume that they’ll improve. A second season would be our shot to really make things work, and right this season’s many, many wrongs. Below is a shortlist of recommendations. Could characters of color be allowed to just exist? After 10 episodes, all we’ve really seen of Lisa Todd Wexley is her art collection and Moschino jacket. While Charlotte’s new friend adds to the show’s diversity, thus far she’s shown little of her personality, a reversal of SATC’s character-driven formula. In the original series, four white, more or less straight, women resonated with fans on a universal level, representing traits that we explicitly recognized within ourselves. You could be a Carrie, a bubbly, self-centered optimist, or a Samantha, a sexual iconoclast. Today, I can’t help but wonder, what would it mean to be a Lisa? For diversity and relatability to thrive in the second season, AJLT needs to take better care of its Black and brown characters, whose screen time gets wasted on sentimental lessons in diversity. (Seema Patel actually unironically says: “It’s not cultural appropriation, it’s cultural appreciation.”) Reinvest that time in developing their stories; give them identities rather than labels; and relieve them of their teaching duties. Charlotte needs another dimension In episode four, Charlotte makes the error of confusing one Black woman for another. “I’m not Gwen,” she responds politely, “but I know who you’re talking about.” What a succinct, lacerating sting. With 10 words, it speaks volumes about the patience with which women of color handle white women’s egos, and how easily white women’s egos will crumble – visibly, a piece of Charlotte dies inside. It’s the smartest depiction of racial dynamics on the show, and Charlotte’s realest moment all season. Please, give us more of these! The original series’ HBO-caliber dialogue has noticeably atrophied to ABC Family sentimentality, particularly with Charlotte, whose life is otherwise one-dimensional conflicts with two-dimensional characters. She would benefit from a more truly challenging narrative arc, less pouting and teaching her children to knock. More Miranda, Less Che “We can’t stay who we were,” Miranda says in the first episode, setting the tone of AJLT’s wild experiment with the SATC canon. Her midlife spiral reads like a work of fan fiction, where the infinitely meme-able Che Diaz sweeps her off her feet. (It was inevitable that Miranda would leave Steve, however. She was Steve’s Big all along.) An amalgam of contradictions, Che Diaz is a comic with no jokes but a pilot on Netflix, a celebrity with a huge following but zero friends. Radiating with the fuckboy energy of a young Big, they tell Miranda unequivocally “I can’t give you anything traditional” yet, and there they were, introducing her to their grandparents within the first season. Enough already! The chaotic energy of this couple is more than this audience can stand. Every episode, we’re riddled with the anxiety that Che is finally going to break Miranda’s heart, only to get another stay of execution. Next season, leave Che in California and bring Miranda home. Be consistent, like Carrie While Miranda changed too much and Charlotte changed too little, Carrie is proof that showrunners are capable of getting a character just right. She rings true to the original Carrie, only with a decidedly subdued effervescence and more advanced sense of entitlement; she tells Charlotte to shut up more than ever, and even after his death, upholds her lifelong devotion to Big. This is the template of realistic ageing for showrunners to follow next season, when they hopefully cure Miranda’s stunning reversal in character, and fortify Charlotte with the confidence to confront Carrie’s bullying. Stop with the “Ok boomer” gags For all its emphasis on positive representation, AJLT really treats mid-life with derision. Leigh Raiford, a UC Berkeley professor, describes the construct perfectly: “Three white ladies go on vacation to the exotic locale of 2022,” not unlike their clueless trip to Abu Dhabi in 2010. Carrie, Charlotte and Miranda seem to visit us from some foreign time and place, where 55 is the new 80, podcasts are a novelty, and no one watches standup – no, they go to comedy concerts. “That’s what your mom would call it!” the AJLT writers explained in a recent interview, only to highlight the underlying ageism of this show; these are Gen Xers telling boomer jokes written by millennials. Rather than punish Carrie, Charlotte, Samantha and Miranda for the tone-deafness of the early aughts, it would be infinitely more compelling to meet versions of them who had evolved offscreen with the rest of us. Imagine a New York-based, fashion-forward iteration of the Golden Girls, whose central focus was rarely on “getting old” but the broader concerns of loyalty, intimacy and friendship. They could also tell good jokes and have good sex. Rose Nylund has more sex in her first three episodes than Carrie Bradshaw has all season. Next time, take us to Cleveland In the finale, when Carrie started kissing the hot producer who said two lines nine episodes ago – did anyone catch his name? In AJLT, major developments tend to come out of nowhere, friendships form overnight, and storylines are established just to be abandoned. I swore Miranda was on her way to Cleveland to see Che, but then again, it was never shown and never acknowledged. The narrative arcs would benefit from more rigorous construction; SATC truly excelled at growing chemistry between characters and furthering the plot, taking its audience on the full rollercoaster of exposition, tension and climax. More Anthony, please Unhampered by menopause, children, or monogamy, Anthony might be the sole character who maintains the same energy he had 20 years ago. In season two, more erotic bread delivery and caustic wit.Uber has swung its weight behind proposals from the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, for more road charges as it unveiled plans to expand zero-emission cab services. The ride-hailing firm said it had more than doubled the number of electric vehicles (EVs) on its app in London to 5,000 in the past year, which will allow it to widen out its Uber Green service – where users can request only EV drivers – from the city centre to cover the whole of greater London in the spring. Uber’s UK boss said its growth in EVs was in part down to the “strong leadership” of the mayor and said the firm “absolutely supported” Khan in planning to levy more charges to ease congestion and pollution. Jamie Heywood, Uber’s general manager for northern and eastern Europe, said the firm had committed to being fully electric in the capital by 2025, adding: “The reason we were able to do that is because of the strong leadership the mayor has shown in electrifying London and trying to manage things like congestion and pollution. “We’ve spent a lot of the last four years leaning in to join with the momentum the mayor has created to support our drivers.” Uber’s London licence comes up for renewal in March. It won an 18-month extension on appeal in 2020, after Transport for London initially rejected its application due to safety concerns. Uber introduced a clean air fee in 2018 that added 15p a mile to London journeys – now totalling a £145m pot, giving the average driver more than £3,000 in an individual savings account to redeem against the purchase of an electric car. Heywood said the fund was at a “tipping point” from saving to spending, with only £9m so far spent but most drivers having saved enough to incentivise buying electric. About 90% of new registrations of Uber vehicles in London are now fully electric, he said. The firm has negotiated discounts with manufacturers including Nissan, Hyundai and Tesla, as well as banks and lenders to help Uber drivers access finance. Heywood said it was on track for 10,000 EVs in London by the end of the year, more than any other global city, and had committed to be fully electric in the capital five years earlier than in its other markets. Heywood said it owed much to the congestion charge and the push for more electric charging points, and “other tools to work out how to keep London a clean, great, low congestion city”. Khan last month said he would seek by 2024 either to extend charges for drivers of all but the cleanest vehicles or to enlarge the ultra-low emission zone, and in the long term would explore a road pricing scheme. Heywood said: “It’s admirable that the mayor has called for a consultation on what are the bold steps that need to be taken – we absolutely support having that conversation. It’s important that behaviours that cause pollution and congestion – which are big social costs – are disincentivised.” He said road charging “could play a very important part in trying to move urban transport from being [private] car-dominated into one that is shared – be that Uber Pool or public transport – or much more active, biking and walking”. But he said it would be important it was designed in a way that “doesn’t worsen London’s inequalities”.What the truck is going on in Canada? No offence to Ottawa, but it’s not the most exciting place in the world. Over the past couple of weeks, however, the Canadian capital has been embroiled in drama: hundreds of truckers, ostensibly protesting against vaccine mandates, have brought the city to a standstill. Members of the so-called “Freedom Truck Convoy” have been blaring horns, desecrating war memorials and setting off fireworks. Residents are being driven to distraction. The police chief has called the situation a “siege”; the Ontario premier called it “an occupation”. On Monday, the city’s mayor, Jim Watson, declared a state of emergency. There’s a lot going on in the world right now. If you’re not Canadian, then the protest in Ottawa might not be top of your list of things to worry about. But I’m afraid you should be worried. You should certainly be paying attention. What’s unfolding in Ottawa is not a grassroots protest that has spontaneously erupted out of the frustration of local lorry drivers. Rather, it’s an astroturfed movement – one that creates an impression of widespread grassroots support where little exists – funded by a global network of highly organised far-right groups and amplified by Facebook’s misinformation machine. The drama may be centred in Canada, but what is unfolding has repercussions for us all. That’s a big claim, so let me break it down. We’ll start with the Canadian lorry drivers. The people protesting against vaccine mandates, it can’t be stressed enough, are by no means representative of the Canadian haulage industry as a whole. Just 10% of cross-border drivers refused the jabs, according to the Canadian Trucking Alliance (CTA), meaning that from 15 January they can no longer cross back into Canada without quarantine. The CTA, along with other major industry organisations, has disavowed the protest. The protesters don’t represent the vast majority of lorry drivers, nor are they representative of public sentiment towards vaccines in Canada – a country where 84% of the population, children included, have received at least one vaccine dose. They are, as Justin Trudeau has said, a “small fringe”. They may be a fringe minority, but that doesn’t mean you should (as Trudeau seems to be doing) downplay or dismiss them. For one, they have a lot of powerful supporters. The usual crowd of rightwing politicians in the US, including Donald Trump and Ted Cruz, have been cheering them on. They have also been getting millions of dollars in funding across crowdfunding sites from international donors. “Donations from abroad are quite a common part of any large crowdfunding campaign,” Ciaran O’Connor, an expert on online extremism at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, told Politico. “But the scale of this one is unprecedented.” Another reason why you should take the Ottawa protests seriously? Thanks to the wonders of modern technology, fringe groups can have an outsize influence. I’m sure you’ve heard of troll farms: organised groups that weaponise social media to spread misinformation, promote division and influence public opinion. Get this: in the long run-up to the 2020 US elections, Facebook’s most popular pages for Christian and Black American content were being run by eastern European troll farms. According to an internal Facebook report written in late 2019 and leaked to MIT Technology Review, troll farms were reaching 140 million users every month. Three-quarters of these users had never followed any of the pages: they’d had the content thrust upon them by Facebook’s engagement-hungry content-recommendation system. “Our platform has given the largest voice in the African American community to a handful of bad actors, who, based on their media production practices, have never had an interaction with an African American,” wrote the report’s author, a former senior-level data scientist at Facebook. “Instead of users choosing to receive content from these actors, it is our platform that is choosing to give [these troll farms] an enormous reach.” After that report was leaked in September, Facebook made a lot of noises about how it was aggressively cracking down on troll farms. Has it followed through on these promises? Meta Platforms, Facebook’s owner, said on Monday that it had removed dozens of scam pages associated with the convoy protest from Facebook; however, there are still a huge number of recently created pages supporting the hauliers, with suspiciously large numbers of followers. Meanwhile, on Telegram, a social network favoured by the right, people across the world are urging each other to replicate the tactics in Canada in their home towns. Canada may not be on the brink of civil war, but what is happening in Ottawa is one small front in a global information war. And the baddies, I’m afraid to say, are winning. • Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistA new professorship in the history of sexualities is to be established at the University of Oxford, after a £5m donation in memory of the human rights lawyer and LGBTQ+ activist Jonathan Cooper who died last year. The new chair will expand the teaching and research into LGBTQ+ history carried out at Oxford and will be the first fully endowed post of its type in the UK when it launches in 2023. The university said the professorship “will act as a catalyst for developing scholarship in LGBTQ+ history at Oxford and also enable it to develop an interrelated series of courses to enhance the student experience, while attracting applicants who may not have considered pursuing study at Oxford before”. Lyndal Roper, the university’s regius professor of history, said: “LGBTQ+ history is where some of the most vibrant historical research and writing is now happening and the creation of the Jonathan Cooper chair of the history of sexualities is an important milestone for the field. The coming generation is questioning what gender means, and now is the time to establish this exciting new scholarship.” Funding for the endowment came from donations by Lisbet Rausing and Peter Baldwin, academics and co-founders of the Arcadia Fund, a grant-making charity that has donated millions of pounds to organisations working on human and natural diversity. Rausing is the daughter of Hans Rausing, the Tetra Pak billionaire. The professorship will be based at Mansfield College, whose principal, Helen Mountfield, said: “It is my firm aim that this will be the start of an exciting research cluster exploring the histories and contributions of LGBTQ+ people. As a historian, in the nonconformist college, I am delighted to help widen the stories which are recorded and valued. As a lawyer, and a friend of Jonathan Cooper, I am proud that his enduring contribution to the history of LGBTQ+ emancipation will be recognised and celebrated by the post named in his memory.” Cooper died suddenly in September last year. He was renowned for his work on international human rights law, and as an advocate for LGBTQ+ rights and a commentator on issues such as trans rights, conversion practices and the rights of people living with HIV. Kevin Childs, Cooper’s partner, said Cooper’s first love had been history: “If there’d been space in his life for him to be anything else he would have been an historian. So, it is particularly fitting that this first chair in the history of sexualities is named after him, for it acknowledges his passion and love as much as his reputation.” Mansfield College plans to continue fundraising to establish a research cluster around the chair, to “spark debate and nurture new scholars”. It wants to support the post with fully funded graduate scholarships in LGBTQ+ history research.The EU is being urged to stop punishing scientists and end the year-long delay in letting British universities and laboratories access its flagship £80bn Horizon Europe funding programme. Scientists across the UK and Europe have launched a campaign to get the UK admitted into the programme amid continuing fears that Brussels is using the fund as leverage in negotiations over the Northern Ireland protocol. The EU agreed to associate membership for the UK as part of the wider Brexit trade deal struck on Christmas Eve 2020 but it has still not ratified the deal or a similar one with Switzerland, held up by a dispute over a draft treaty binding the country to the bloc. The Swiss astronomer and Nobel prize winner Didier Queloz described the delays as a tragedy for science in the UK, Switzerland and Europe. Lord Kinnoull, the chair of the House of Lords European affairs committee, which has recently investigated the impact of the delay, said: “This is a mutual self-harm problem. And that’s not good for something very precious, which is European scientific research. “Last week we had two British academics and a European academic in front of us and there was a great clarity from all of them about how this was harmful to European science. Collaborative projects are much more than just a cheque … if you say you have a half-funded project you are very keen to do, you are not necessarily going to get the thumbs-up.” Queloz, who is backing a Europe-wide campaign by scientists across the bloc to get membership ratified for the UK and Switzerland, said: “To be blunt, politicians have decided to use participation in Horizon Europe as a bargaining chip in wider negotiations.” He wrote in the Financial Times: “If this is the way the game plays out, everybody loses. We risk destroying a fantastic tool that the EU has spent decades developing by excluding two of the biggest players in the global research arena for reasons that have absolutely nothing to do with the programme itself.” Scientists say the days of solo science are long gone, with collaboration responsible for success in everything from the development of Covid vaccines to Queloz’s discovery of a new extrasolar planet. Queloz urged politicians to “pause for a moment” and consider the damage they were doing. “As a scientist holding posts at the universities of Cambridge and Geneva, I recognise that I am conflicted. But, approaching 60, this decision won’t affect my career very much. I am not batting for myself, I’m batting for the future generation of scientists who will be held back by this failure of politics. If the UK and Switzerland walk away, the Horizon budget will be lower; there will be fewer opportunities for young talent to spend time in our great universities,” he said. Ludovic Thilly, the chair of the executive board of the Coimbra group of 41 universities across Europe, said: “We cannot accept any longer that scientific cooperation be held hostage to bilateral politics. A decade of cooperation with our British and Swiss partners is at risk of being jeopardised, and this at a period of time when global challenges have never required so much international research cooperation.” • This article was amended on 9 February 2022. An earlier version incorrectly described the Horizon Europe fund as amounting to “£10bn”.The NHS waiting list in England, which already stands at a record 6 million, will keep on growing for another two years as millions more patients seek care, Sajid Javid has told MPs. The health secretary made the admission in a Commons statement on Tuesday to launch the long-awaited elective recovery plan setting out the NHS’s plan to tackle the backlog of hospital treatment. As many as 10 million people who did not seek care from the NHS since the Covid pandemic struck in March 2020 could now turn to it for help, Javid said. “Even if half of these people come forward, this is going to place huge demand on the NHS,” he added. Assuming that 5 million of the 10 million start seeking care over the next three years, the NHS waiting list will keep getting bigger and bigger until March 2024, he added. Downing Street is worried that, alongside the cost-of-living crisis, long waits for NHS care are an issue of real public concern and one that Labour will seek to highlight. Under the plan, the NHS will have to ensure that by July this year no one has to wait longer than two years for planned treatment in hospital – currently, 18,600 people have been waiting that long. However, it will take until March 2025 – well past the next general election in May 2024 – to end the situation where large numbers of patients, currently 307,000, are forced to wait over a year. Under the NHS’s referral to treatment pathway, patients needing elective care in hospital should be treated within 18 weeks, a right enshrined in the NHS constitution. The publication of the plan sparked a spat between Javid and Wes Streeting, Labour’s shadow health secretary. Streeting said the plan “falls seriously short of the scale of the challenge facing the NHS and the misery that is affecting millions of people, stuck on record-high NHS waiting lists”. He also criticised Javid for trying to portray the backlog as having been caused by Covid. It was rather “a Tory backlog”, caused by years of underfunding of the NHS and failure to tackle the health service’s understaffing, he claimed. The backlog stood at 4.4 million before the pandemic but has since shot up to 6 million. It was 2.6 million when the Conservatives came to power in May 2010. The document contains mainly initiatives that have been announced previously by Javid and NHS England. They include plans for more community diagnostic hubs – one-stop shops where people can have diagnostic tests – and also more surgical hubs, which can undertake large numbers of operations more quickly. In addition, patients whose operations have been delayed for a long time will be offered the chance to have them in hospitals outside their home area and NHS trusts will be encouraged to send patients to be treated in local private hospitals. Boris Johnson said the plan was “the biggest catch-up programme in the history of the health service, backed by unprecedented funding”. Originally due in December, it was delayed by the emergence of the Omicron variant of Covid and protracted wrangling between NHS England and the government over targets spelling out how quickly hospitals can be expected to eradicate one and two-year waits. There were also reports – denied by Johnson – that Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, had refused to sign off the plan amid uncertainty over the prime minister’s future. NHS experts and staff organisations gave the plan a cautious welcome, but they highlighted the lack of a matching strategy to tackle the NHS’s longstanding and widespread workforce problems “The backlog of long waits will not be cleared by March 2025 and it will be impossible to carry out 9m more tests and checks if there are not the right number and mix of staff in place,” said Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation. Richard Murray, the chief executive of the King’s Fund thinktank, said that the plan “if successfully implemented will improve access to services for the many patients anxiously waiting for care in pain and discomfort”. But the targets in it “look ambitious”, because Covid disruption to NHS care means it is impossible to know how many people who need it will come forward seeking it.Black business ownership is surging in the US despite the coronavirus pandemic, research shows, with a rise in businesses owned by Black women. At the start of the pandemic, Black-owned businesses suffered. Between February and April 2020, Black business ownership dropped by more than 40%, the largest drop of any racial or ethnic group, according to a report from the House committee on small business. When government aid became available, Black business owners received fewer small business grants than white business owners, with paycheck protection program funds only reaching 29% of Black applicants versus 60% of white ones. But according to research from University of California Santa Cruz economist Robert W Fairlie, Black business ownership is now up by almost 30% on pre-pandemic levels. The Biden administration has said a record number of people are starting their own businesses. Women of color are the fastest-growing group of female entrepreneurs. “At a time when folks are rethinking their lives and choices, it is not surprising that more Black women are electing to become CEOs of their own companies rather than waiting for their intelligence and skills to be recognized at their current firms,” Melissa Bradley, founder of 1863 Ventures, an agency for Black and brown entrepreneurs, told Business Insider. Pandemic layoffs could be another factor in the rise of Black business ownership. Job insecurity caused by Covid-related restrictions prompted many people to explore alternative options, including starting businesses. Diamonte Walker, deputy executive director of the Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh, told the Pittsburg Post-Gazette: “Being beholden to corporations and institutions just doesn’t feel like a safe bet in times of uncertainty, whereas the risk of starting a business now starts to feel a lot less than the risk of sitting on a job not knowing when your number is coming up.” Experts say the emergence of female Black business owners could be explained by Black women wanting more control over their work life. Millions left their jobs during the pandemic due to inadequate pay, lack of childcare options and debates about remote work, all compounded by systematically low pay and workplace discrimination. “If you start your own business, some of those obstacles may not be as acute as if you were relying on employment from someone else,” the Wells Fargo chief economist, Jay H Bryson, told Insider. “There may be avenues that certainly benefit anybody, but proportionally they’d be more beneficial to the Black community than other parts of the population.”This animated documentary from Danish film-maker Jonas Poher Rasmussen is an irresistibly moving and engrossing story, whose emotional implications we can see being absorbed into the minds of the director and his subject, almost in real time. Rasmussen’s elegant digital animation, interspersed with live-action archive TV footage, makes for a seamless link between the present and the remembered past and provides an ingenious way of obscuring the subject’s identity, which still has to be kept under wraps. Rasmussen talks to a friend of his from teen years, a gay Afghan man in Copenhagen, whom he names “Amin”, and who escaped from Kabul with what remained of his family after the Soviet withdrawal in 1989, his dissident father having been arrested and murdered in prison by mujahideen forces. Amin opens up about memories he has suppressed for decades: how his family went to Moscow on a tourist visa, which they outstayed, hiding in a rented flat; how his elder brother and two sisters were trafficked to Sweden on a container ship with inadequate food, water and air; and how he, with his mother, was forced to make a separate terrifying trip across Russia, and then board a tiny, leaky boat across the Baltic. Amin was finally deported from an Estonian holding camp back to Moscow, and made a new, desperate attempt to reach Denmark, which meant surrendering himself at Copenhagen airport by claiming that all his family were dead – a lie that was vital to his being charitably accepted as an underage refugee orphan, and a lie which he tragically internalised almost all his adult life, because revealing the truth even now could complicate his Danish residency. It has created its own agonising survivor guilt, despite Amin being in touch with his family, themselves safe in Sweden. Then there is also the question of his gay identity, which is playfully disclosed with memories of his crush on Jean-Claude Van Damme – but interestingly, homophobia does not play a substantial part in this story. Anonymity means that, in journalistic terms, none of this can be verified. But there is no reason to doubt any of it, and the only thing I wondered was how much more heartwrenching detail the audience has been spared. What an extraordinary story. • Flee is released on 11 February in cinemas and on Curzon Home Cinema.The European Commission plans to withhold EU funds from Poland over an unpaid fine related to a coalmine dispute. In an unprecedented move, the commission will cut Poland’s EU funds by €15m (£12.6) to recover money Warsaw has refused to pay the European court of justice. Poland’s government was ordered by the ECJ to pay €500,000 a day for every day it defied an order to suspend lignite mining at the Turów coal mine. The Czech Republic brought the case, alleging that the open-pit mine near the Polish-Czech-German border broke EU environmental law, depleting groundwater supplies and causing dangerous levels of air and water pollution. The two countries settled the dispute last week, but EU officials say they had no choice but to deduct the unpaid fine from funds due to Poland. “When performing offsetting, the commission fulfils its legal obligation to collect financial penalties imposed by the court in accordance with its order of 20 September 2021,” said the commission spokesperson for budget, Balazs Ujvari. “In this regard, the commission follows the rules set out in the financial regulation, in the absence of payment by the member state.” The deduction covers unpaid fines from 20 September to 19 October 2021. The total fine amounts to around €70m and further cuts are expected to follow unless the sum is paid. A Polish government spokesman, Piotr Müller, told the Polish Press Agency that Poland would use “all possible legal measures to appeal against the plans of the European Commission, the more so that an agreement has been reached between the governments of Poland and the Czech Republic”. “This is particularly important in the context of the current geopolitical threats from Russia,” he said. Poland faces losing a further €100m over an unpaid fine of €1m per day for its refusal to abandon a disciplinary forum for judges. The dispute comes a day over Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, met the head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in Brussels, where they discussed the Ukraine crisis. Von der Leyen said they had a “good exchange” on the security situation and Russia’s military build-up. “We also discussed the objective of having a robust judicial system in Poland, in line with EU standards,” she added. In an attempt to end the long conflict with Brussels over judicial standards, Duda announced last week that he would dismantle the disciplinary chamber of Poland’s supreme court. While this is a key request for Brussels, it is not clear whether his new law will unwind political control of Poland’s judiciary, the root of the conflict with the EU.Emmanuel Macron completed a whirlwind diplomatic mission to Moscow and Kyiv on Tuesday, claiming that he had received personal assurances from Vladimir Putin that Russia would not worsen the crisis over Ukraine. Speaking after talks with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in Kyiv, Macron said Putin had made clear during discussions on Monday that he would not be the one to escalate tensions. The standoff could take months to resolve, Macron added. Zelenskiy, however, said he was sceptical about his Russian counterpart’s apparent commitment to peace. “I do not really trust words. I believe that every politician can be transparent by taking concrete steps,” Zelenskiy said at a joint press conference with Macron. “Openness was great” so long as it was “not a game”, Zelenskiy added. On Tuesday, six Russian warships and a submarine passed through the Dardanelles strait, heading towards the Black Sea from the Mediterranean. The Russian vessels, landing ships used for amphibious assault, began arriving in the Black Sea on Wednesday. Josep Borrell, the EU foreign policy chief, said the arrival of the ships, adding to Russia’s already substantial firepower, showed that “the visit of president Macron was important, but it has not produced a miracle.” Macron flew from Ukraine to Berlin for a meeting with German and Polish leaders. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said: “Our appraisal of the situation is united, as is our position on this. Any further attack on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine is unacceptable and will draw wide-reaching consequences for Russia – politically, economically and geo-strategically.” After a meeting in Washington with Joe Biden on Monday, Scholz refused to say definitively whether the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline between Russia and Germany would be shut down in the event of an invasion. However, the US Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell, said that the chancellor had given that assurance privately at a dinner on Monday night. “The good news is, he confirmed what President Biden said yesterday: that if the invasion occurs, Nord Stream 2 will not go forward,” McConnell said. “The bad news is that would be after an invasion.” Macron insisted on Tuesday that the Minsk agreements signed by Ukraine in 2014 and 2015 at a time of military defeat were the best way out of the conflict. But Kyiv and Moscow do not agree on what the deal means. The Kremlin says Zelenskiy’s government needs to recognise pro-Moscow separatists in the eastern territories of Donetsk and Luhansk. Kyiv insists the separatists need to disarm before any political solution can be found, and officials believe implementing the accords could lead to the collapse of the Ukrainian state. Asked about Ukraine’s reluctance to implement the Minsk accords, Putin had responded on Monday night with a sinister-seeming phrase: “Like it or not, you’ll have to tolerate it, my beauty.” Switching to Russian and addressing Putin directly on Tuesday, Zelenskiy said Ukraine was indeed “tolerant” because it was not replying to Kremlin provocations. “There’s wisdom in this tolerance,” he said. It was not clear whether two days of intense French diplomacy had brought about modest concessions by Moscow, as Macron intimated, or nothing of the kind. French officials said Putin had pledged not to carry out any new “military initiatives”, after six hours of frank talks with Macron. But the Kremlin quickly moved to ridicule any suggestion that it had made concessions. In a call with reporters on Tuesday, Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, denied that Putin had agreed with Macron to de-escalate. “This is wrong in its essence. Moscow and Paris couldn’t do any deals. It’s simply impossible,” Peskov said, insinuating that it would be pointless to make a deal with France. Peskov added: “France is a leading country in the EU, France is a member of Nato, but Paris is not the leader there. In this bloc, a very different country is in charge. So what deals can we talk about?” In Kyiv, Macron clarified reports that he had suggested that “Finlandising” Ukraine might resolve the crisis. The term Findlandisation refers to Helsinki’s non-aligned status during the cold war. Asked at the press conference in Kyiv about “Finlandisation”, Macron said he had “never used this formula”, and declined to repeat the word. The Normandy format – featuring French, German, Russian and Ukrainian officials – was the best way of making progress, he said. The Biden administration has rejected Putin’s demand that Nato rule out membership for Ukraine. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said his government was not prepared to ditch its long-held red lines. These included Ukraine’s right to make its own security choices, including over Nato, and its refusal to hold negotiations with Moscow-backed separatists. “No one will be able to force us to cross them,” he said on Tuesday. The French officials said that during the talks Macron had agreed to “open dialogue on strategic questions”, but there were no details on what that dialogue might involve. Macron is the most senior western leader to meet Putin since Moscow began massing troops last autumn near Ukraine. The Kremlin has deployed and estimated 140,000 soldiers along Ukraine’s borders and will begin major military exercises on Thursday in Belarus, within striking distance of Kyiv. These are due to finish on 20 February. Even if the Kremlin does then withdraw tactical battalions from Belarus, it is unclear if they would return to their bases in the far east of Russia or remain closer to Ukraine. Western states have been saying for the past several weeks that they fear Russia is preparing to invade. Putin denies this but has previously said he could take “military-technical measures” if his security demands are not met. He wants Nato to return to its 1997 levels of deployment and to pull out of central and eastern Europe. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, said Kyiv would carry out its own parallel exercises at the same time as Russia and Belarus. These would take place across the country, including in the Chernihiv region, close to the Belarus border. Reznikov estimated Russia had deployed 140,000 soldiers and 72 battalion tactical groups, 11 of them in Belarus. Orysia Lutsevych, the head of the Ukraine forum at the Chatham House thinktank, said Putin was notching up a series of “tactical wins” over the White House and its western allies. “His strategy is to plant these seeds of discord,” she said, adding that he may yet string this crisis out for months. She said: “Putin offers the miracle of a possible solution. It’s very alluring for each western leader to say: ‘I found it! I’m the saviour of Europe.’ He plays on people’s egos. This is especially true with Macron.” Speaking alongside Macron in the Kremlin on Monday, Putin claimed that if Ukraine joined Nato, it would inevitably lead to conflict between the alliance and Russia, given Ukraine’s claims on Crimea, which Russia annexed in 2014. “Ask your readers, viewers, internet users: do you want France to fight with Russia? But that’s the way it will be,” said Putin, angrily lecturing a French journalist.As more of us are considering heading abroad again, travel restrictions in a number of popular tourist destinations have been relaxed. France, Portugal and Greece have each updated their entry requirements for fully vaccinated travellers, with changes coming into effect in time for half-term. Vaccinated tourists travelling to Portugal will no longer need to provide a negative test result to enter, although unvaccinated passengers will. Greece has also dropped pre-departure test requirements for fully vaccinated arrivals. However, as with many other EU states, it will require arrivals that have had their second jab more than 270 days ago to have had a booster. France also announced it would soon drop its requirement of a negative Covid test for vaccinated travellers from outside the EU, as daily infection numbers continue to fall. “We again required tests in December over the Omicron variant. In the coming days we will announce that tests are no longer needed for vaccinated people,” Europe minister Clément Beaune told France 2 television on Tuesday. Currently, anyone visiting France from outside the EU, including the UK, has to show a negative test result from the previous 48 hours, regardless of vaccination status. “This week there will probably be a new European protocol for vaccinated people arriving from outside the EU, with eased measures,” Beaune added. EU members agreed on 25 January to better coordinate their travel rules, in particular for people crossing borders within the bloc. The Omicron surge prompted Italy and Denmark, for example, to impose recent negative test requirements for entry by fellow EU residents as well as proof of vaccination, a tightening of the rules that irritated officials in Brussels. French authorities began lifting Covid restrictions this month, with nightclubs set to reopen from 16 February and standing areas once again authorised for concerts and sporting events as well as bars. Norway also eased restrictions, no longer asking travellers to test when they arrive in the country but requiring all travellers over the age of 16 to complete an online registration form 72 hours prior to arrival in Norway. Those who aren’t fully vaccinated must complete the online registration form and have proof of a negative Covid-19 test taken less than 24 hours before arrival. Meanwhile, Morocco has opened for the first time in 16 weeks and Australia also opened its border for fully vaccinated tourists and all visa holders from 21 February, almost two years after borders were first closed. However, travellers were warned to continue to double-check their half-term holiday plans to make sure they meet Covid vaccination rules when travelling to EU destinations. France joined Spain and Denmark last week in requiring anyone who completed their vaccination jabs more than 270 days ago to have a booster to enter the country – or be considered unvaccinated. Austria requires boosters after 180 days. People travelling to Italy, Croatia and Switzerland, as well as New York state or California, will not face the same border checks but may find it harder to go to restaurants, museums and other indoor venues if they have not been boosted.The Queensland government’s response to a gas seep “capable of posing risk to life or property” near Chinchilla included a briefing memo about the incident that described a local Knitting Nannas Against Gas group as a “risk”. On 24 July 2020, a landowner about 10km from Chinchilla discovered water and gas bubbling from several former coal exploration bores on the property. The seep occurred near a section of the Condamine River where methane had previously bubbled to the surface. Documents released under Queensland Right to Information laws detail how the bores were releasing water and gas in an “uncontrolled manner that would appear to be capable of posing a risk to life or property” and required “urgent remediation” work, according to the state Department of Natural Resources, Mines and Energy. Conservation group Lock the Gate claims the documents show the government did not act with necessary urgency – it took six days for the state department to consult with resource companies and authorise access to the site for remediation. One briefing note written by departmental staff on 30 July 2020 – the same day the remediation was authorised – lists “risks” associated with the incident. “The risk of media attention is considered low due to the borehole location being away from public view,” the memo says. “However, it is noted that anti coal-seam gas (CSG) sentiment exists around Chinchilla, with an active ‘Knitting Nannas Against Gas’ group, and several anti-CSG advocates and landholders in the area. “There is a low/moderate risk that the brackish water discharge could negatively impact the landholder’s cropping land and/or dam water. “This risk is mitigated by the swift and active management of the incident.” Leanne Brummell, a member of the Knitting Nannas Against Gas group from St George, said it was troubling the government “was worried about a threat from the Nannas while a potential contamination emergency was unfolding”. “It’s totally appalling that it took the government so long to … fix this mess,” Brummell said. “A similar incident would be fixed immediately if it happened on William Street outside the government’s ivory tower.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In the previous few years, gas seeps in the vicinity of the same Chinchilla property had created concern among opponents of the CSG industry. In 2016, the NSW Greens MP Jeremy Buckingham set methane bubbles on the Condamine River on fire. A report commissioned by the Queensland Department of Environment and Science last year found that Condamine bubbles are “a natural system” but that “the gas escape is enhanced by down-dip CSG production, which is approximately 1km away”. The exploration boreholes discovered bubbling in 2020 were drilled in 2007 by coalminer Yancoal at a site about 10km south-west of Chinchilla. The property has overlapping coal and petroleum leases, and ultimately the operator of the petroleum lease – Origin – plugged the seeps with concrete. Origin required government authorisation to enter the property and complete the remediation, and emails detail how this process took six days as public servants sought the input of both resource companies. Both Yancoal and Origin were supportive of the remediation work. Lock the Gate’s Queensland spokesperson, Ellie Smith, said the government had allowed CSG companies “to run rampant … without first commissioning detailed research into the risks”. “The July 2020 incident … laid bare the Palaszczuk government’s inability to swiftly respond to such emergencies,” Smith said. “It’s hopeless that it took six days before there was a response, because the government processes are so poor that it needs permission from the coal company that left the bores un-rehabilitated before it can trigger action to address the incident. “The CSG industry has dewatered vast areas of the Western Downs, and more than 100 water bores have already run dry, and now we’re seeing incidents like this.” In a statement, the Queensland Department of Resources said the state’s resources framework promotes coexistence of agriculture and resources, as well as managing environmental impacts. “When historical and current resources activity overlap, management can be complex and involve a number of government entities, as well as landholders and resources companies,” the statement said. “In this case, the several entities involved attended the site promptly once the seep was reported, assessed the seep as low to medium risk, the site was made secure immediately, and later fully remediated once the responsible resources company was established.”“You are a hero.” “Not really. The strength just comes to you.” Her clear voice sounds like she’s next door, but we aren’t even on the same continent, forced to undergo the same sombre routine of countless others around the world: swapping sadness via WhatsApp. Last week, her dad died. By the time I call, he has been cremated. In a pandemic, everything demands a shortcut, even the time-honoured rituals of grieving. We have known each other since we were mere children discussing the length of our dress and hair, although the nuns who taught us brooked no latitude with either. Growing up in India, we lived in a university “compound” in houses reserved for faculty from every department from history to chemistry. It only struck me years later what a rich start it was to be steeped in that environment. We went to the sole functional girls’ school and our brothers to its counterpart: this lack of choice would be the making of us and the foundation of friendship. Our fathers were professors and the heads of their departments. Indian families can be nosy about other people’s children, but when I entered medicine, her family took an honest delight in my achievements. Every holiday, they hosted a special dinner for me. This was slightly embarrassing for a medical student with little real knowledge, but my reservations melted at the sight of the feast. I wanted to earn their pride and hoped one day to repay their goodwill. As a doctor, I field all kinds of worried calls from friends and friends of friends. It can be perilous to say too much without knowing enough, so I stick to suggesting practical questions to ask their own doctor to best understand their situation. Empowering patients thus seems to be the most appropriate use of my skills. But the most frustrating part about my friend’s situation was that her father’s illness knew no cure. All one could do was watch the progressive decline that is the hallmark of dementia. Those who care for relatives with dementia often describe how a loved one slowly slips away, physically intact but unrecognisable bit by bit by bit. At the peak of his powers, her dad was a respectable academic and, like so many people of his era, not only an expert in his own field but also a man interested in the world. On any given evening he might be found arguing about politics, grocery prices and university governance. In between he was grading papers, advising students, guiding his own children, and walking daily. The beginning of the end came when he got lost in the teeming metropolis. Before then, his memory failing, he would still take walks which kept his body fit and his mood stable. His daughter had surreptitiously warned the doorman to keep an eye on him, but it wasn’t really needed because he always came back. Until the day he didn’t. For hours she trusted him to return. Then in a panic she called the police, all the while fearing that he had walked into the traffic. But when found, he had endearingly made himself part of some committee meeting on nearby grounds – a hark back to his university days. My friend is a pragmatist. Determined not to lose him again, she labelled all his clothes and slipped identity tags into his pockets. It seemed dispiriting but if it kept him safe – so be it. To those who look on from the outside, it is impossible to imagine the emotional toll of such caregiving with no end date, but in all those years, I never once heard her protest, such was her filial devotion. Dementia places many indignities on sufferer and carer. On the wards, I encounter adult children who can’t bear to see their declining parents soil themselves, while others are distressed by their labile temperament. Some are amazed by the apathy while others dread the disinhibition. What broke my friend was a visit to the bank. Trying to sort out important financial details, she alarmingly discovered that her father could no longer sign his name. The bank politely suggested an alternative. Thumbprints have been used in India since time immemorial by illiterate or semi-literate people who find it difficult to develop a unique written signature and who may use a thumb impression on official documents to maintain consistency. In fact, “angootha chhap”, meaning thumbprint, is a derogatory Hindi phrase for an illiterate person. While he may not have registered the indignity of the situation, his daughter felt it keenly, and for the first time wondered how much longer he must endure it. Perhaps he thought the same, for he died not long afterwards. Absent the pandemic, I might have had a chance to visit him and pay him my respects. Even if he didn’t recognise me, it could have been a form of closure. More importantly, I could have supported my friend through more than text messages. Amid all her responsibilities, she still asks me how I am doing on the frontline. I tell her that her frontline duty has been longer, harder, and deeply personal. With one parent gone, she continues to care unstintingly for the other. There is no recognition and no respite. There are no awards for the selflessness of these everyday heroes. Quiet and industrious, they are an example to us all, which is why we must shine a light on them while reflecting on the debt of gratitude that society owes them.Families separated by Australia’s strict travel restrictions are counting down the days to long-anticipated reunions when the country’s border opens after almost two years. On Monday, Scott Morrison announced all double-vaccinated visa holders, including tourists, would be able to enter Australia from 21 February, a decision branded “bittersweet” by those who had been subject to ongoing restrictions. The border rules have been progressively relaxed since November but some groups – including those on bridging visas, some immediate family members, and tourists – remained cut off from exemption-free travel. Sophie Raynor cheered on the news from Timor-Leste, where she has been living with her partner, Felix Maia, in Dili. Raynor endured almost a year of a long-distance relationship during the pandemic until she was able to leave the country in November. Now, when she returns to Melbourne in a fortnight, her partner, a Timor-Leste citizen, will be able to visit her. “I would have had to go back to Timor-Leste to visit him again in June, so the good news is he can come to Australia instead,” she said. “I hope this reopening is a line in the sand and the end of enforced long-distance and the end of us wondering when we’ll next be able to see each other.” The announcement has also been a welcome relief for those on bridging visas like Canberra-based Shorya Prashar. While most temporary visa holders were granted a reprieve from the hard border in recent months, bridging visa holders have been excluded from the changes until now, leaving them trapped either in or out of the country. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Prashar, a restaurant manager, has not seen his family in India since the pandemic began and grew increasingly frustrated as the Morrison government allowed almost every other group – including working holiday makers and international students – to come and go from Australia. “We felt like we were left behind first and were just waiting but with no hope ahead,” he told the Guardian. “But with this news I can see a big smile on my four-year-old kid [because] he can finally see his grandparents back in India and come back to cherish his life in Australia too.” Another person who has a bridging visa, who asked not to be named, has been stuck in Nepal since June because of the ongoing restrictions. The woman has worked and studied in Adelaide for four years and has been desperate to come back to Australia to continue her career. She told Guardian Australia she was “elated” about the reopening. But she warned there were others who continued to face uncertainty, including those whose visas had expired while they were stuck abroad during the pandemic. “It is definitely a relief for me,” she said. “[But] there are lots of people whose visas have expired including bridging visas, 476 [visas] and so on and [they are] uncertain regarding the government’s plan for them.” For Yohana Belinda, the reopening of the border will mark an end to logistical nightmares. Belinda was living in Melbourne prior to the pandemic while completing her university degree. When Australia began to ban international arrivals, she decided to make a quick trip home to Indonesia. Two years later, she still hasn’t been able to return to clean up her apartment, where all her possessions remain. “I haven’t been able to pack up my stuff since the first lockdown,” she said. “I can’t imagine what it’s going to look like. Can you imagine if you haven’t cleaned your bedroom for two years?” Others, like Matthew Hiscox, hope the easing of border restrictions will see the end of snap flight cancellations as the airline industry bounces back to pre-pandemic levels. Hiscox and his partner had flights booked to South America through Latin American Airlines and Qantas to visit family next month. On Friday, the flights were cancelled with no explanation from LATAM. The airline has since cancelled all of its flights out of Sydney for the entirety of March. “All flights are subject to changes due to availability and the current situation and also, some flights are subject to the government approval,” LATAM said on social media. Last year, LATAM suspended all flights from Santiago to Sydney and Auckland until 28 February due to “commercial requirements”. “It’s now been three years since my partner has seen her family back in Colombia and I’ve yet to meet them for the first time,” Hiscox said. “She is incredibly desperate to get home and seeing her face when I got home from work on Friday pretty much reduced me to tears. “I remain hopeful things will be sorted,” he said. “My partner is very upset, but I have promised to get her there [in] any way possible.”When Nick Howson ends his nursing shift at western Sydney’s Cumberland hospital, it can sometimes be a gamble to make the one-hour drive home before his car runs out of fuel. “You’re always doing that stupid thing where you stretch it – can I drive while the [fuel] lights are blinking for another day?” Howson says. “There’s always a bit of a joke at work when you’re coming up towards payday, and everybody checks their balance to see who’s got the lowest. I continuously win that one.” The 36-year-old father of two toddlers earns about $39.65 an hour, or roughly the national median salary for permanent male employees. Despite serving in a healthcare industry that’s been stretched to breaking point, Howson’s wages aren’t keeping up with inflation, including petrol prices which shot up a third last year. “There’s this entire sector that has kept the rest of the state functioning for two years,” he says. “We’ve literally given our blood, sweat and tears and we just get nothing – nothing except more angst and to be told to deal with it.” The economy is supposedly heading towards its lowest unemployment rate since 1974 if the joblessness rate drops below 4% as expected by the Reserve Bank of Australia in the second half of 2022. But if the past decade is any guide, a tighter labour market is no guarantee of higher incomes for workers like Howson whose 2.5% wage rise fell short of inflation. The disconnect is a problem the RBA governor, Philip Lowe, recognises as he mulls how long to wait for wage growth to quicken so it at least outpaces prices before he and the central bank’s board start to lift the official cash rate from its record low 0.1%. “[T]he pickup in aggregate wages growth is likely to be only gradual, reflecting slow growth in public sector wages and the inertia resulting from multi-year enterprise agreements,” the RBA said in its quarter monetary policy statement released last Friday. “Most employers in the bank’s liaison program are not anticipating wages growth to move beyond the 2 to 3% range this year [while CPI is forecast at 3.25%].” The December quarter wage price index is not due out until 23 February. In the September quarter, private wages were up 2.4% from a year earlier but those in the public sector “remained subdued at 1.7%, as public sector wages policies continued to weigh on outcomes”, the RBA said. That a falling jobless rate isn’t automatically translating into higher wages is no surprise to Jim Stanford, the director of the Centre for Future Work, who says that hasn’t been the case since about 2013. In a recent paper, Stanford argued the jobless rate itself is a poor guide to the tightness of the labour market. The ABS counted 574,400 as unemployed in December but if you count the 1 million people who want to work more hours than they did and those “marginally attached” workers who would like to work but are not actively seeking it, the actual tally swells to more like 2.5 million, he said. That larger pool is one reason why the so-called Non-Accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU), below which wage growth is meant to accelerate, has been overestimated. Once it was thought to be 7%, then 6%, then 5% and now sub-4%. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “That magical point, when workers will finally get their share is always just around the corner,” he says, adding the idea wages are set by demand and supply and productivity is “absolutely bankrupt”. “There is no reason to believe that there’s any magical unemployment rate at which workers will automatically be paid according to the productivity because wages are not determined by supply and demand,” Stanford says. “They’re determined by power.” Evidence of that power imbalance abound. For instance, Stanford calculates that labour productivity has grown by about one-third since 2000 but wage rises have been only half as much. One contributor to the weakening power of workers has been the drop in collective bargaining, particularly in the private sector, after 2013. “The number of current enterprise agreements registered under the federal industrial relations system fell by more than half between end-2012 and 2021, from 23,500 agreements to 10,000,” Stanford says. “And the number of workers covered by current agreements also plunged by one-third in the same period, from over 2.5 million to 1.6 million,” he says. “The decline was more severe in the private sector.” Stanford blames the rise of insecure work – such as the gig economy – and policies that push for wage restraint for breaking the link between a low jobless rate and higher income for workers. However, Andrew McKellar, the chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry representing businesses, backs the existing arrangements. “These policy settings reduce the volatility in the wages system and ensure sustainable wages growth that benefits all parties,” McKellar says. “It is too early to tell if the relationship between wages growth and the jobless rate has been disrupted by the pandemic, or that we will see more significant wages pressure in the coming months.” Nor are recovering businesses in a state to fork out for big pay rises. “We cannot delude ourselves that if we have unrealistic wage demands not backed up by productivity, this will lead us into an unsustainable wage inflation price spiral,” McKellar says. “Then it’s straight back to the 1970s.” Looming public sector industrial action, which often sets the wage pace for private firms, will soon test both the RBA’s models and state and federal budgets. Howson’s union, the NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association, has begun voting on whether to strike on 15 February. Last year the union sought a 4.75% pay rise and got 2.5%, with about one-fifth of that from an increase in superannuation. Next year’s award increase is still to be set. “Clearly, going backwards is where the wages policy is taking us, and there’s no recognition of what the extra efforts every single member in the public health system has made,” says Brett Holmes, the union’s general secretary. Other unions are also lining up, such as teachers. In New South Wales, their wages agreement expired at the end of 2021 and the NSW Teachers Federation will decide on 19 February whether to ramp strike action. The president of the teachers’ union, Angelo Gavrielatos, says the government’s proposed 2.04% a year increase is “well below current inflation rates”. The Guardian approached the NSW government for comment. The wages issue could feature prominently at the federal election. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said both Treasury and the RBA had upgraded their wages forecasts as economic activity rebounds faster than expected. “We are already seeing the benefits of the tight labour market with a record number of people taking up new opportunities,” Frydenberg said. “Treasury analysis shows that on average, people switching jobs have seen pay increases of 8% to 10%, well above the rate of inflation.” However, his Labor counterpart, Jim Chalmers said families were “finding it really tough at the moment” as the cost of essentials skyrockets. “The usual relationship between lower unemployment and higher wages growth has been strained, if not broken, because we’ve got all this job insecurity,” Chalmers said.A hitman walks into a theatre class to kill an aspiring actor and discovers he really loves acting. You’d be forgiven for thinking that the premise of Barry sounds like a sketch from Saturday Night Live, the show that shot Bill Hader, Barry’s star and co-creator, to comedy fame. I was drawn to Barry as a fan of Hader – one of SNL’s best impressionists – and went in expecting fun, high-concept laughs. But over its two seasons (a third is on the way), the series is maturing into something more, becoming a superb meditation on violence and performance. Created by Hader and Alec Berg, the show follows traumatised ex-Marine and killer-for-hire Barry Berkman (Hader), who has accepted a job to kill an amateur actor in LA. He travels from the midwest and does the job – then stays to enrol in the class his target was in. Barry fumbles his way through finding new friends, a romance and improving his craft – all very relatable to any aspiring creative, except that Barry must juggle all this with gang conflicts, an encroaching police investigation and his handler, Fuches (a diabolically slimy Stephen Root), who wants him to quit acting to focus on killing. This hotpot of comedy and brutal action makes for a delicious and surprisingly cohesive mix. And for a man constantly managing different identities, what better metaphor is there than theatre? When his class takes on Macbeth, Barry is so overwhelmed by the moral questions of the Scottish play that he has a meltdown. “I’ve killed people,” he says. “I should just go blow my brains out because there’s no hope for me, right?” He’s not alone in struggling with the thin line between reality and performance. In one memorable storyline, Barry’s girlfriend Sally (Sarah Goldberg) writes an autobiographical play in which she leaves an abusive relationship with her head held high, when in reality she still lives in a state of constant fear and shame because of her ex. Yes, Barry can be heavy stuff but it still manages to be one of the funniest shows in recent memory, with plots involving bumbling criminals, supergluing stab wounds and a feral little girl with terrifying strength. The stellar ensemble cast sees breakout actors mixed with household names. Henry Winkler does his best work in years as Barry’s blowhard acting coach Gene Cousineau, while fan fave Anthony Carrigan is deeply lovable as the Chechen mobster NoHo Hank, who imprints on Barry like a duckling after dubbing him “the Air Jordans of assassins”. Kirby Howell-Baptiste also gets to spoof her much-lampooned Australian accent from The Good Place. But the beating heart of the show is Hader, whose performance nabbed him an Emmy in 2018. Though Hader has joked about HBO execs being sceptical of his casting (and he can be goofy), he’s completely electrifying as Barry, flipping from endearing sincerity to menacing rage. Barry’s immoral actions aren’t motivated by a need to channel his bloodlust like Showtime’s serial killer Dexter, or a mounting god complex à la Walter White. Barry is irrevocably shaped by his time in the US military and its disturbing, gleeful embrace of violence. He is terrifyingly capable, and constantly in pain. When someone finally confronts Barry, he pleads: “We want the same thing. We wanna be happy. We want love. We want a life.” Barry is so compulsively watchable due to this unbreakable cycle of self-validation, as he scrambles to cover his tracks and his murders and lies pile up, the show challenges the limits of our empathy. At the same time, it exposes how people compartmentalise their own bad behaviour. Though most of us can (hopefully) say we’ve never killed anyone for gain, how many of us have presented a false image to maintain our lifestyles, avoid conflict, or feel powerful, absolved or loved? The showrunners wrestle with these questions while never letting Barry off the hook. The second season leaves him hurtling towards a long dark night of the soul, and I’m desperate for a resolution. Covid-19 has delayed the production of the third season – but while we wait, watch the first two to experience a wonderfully experimental comedy-thriller and its often repulsive, yet always delightful, array of characters. Barry is available to stream on Binge nowAustralian consumers could still be waiting months for international parcel deliveries, despite the addition of thousands of tonnes of air freight capacity after the country’s long-awaited border reopening on 21 February. When Australia opens its international borders, not all destinations will initially have enough passenger demand to support the resumption of freight-carrying passenger flights to Australia to pre-pandemic rates, meaning the delays will continue, Cargo Facts Consulting managing director, Frederic Horst says. A backlog in the supply chain is currently contributing to delays and continued demand is keeping air freight costs high. While companies importing and exporting goods use cargo freighter planes for international shipments, postal services largely rely on freight holds in the belly of passenger planes – which saw the US Postal Service suspend deliveries to Australia during the harshest months of flight arrival caps and reduced services in 2021. Countries with strict Covid quarantine rules, such as China and Hong Kong, are unlikely to appeal to Australian tourists, meaning airlines will not have a reason to run additional passenger services, Horst said, so Australians are still facing months-long waits for consumer goods and parcels from Asia. But Horst was optimistic that postage delivery times from the United Kingdom, the United States and destinations with open border rules may improve initially. Horst said that “even when international flights to Australia increase, air freight capacity is still in high demand, so until supply chain issues normalise, things won’t be operating as usual”. “People are going to be wary of travelling [to and from Australia], it’s not just a matter of getting in, it’s what happens when you’re there.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Horst said it would take until at least the second half of the year, just before businesses prepare for Christmas shipments, for freight capacities and costs to Australia to significantly improve, noting that the International Air Transport Association (Iata) are only predicting a return to 2019 air service levels by 2024. International airlines are operating about 20% of the number of passenger services into Australia compared to pre-pandemic levels – not factoring in Western Australia, where traffic is 1% – according to the Board of Airline Representatives of Australia (Bara). Before the pandemic, airlines operated about 2,000 flights to Australia a week, with 840,000 passengers and 22,000 tonnes of freight, generating revenues of $38bn in 2018-19, Bara estimates. The same figure for 2020-21 fell to $6.5bn. Bara, along with other industry bodies including the Australian Airports Association and the Tourism and Transport Forum, have praised the federal government’s announcement this week and remain confident they can begin to scale up services by 21 February, when all remaining visa holders who are double vaccinated will be able to enter Australia. In a statement sent to member airlines on Wednesday, Bara said “the recovery in international aviation depends on a number of factors, some of which are outside the control of the industry”. “Consumer confidence to travel with Covid-19 widely circulating in many countries will be a major influence.” Bara also said the requirement for a negative pre-departure PCR test for travellers to Australia “is commonly cited [as a] barrier to international travel”, as well as the varied testing and self-isolation requirements across states. “These differing arrangements will create confusion for international tourists about their obligations when they travel to Australia and across states and territories within Australia.” Bara is also calling for state and territory governments to end mandatory 14-day hotel quarantine for unvaccinated arrivals, noting its burden on health resources when the virus is already circulating in the community, and the complexity the rule brings to international airlines. “It is administratively difficult and expensive for them to operate two passenger groups.”Michelle Brasier has a knack for making sad things very funny. Her last musical comedy show, Average Bear, was about living in the shadow of hereditary illness – a family history of cancer means that Brasier has a 97% chance of developing the disease that claimed the lives of her father and brother. The show hit the right notes, snagging Brasier the director’s choice award at the Sydney comedy festival. Brasier will bring Average Bear to the Adelaide fringe, Perth comedy festival and Brisbane comedy festival this year for another round of shows. She’ll also present her new show, a theatrical hour of storytelling and music titled Reform, at the Melbourne international comedy festival and Sydney comedy festival this April and May. Reform is the cautionary tale of an online scam and a little less close to the bone. Her history of loss has left Brasier with a conflicted relationship to physical objects. Here, she tells us why she is afraid of holding on to sentimental items, as well as the story of a few significant personal belongings. What I’d save from a fire I’d save my late dog Bruce’s collar. It has a bow tie so people knew he was friendly. It still smells like him, which is to say it smells like chemo and staffy farts, but I like it. I keep it out sometimes, much to the discomfort of guests and our other dog, Eva, whose farts are treated with far less reverence. I was in a fire once and, in a daze, grabbed only my DVD boxset of early 00s cult hit Veronica Mars. So maybe I’d grab that again? Fight or flight is a funny old thing. I try very hard to not get attached to physical things because I am afraid of losing them. Anything sentimental – jewellery from my family, old photos, heartfelt letters – I hate having, because I know I might lose them. So I try to let go of things on my own terms. I’d rather recycle a beautiful letter the second I get it than lose it in a move. I’ve lost a few people in my life and that makes it even worse – you just want to hold on to every scrap of them. “He sneezed on this once”, “this was a candle she lit two times”: pop it in the shrine! It’s a terrible impulse. I should really be a Buddhist but my ego is a nightmare, so here we are. My most useful object My bath. I love a bath. In the second lockdown I was so desperate for a bath that I went to Bunnings and bought the biggest storage tub I could find. I popped it in the shower to fill it up and bathed in it. It’s clear plastic, a tight squeeze and humiliating to squish one’s flesh up against. Hard to empty. This year I moved to a place with a real bath. My partner bought me a little wooden bath tray that sits across it, for holding whisky and my iPad. I can use it for watching Desperate Housewives in, writing in, crying in, relaxing with candles, washing the dog, warming up in winter. It ticks all the boxes. Best thing in the world. A place of stillness constructed out of forgivingly opaque porcelain. The item I most regret losing There are two great regrets in my life. One is sweet and one is embarrassing. The first is that I lost the videotapes I made during my teens. I filmed everything my friends and I did in a cool arty way that felt like Skins or Euphoria at the time, but I’m sure was mostly Bardot dance routines. I filmed the first night I drank alcohol (Fruity Lexia) with friends at a terrible school musical afterparty. That night I figured out I was bi and heard Led Zeppelin for the first time. I delivered a passionate secret monologue to camera about these discoveries. I wish I could watch it now. I love a good cringe in flares and skate shoes. I think I taped over it with an episode of South Park or a Melbourne comedy festival gala for Oxfam. Secondly, I lost a trombone. A full trombone. Not on a flight, not even in an airport. Just day to day moving about my life somehow I misplaced and never found a full trombone. I wish there was more to this story. I played the trombone like any cool normal young woman, then one day I lost the trombone. The day the music died etc.Former foreign minister Alexander Downer privately boasted that Timor-Leste was an “open book” to the Australian government in the year 2000, well before the infamous bugging scandal revealed by Witness K, a tribunal has heard. The Administrative Appeals Tribunal is hearing an application by independent senator Rex Patrick, who is seeking the release of previously secret cabinet documents about Australia’s dealings with Timor-Leste following its 1999 independence vote. As part of the case, Philip Dorling, a then foreign affairs department officer and adviser to shadow foreign affairs minister Laurie Brereton, has filed an affidavit recalling a private conversation he had with Downer on 31 August 2000 during an RAAF flight from Dili to Maroochydore. Dorling recalls Downer speaking of the second world war, describing Winston Churchill’s mistakes and suggesting the war “could have been brought to a more rapid and victorious conclusion” if he had been in Churchill’s position. According to Dorling, Downer spoke of the importance of signals intelligence to the allied war effort and remarked that “clandestine intelligence gathering” remained vital for diplomacy. He then recalls Downer saying: “You know. There’s not much back there [in Dili] we don’t know. We know what they’re saying about Laurie. They’re an open book to us.” Dorling, who went on to become a journalist and now works in Patrick’s office, made a contemporaneous handwritten note about the conversation, which has also been filed to the tribunal. He told the tribunal he had heard concerns from Timorese leaders José Ramos-Horta and Joao Carrascalao prior to his conversation with Downer. Dorling said they had expressed concerns that they were the subject of an extensive electronic surveillance campaign, mounted by Australia. “I interpreted Mr Downer’s remarks, in the context of a discussion of the value of signals intelligence to diplomatic operations, as a measure of confirmation of the concerns expressed by Mr Ramos-Horta and Mr Carrascalao,” Dorling told the tribunal. At the time, Timor-Leste was not yet formally an independent nation. It was being governed by the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor after a successful independence ballot in 1999. Downer told Guardian Australia he had no recollection of any conversation with Dorling 22 years ago. But he said it was “particularly thick” for people to think Australia would send thousands of peacekeeping troops to Timor-Leste without learning as much as possible about the environment into which they were being deployed. “What I do recall is we had thousands of troops in East Timor at that time and obviously we did our best to understand the environment in that country,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Your questions are just extraordinary and there must be something in the water in Australia that makes it hard for some people to understand why, when you deploy thousands of troops to a neighbouring country, you need to have extensive information on that country.” Patrick is seeking two archived documents, dated 29 August 2000 and 4 September 2000, which were not released under the usual 20-year rule due to fears they would compromise relations with a current government. He has already secured the release of parts of the documents which show the Australian cabinet in 2000 was preoccupied with the interests of big oil and gas corporations, fearing the independence of Timor-Leste could disrupt access to the vast underwater reserves in the Timor Sea. During subsequent negotiations in 2004 over the Timor Sea maritime boundary, Australia infamously bugged the government offices of Timor-Leste to gain an upper hand. Witness K and his lawyer Bernard Collaery were charged in 2018 for their alleged role in making the operation public. Collaery is still awaiting trial. Patrick said the evidence suggested Australia had been spying on Timor-Leste “from the moment they became independent”. He said Timor was a “young, fragile, inexperienced country that was desperate for oil and gas revenues” to lift itself out of poverty. “They needed a friend to help them build their new nation,” he said.  “And what did we do? We spied on them to gain an advantage for oil and gas companies, to steal their resources. “I’m a former submariner. I know the intelligence game. I’ve never come across intelligence being collected and used for commercial purposes. I’ve never seen an intelligence product being used to defraud a friend.” Xanana Gusmão, a former president of Timor-Leste, has also given evidence in support of Patrick’s attempts to secure the cabinet records. Gusmão said the release of the documents would “be a positive outcome” for relations between Australia and Timor-Leste. “Any continued secrecy relating to those events only serves to create a further sense of suspicion and impropriety between neighbours,” he said. He said evidence showing the spy mission took place was already on the public record and Timor-Leste generally believed the claims to be true. Gusmão recalled a UN diplomat Sergio Di Mello telling him in 1999 or 2000: “Whisper what you have to say, otherwise Australia will hear our conversation.” The case continues before the AAT. The revelations came on the same day that Timor-Leste’s parliament passed a resolution calling for Australia to drop the prosecution of Collaery and quash the conviction of Witness K, according to local media. Alliance Against Political Prosecutions co-convenor Kathryn Kelly said the resolution was a “significant event”. “It is clearly not in the national interest for the prosecution to continue if this is the Timor-Leste government’s view,” she said. Collaery’s case was also back in the ACT supreme court on Wednesday, where the government was seeking to convince a judge to let it file super secret evidence, which Collaery would not be able to see, as part of its argument that the open hearing of the trial posed a national security risk.News Corp Australia has teamed up with its former foe, Google Australia, to establish the Digital News Academy to send hundreds of journalists to a university business school for training in “unashamedly” commercial journalism. Murdoch’s corporate affairs executive Campbell Reid will be the inaugural head of the Digital News Academy (DNA) and News Corp big-name writers Joe Hildebrand, Hedley Thomas and Sharri Markson will be on tap for students as “experts”. More than 250 journalists from News as well as Australian Community Media and some smaller media, will do the nine-month course each year through University of Melbourne’s business school, a move which has angered journalism academics at the Victorian university. The director of the Centre for Advancing Journalism at the University of Melbourne, Andrew Dodd, said the first he heard of the move was when he read the press release. “Our concern is that the training is happening through the business school,” Dodd told Guardian Australia. “And that News Corp is seeking to work with the business school so as to avoid the kind of questioning culture of liberal arts and humanities faculties. It’s a reflection really of the antagonism that News Corp has had for university journalism programs over many years.” Reid told Guardian Australia the business school was chosen “because it’s unashamedly about the business of journalism” and they wanted to design a curriculum from the ground up. Reid said the academy would teach students to do journalism which was “fit for a commercial purpose right from the moment of creation” because the public was prepared to pay for “trusted news sources” through subscriptions. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Times had changed and journalists now needed to be aware of how to reach the target audience for a podcast or a piece of data journalism, he said. News Corp Australasia’s executive chairman Michael Miller said the academy would build a stronger Australia “by keeping society informed through strong and fearless news reporting and advocacy”. “The academy will play a role in equipping news media organisations and news professionals – from on the ground reporters to editors and publishers – with the toolkit, skillset and mindset to meet the opportunities that digital media provides,” Miller said. It was only 12 months ago that Google signed a multiyear deal with News Corp that led to the search engine paying for journalism from news sites around the world. The deal followed years of Murdoch interests blaming the search engine for killing the business model of newspapers. Other media organisations, including Guardian Australia, also signed deals with Google last year. The idea for the Digital News Academy was hatched during negotiations for the news media bargaining code between News executives and Google Australia’s managing director Melanie Silva. The dean of Melbourne Business School, Ian Harper, declined an interview but said the academy was a “profound education initiative”. “We believe the Digital News Academy has the potential to transform the future of organisational learning, as well as journalism,” Harper said. Reid said the school would attempt to replace the institutional knowledge of newsrooms lost over many years of attrition. “Not that long ago an entry-level journalist would be surrounded by people who would be both curmudgeons and generous with their time and expertise,” he said. “But the throbbing heart of a newsroom is not as vibrant as it used to be.” Reid acknowledges the tension between News and journalism schools which Dodd believes is behind the move, but he said the business school was not chosen for this reason. “There’s no doubt that at News over time there has been tension or scepticism about some of the journalism schools, and I must say extraordinary scepticism in the journalism schools about News Corporation,” he says. Honorary principal fellow at the Centre for Advancing Journalism, Meg Simons, said it was “incomprehensible” that the university “has apparently entered into this arrangement without consulting its journalism school”. “You can’t teach the technical skills divorced from all the rest of journalism,” Simons said. “Journalism happens within a context, a social and an economic context.” Professor of journalism at New York University Jay Rosen went even further, saying that in the US they don’t put business schools in charge of journalism training, “just as we don’t house dramatic writing courses, or a master’s degree in film-making there”. “It says it wants to train the next generation of journalists in how to tell the story of Australian communities,” Rosen said. “It was my impression that the University of Melbourne’s Centre for Advancing Journalism did that work, but they seem to have been cut out of the deal. I would expect that from the Murdoch companies. I would not expect Australian journalists and academics to go along with it.” Reid said Google’s financial support for the school was not part of the news media bargaining code deal.The Coalition has been sitting on a major report into the state of the care workforce in Australia since September last year, and is refusing to make the report public. The National Skills Commissioner Adam Boyton was tasked by prime minister Scott Morrison in March 2021 to undertake an “in-depth study on the factors affecting the supply and demand of care workers”. The report set out to examine the needs of the care and support workforce for aged, disability, veteran and mental health care looking at “near term” and longer-term needs to 2050. Submissions closed in the middle of last year and the report was delivered to the employment minister, Stuart Robert, in September. The government is yet to formally respond, however Morrison told the National Press Club last week that the government was developing an aged care workforce strategy that would “address our plans to support the aged care workforce”. “We’ll have more to say about that, and I can assure you our plans will be costed, our plans will be funded and we’ll know how they work,” he said. A spokesperson for the National Skills Commission confirmed the report had been delivered to the minister and was “currently under consideration by government”. A spokesperson for Robert said the government was “utilising the study in policy development, particularly in the context of the broader workforce in Australia”. The Health Services Union secretary, Gerard Hayes, called for the report to be made public saying “the government can’t keep hiding its negligence on wages and training”. “This government has no intention to invest in the skills and training of our care workforce. It has ignored repeated warnings, including from the royal commission,” he said. “The Covid crisis has shown just how important training and skill development is, but the government is stubborn and lazy. “Fully funded and supported training opportunities, linked to improved wages, are critical to addressing the current and longer-term workforce pressures for aged care.” The HSU is understood to have made a submission to the National Skills Commission inquiry, arguing that wage increases were needed to reflect the arduous nature of the work in the sector. It also called for workers to have more secure employment arrangements, and better opportunities for career progression. Carolyn Smith, United Workers Union national aged care director, said that the government needed to prioritise change for the workforce. “The government has done 22 inquiries into the problems in aged care since 2013 when they came into government, and this particular workforce inquiry the prime minister commissioned two months after receiving the royal commission report which gave very clear recommendations about what needs to happen in terms of workforce,” Smith said. “Workers are sick of inquiries – they want to see some action to change aged care.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning According to the study’s terms of reference, the skills commissioner would have regard to the findings of the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety, and evidence given to the Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of People with Disability. It would assess the likely future growth in demand for workers in the care sector and the “extent to which it can be met over the near and longer term”. “This should include consideration of current strategies to meet that need including workforce planning, migration settings and linkages to the education and training sectors and employment programs and services [and] draw on domestic and international policies and experience, where appropriate.” The report would also develop a framework to monitor and assess pressures in the care and support sector workforce over the short, medium and long term. The criticism from unions comes after the federal government announced on Monday that it would send Australian Defence Force personnel into aged care homes, with up to 1,700 people being deployed to “help stabilise outbreaks and support staff shortages”. Nurses from the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation joined protesters in Canberra on Tuesday, with the federal secretary, Annie Butler, saying workers were “fed up with this government for abandoning aged care workers and residents”. In question time on Tuesday, Morrison came under fire from Labor for the government’s handling of the aged care crisis, with the opposition leader accusing the prime minister of “always taking action which is too little too late and after a problem becomes a crisis”.Peloton, the troubled exercise equipment company, is replacing its chief executive and planning to axe 2,800 jobs as it deals with a post-pandemic sales crash. Co-founder John Foley, who has led the company for its entire 10-year existence, will step down as chief executive and become executive chair while the company will cut about 20% of corporate positions. Laid off staff will receive a year’s free membership with Peloton as well as a “meaningful cash severance allotment”. The move, first reported in the Wall Street Journal, comes weeks after activist investor Blackwell Capital called for Peloton to fire Foley and explore a sale of the company. Amazon and Nike have reportedly expressed interest. Barry McCarthy, former chief financial officer of Spotify and Netflix, will become chief executive and president and join Peloton’s board, according to the Journal. Peloton became one of the highest-profile successes of the pandemic as people canceled gym memberships and bought its exercise bikes and treadmills to work out at home. Investors snapped up shares and the company was valued at $50bn in January 2021. But as the pandemic waned, sales slipped and a series of incidents left the company’s shareholders feeling jittery. Last May, Peloton recalled its two treadmills after the death of a child and dozens of other injuries. In November, the company reported sales in 2022 will be up to $1bn lower than expected. In December, Peloton’s shares collapsed again following the on-screen death of the Sex and the City character Mr Big while riding a Peloton in the series reboot, And Just Like That. On Tuesday the company reported it had lost $439m in its most recent quarter, and lowered forecasts for revenue, subscriptions, and profitability for the year. Peloton hopes to cut costs by $800m over the year and will wind down the development of a $400m factory in Ohio, the company’s first dedicated Peloton factory in the US and a site that Peloton hoped would create 2,000 jobs in the region. Shares in the company surged about 25% on Tuesday. “Our objective is clear: we are taking steps to best position Peloton for sustainable growth, while also establishing a clear path to consistent profitability,” Foley wrote in a letter to shareholders. “Decisions like these were not taken lightly, and we will work hard to assist impacted teammates with their transitions.” Peloton is currently valued at about $9bn, having risen in value on speculation of a takeover. Blackwells Capital was unimpressed by the news and said the company’s moves “do not address any of Peloton investors’ concerns”.BP’s chief executive has dismissed rising calls for a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies to help UK households weather the record surge in global gas prices after his company made its biggest profits in eight years. The FTSE 100 oil giant swung to a profit of $12.8bn (£9.45bn) for last year, from a loss of $5.7bn the year before, after cashing in on historic highs in the market price for gas and oil which have fuelled a cost of living crisis for Britons. BP’s profits for the final quarter of last year leapt 35-fold to $4.1bn, from a modest profit of $115m in the same period last year, as gas prices across global markets reached new all-time highs, and the international oil price reached a seven-year record towards the end of the year. Its chief executive, Bernard Looney, has said that BP becomes a “cash machine” at those prices. The historic profits have put BP shareholders in line for a $1.5bn share buyback in the first quarter of this year. British households, on the other hand, are braced for one of the steepest energy tariff hikes on record this April, with prices all set to rise even higher by next winter due to a global squeeze on gas supplies that has fuelled record high energy market prices. But Looney said a windfall tax would do little to solve the global energy supply crisis, which requires major investments in low-carbon energy sources that can help to secure energy supplies while being “clean and affordable too”. Looney told the Guardian: “What we really need to do right now is make sure we are investing in the energy that we need to help the world transition [from fossil fuels].” The historic profits revealed by oil companies including BP and Shell have refuelled calls for a windfall tax on oil companies; such a tax could fund extra financial help for struggling bill-payers. Opposition parties and green groups were united in calling on the government to tax the company in order to bolster the Treasury’s £9bn rescue plan to reduce energy bills across the country. The Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, said: “The truth is that this is about basic fairness. It simply cannot be right these energy companies are making super profits while people are too scared to turn their radiators on and terrified there will be a cold snap.” Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, tweeted: “The chancellor’s energy plans last week left families more worried than ever. It’s time for Labour’s plan for a one-off windfall tax on oil and gas producers to cut bills.” BP’s rival Shell last week reported a quadrupling of profits to $19.3bn for last year, its highest in eight years. In the US, the oil giants ExxonMobil and Chevron reported net profits of $23bn and $15.6bn respectively for last year – the highest since 2014, when crude last traded above $100 a barrel. The rising calls for a windfall tax were dismissed by Shell’s boss, Ben van Beurden, last week. He said: “I’m not convinced that windfall taxes, popular though as they seem, will help us with supply, nor is it going to help us with demand.” Chancellor Rishi Sunak also rejected calls for a windfall tax last week, saying oil companies already contribute to the exchequer by paying a higher rate of corporation tax and an extra tax would deny the sector the funds it needs in the switch to low-carbon sources of energy. Alongside BP’s bumper profits, the company set out an updated strategy to spend almost half of its capital on business activities which contribute to the global energy transition, such as electric vehicle charging, renewable energy and biofuels this decade. It also plans to boost its investment in the UK. Looney told the Guardian: “When oil prices are high, we make more money and we make no secret of that. But it is literally just 12 months ago that BP recorded the largest loss we’ve made in our history. And the reason for that was because [in 2020] oil prices were, at times, negative,” he said. “I hope objective people look at this and realise that we had to halve our dividend. Around 10,000 people lost their job. It was very difficult,” Looney added. The company’s share price plunged to a 25-year low during the global commodity market slump in 2020, after the company set out plans to increase its investment in clean energy while cutting its production of oil and gas by 40% by the end of the decade. BP’s market value has increased in line with rising oil and gas prices but it remains about 16% lower than before the pandemic.Television quiz masters have the great advantage of the answers being written on cards. Some like to give the impression that they would know more than the contestants regardless of those prompts. Bamber Gascoigne, who has died aged 87, almost certainly did. There were many sweet moments on University Challenge, which he fronted for its first 25 years from 1962, when Gascoigne would, for example, absent-mindedly sing a line of a Bach cantata to confirm a response, or quote the whole couplet or paragraph from which an answering phrase came. Gascoigne was naturally literate and intellectual, as he showed in his other major TV work – the historical documentary series The Christians (1977), Victorian Values (1987) and The Great Moghuls (1990). His genuine erudition drove a business sideline in high-end publishing and bookselling. This allowed him to choose TV work carefully but also led to a second quiz show, in which, improbably as it might seem in a contemporary medium cautious about high culture, he went somewhat upmarket from University Challenge, fronting Connoisseur (BBC Two, 1988-89), a panel game in which the subject matter was exclusively the fine arts. His learning, though, was worn lightly and smilingly. Whereas his successor as University Challenge question master (from its revival in 1994), Jeremy Paxman, has the air of a vice-chancellor dropping in to quiz some of the brighter students over dinner, Gascoigne, who was only 27 when appointed, began with, and kept into middle age, the manner of a PhD student or junior lecturer. Although he always wore a jacket (often tweedy) and tie, it would not have been startling if he had turned up with a varsity scarf coiled round his neck. Gascoigne’s ability to speak with great clarity at high speed helped to build tension as the clock ticked. And catchphrases are as important on quiz shows as in comedy: his “Your starter for 10” (announcing the points coming into play) became as famous as “I’ve started, so I’ll finish” on the rival Mastermind, while Gascoigne’s other go-to quote, “I’m sorry I’ll have to hurry you,” charmingly applied his natural good manners to a timed format. The son of a lieutenant colonel and grandson of a brigadier general, Gascoigne was born in London and educated at Eton and Cambridge (“Magdalene, English Literature” would have been his tag if competing on University Challenge). Through student theatre at Cambridge he met Michael Frayn, a lifelong friend, who went on to become a comic playwright and novelist, although it was Gascoigne who had the earliest success as a writer. He scripted Share My Lettuce, a revue for young actors including Maggie Smith and Kenneth Williams, which ran in London from 1957-58, giving Gascoigne a West End success in his early 20s. Switching from vegetable to fruit-related titles, Gascoigne script-edited Dig This Rhubarb, a TV sketch show, but, by then, had already moved from postgraduate comedy to interrogating students. Gascoigne’s accent – and the Oxbridge colleges who dominated University Challenge’s early decades – gave the show a very English feel, despite its American roots in a show called College Bowl, which the Bernstein family, who ran Granada TV, wanted to emulate for UK television. The subject matter – and title – might have been thought potentially intimidating to audiences, but the Bernsteins specifically intended Granada to be a BBC within the ITV commercial structure, and there was no panic over hard questions on the kind of tough subjects that Gascoigne knew so well. He was the perfect host to prove ITV’s instinct that viewer enjoyment does not necessarily depend on the ability to play along at home. Instead, his easy intellect and unpreposessing grasp of trivia allowed viewers to enjoy the cleverness of others. As a smug arty teenager, I was at first bemused that my working-class north-eastern grandparents (who left school in their early teens) dutifully watched a programme on which they got even fewer of the answers than I did. Now, I ashamedly realise they were appreciating the spectacle of Gascoigne and his contestants’ intelligence (in whom they also saw their children, the first in the family to go to college) and further educating themselves. Whatever your knowledge bank, it was greater by the end of an episode. Gascoigne was also intensely telegenic, if in a slightly eccentric way. His repertoire of encouraging or consolatory smiles or grimaces, nods and head anglings were relished by Griff Rhys Jones – who played ‘Bambi’ Gascoigne in a 1984 episode of The Young Ones – and Mark Gatiss, whose portrayal in the 2006 college comedy movie Starter For Ten introduced Bamber to generations for whom the surname was most associated with the footballer, Paul. The presenter’s unassuming charisma was a good fit for a quiz show that was visual in multiple ways, with its trompe-l’œil (a word which was more than once a starter round answer) effect of the teams sitting on top of each other (in reality, they were side by side on the studio floor). The appearances of the competitors allowed younger viewers (at least white and middle-class ones) to see people on TV who unusually looked like them – while parents and grandparents could jeer about the need to visit a barber or clothes shop. A consequence of Gascoigne’s grand lineage was that, in 2014, he inherited, on the death of a distant aunt, a 15th-century medieval manor in Surrey. He and his wife, Christina, set up the West Horsley Place Trust to restore and maintain the property. Gascoigne’s contribution to television was extended indirectly when his residence was used to film TV shows, including Ghosts and Enola Holmes.Boris Johnson has made Jacob Rees-Mogg the new minister for “Brexit opportunities” and installed a key loyalist as his chief whip in a reshuffle intended to shore up his position after weeks of terrible headlines. Rees-Mogg, who was Commons leader, is moved to the Cabinet Office to take on a newly created role as Brexit opportunities minister, a cabinet-level job that also includes “government efficiency”. Chris Heaton-Harris, formerly Europe minister in the Foreign Office, takes over as chief whip from Mark Spencer. Heaton-Harris was a key member of a parallel parliamentary organisation advising the prime minister amid his recent woes. Spencer, a trusted ally of Johnson, was widely criticised by Conservative MPs over a series of missteps, including whipping them to support the disgraced MP Owen Paterson. He has been made leader of the Commons in place of Rees-Mogg, overseeing the passage of government legislation. Stuart Andrew, who was deputy chief whip, is moved to be minister for housing in the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, taking over from Christopher Pincher, who is expected to become a whip. Andrew becomes the 11th housing minister in 12 years, a continual churn that housing groups have argued means the sector is not properly considered by government. In other moves, two ministers have taken on additional Cabinet Office duties to help out Steve Barclay, the main minister in the department who was last week also appointed Johnson’s chief of staff – Michael Ellis, the paymaster general and a noted Johnson loyalist; and the whip Heather Wheeler. In the Foreign Office, James Cleverly has taken over Heaton-Harris’s Europe brief. His existing role as minister for the Middle East, north Africa and North America will be redistributed among other ministers. Labour criticised the new job for Spencer, saying it was “completely inappropriate” to have a Commons leader who was connected to an investigation of alleged racism, and whose whipping operation had been accused of seeking to blackmail MPs. The Tory MP Nusrat Ghani alleged last month that, when she lost her job as a transport minister, she was told that “Muslimness” had been raised as a problem at a meeting in Downing Street. Spencer voluntarily identified himself as the person Ghani made the claims about, saying they were “completely false” and defamatory. Also last month, the former Tory MP Christian Wakeford alleged that party whips told him he would lose funding for a new high school in his constituency if he did not vote with the government, while the senior Conservative backbencher William Wragg urged MPs to report ministers, whips and advisers to the Speaker or police for what he claimed was attempted blackmail of those suspected of opposing Johnson. Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow Commons leader, said: “This is just the latest in a long line of appointments that demonstrates this government’s complete disregard for standards in politics.” Heaton-Harris, the new chief whip, was accused of “McCarthyite” behaviour in 2017 after writing to vice-chancellors to demand a list of tutors lecturing on Brexit. The changes come amid a wider shake-up of the team around Johnson, as the prime minister seeks to reassure mutinous Tory MPs, worried about alleged lockdown-breaking parties that are being investigated by police. Last Thursday, four senior No 10 aides quit or were pushed out: Johnson’s longstanding policy chief, Munira Mirza; Dan Rosenfield, his chief of staff; Martin Reynolds, his principal private secretary; and his director of communications, Jack Doyle. While Mirza’s departure was a surprise – her resignation letter condemned Johnson for falsely linking Keir Starmer to the failure to bring the paedophile Jimmy Savile to justice – the other three had been tipped to leave amid the fallout from the party claims. Barclay will lead efforts to integrate his department with a new Office of the Prime Minister and liaise with backbenchers over areas such as future policy. In place of Doyle, Johnson appointed Guto Harri as director of communications, who held the same role for Johnson when he was mayor of London. Mirza was swiftly replaced by Andrew Griffith, a former investment banker and Sky executive who entered parliament in 2019. The internal reshuffle has faced some criticism. Some Tory MPs from northern “red wall” areas were critical of Griffith, who represents a safe seat in West Sussex, being handed a role shaping new government ideas. Barclay’s role as an MP, minister and chief of staff raised eyebrows as to the potential workload, while Harri has been immediately embroiled in controversy. • This article was amended on 9 February 2022. An earlier version incorrectly described Chris Heaton-Harris as a former universities minister.ON YOUR OWN AND IN CROWDS Dreams can come true Look at me babe, I’m with you You know you gotta have hope You know you gotta be strong. Not The Fiver’s words, reader, but those of Gabrielle, who sounds as though she could be an exciting new signing brought in by Newcastle United during the January transfer window, but is actually a singer made famous in the 90s for her aspirational words of ambition and desire. Much like the now-52-year-old Londoner, it appears that Bruno Guimarães – who sounds like he could be a singer from the 90s but is actually an exciting new signing brought in by Newcastle United during the January transfer window – shares Gabrielle’s penchant for a dream, as well as potentially having the wool well and truly pulled over his eyes. “We’re going to be a big power in world football,” roared the new £33.3m Brazilian midfielder in his first chat with the local press, presumably before he saw fellow Newcastle recruit Matty Targett shuffling around the training pitch like a fan that had won a competition to line up with the first team. “The owners were very up-front that, this season, the idea is to stay in the Premier League but the main objective in the years to come is to be in [Big Cup] and, eventually, to win [Big Cup].” The concept is a nice one. Sure, Newcastle might eventually win [Big Cup], in the same way they eventually win any other cup, or the same way The Fiver might eventually get out of bed. Manchester City, who act as some sort of awful precedent here, having started with the same lofty Big Cup dreams after their own Middle-Eastern revamp in 2008, are yet to get their hands on Ol’ Big Ears, despite 14 years and an estimated £1.5bn of trying. But they might, of course, eventually. So while Guimarães should be admired for his temerity, he could just as much be remembered as this generation’s Roque Santa Cruz, having swallowed the spiel from a Newcastle suit, spending the most important years of his career getting the ball off Paul Dummett and walloping missiles into ‘The Channel’ for Chris Wood to chase. Still, Bruno, you really should give Gabrielle a listen. The years will just fly by! QUOTE OF THE DAY “They have to be streetwise. It is a league we are playing in where there are a lot of streetwise players … I don’t think we have been coaching being streetwise, but I think it is something they will all learn. Usually players become magpies and pinch things off other players that can help their own games – and if that is becoming streetwise for us, then so be it” – Dean Smith reckons his Norwich players need to channel their crafty inner urchins to survive in the dog-eat-dog Premier League. RECOMMENDED LOOKING It’s your boy, David Squires, on the FA Cup fourth round. FIVER LETTERS “Before we leave Afcon for another year, do you realise that Egypt only scored four goals throughout the whole tournament? If they only had a world-class striker then they might have won it” – Michael Dawson. “I honestly read the first few lines of yesterday’s Quote of the Day about this worn-out 37-year-old who hadn’t trained in weeks, and pictured Cristiano Ronaldo” – Marcus Roth. “It’s good to see Ralf Rangnick channelling his inner Garfield (cartoon cat of ‘dieting always starts tomorrow’ fame not former President James Abram) with his ‘Manchester United can compete for league title next season’. He did, of course, forget to include ‘but not with me in charge and a defensive midfield of McTominay and Fred’” – Noble Francis. “I really don’t think your 10 FA Cup talking points went far enough (yesterday’s Still Want More?). Antonio Conte had a nerve even stepping foot on the same hallowed patch of turf as York City’s most relentlessly adequate full-back, and Spurs showed a lack of respect by blatantly scoring two more goals than Brighton at the weekend. If the FA Cup isn’t for Graham Potter’s team, then it should – as many have been quietly saying – be smelted down into some pleasant jewellery and dispersed among loyal Brighton support to compensate them, if in part only, for the continued injustices of 1996. Potter is clearly destined for better things, though whether that be as the director of the Royal Ballet, or to take over from Jacinda Ardern, only time will tell” – Jon Millard. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Michael Dawson. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS The RSPCA has condemned Kurt Zouma after a video emerged of the West Ham player dropping, kicking and slapping a cat. “This is a very upsetting video,” said a spokesperson. “It’s never acceptable.” Zouma has apologised for his actions, parping: “I would like to assure everyone that our two cats are perfectly fine and healthy.” Nike has terminated its endorsement agreement with Manchester United striker Mason Greenwood. Al-Hilal coach Leonardo Jardim isn’t best chuffed with the Club World Cup’s format as they prepare to face Chelsea in the semi-finals. “I find it unfair some teams have to play four matches in eight days and other teams, the best, have to play two matches with their teams rested,” he tooted. “There should be better care with the match schedule to recover so Asia and South America can have ambition to win this cup.” Christian Eriksen is back in training with Brentford after signing for the Bees. “It’s just the football touch that needs to come back,” he cheered. Barcelona chief suit Ferran Reverter has quit the club “for personal and family reasons”. Meanwhile, the Mes que un Club remain in talks over a possible €280m sponsorship deal to create the Spotify Camp Nou. There will be one fewer Mousa Dembélé for Big Website subs to deal with once the former Spurs midfielder hangs up his boots at the end of the season. Frank Lampard’s Everton manager Frank Lampard says Dele Alli can wear whatever clobber he darn well likes after nonsensical criticism from Glenn Hoddle. “Maybe Donny [van de Beek] wears an overcoat that is longer than the one Dele wears and he has a different type of jacket, but it doesn’t bother me. As long as they produce on the pitch then I’m very happy,” he but seriouslyed. And at the “Wagatha Christie” case … the North Sea! STILL WANT MORE? Wayne Rooney appears to feel guilt about his many achievements, writes Jonathan Liew after watching the new Wazza documentary. Sorrow, anger and Mané’s redemption: Jonathan Wilson and Nick Ames reflect on their memories of attending Afcon Not 2021. Meanwhile, here’s a gallery of the #scenes in Dakar after Senegal’s triumph. Aston Villa’s Tyrone Mings gets his chat on with Paul Doyle. Juliano Belletti only scored one goal for Barcelona, but it was the winner in a Big Cup final. “There was no other option, I had to shoot,” he recalls. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! GOING BIG IN CHINATrevor Noah Trevor Noah waded into the controversy surrounding the podcast host Joe Rogan on Monday evening, after the musician India Arie announced she would remove her music from Spotify, which has a lucrative deal with Rogan, because she objected to Rogan’s “language around race”. Arie also published a compilation of Rogan – who was under fire last week for coronavirus misinformation on his podcast, prompting musicians Neil Young and Joni Mitchell to pull their catalogues from Spotify – saying the N-word on his podcast. “If there’s ever a video of you saying the N-word that many times, you better pray one of two things: either you’re Black person, or you’re a dead man from history,” Noah said on Monday’s Daily Show. On Saturday, Rogan issued a videotaped apology in which he called the compilation “the most regretful and shameful thing that I’ve ever had to talk about publicly” and said his past use of the word would make sense in context. “Maybe you’re a professor teaching history, maybe you’re a news anchor reporting on a story about Joe Rogan, maybe you’re in a Quentin Tarantino movie and you have to use the N-word, because if you don’t, the movie has no dialogue,” said Noah of the context argument. “But for the most part, as a white person, you never need to use the N-word.” “Here’s a life hack for white people: saying the actual N-word puts you in unnecessary trouble, especially if you’re not racist,” he added. “It doesn’t matter the context. Because Black people don’t have the time to sit down and sort out the racist who says the N-word 70 times with the non-racist who says the N-word 70 times. Black people are dealing with too much shit!” “Just stop saying it or just be racist – it’s easier for everyone that way.” Noah also addressed a separate clip in which Rogan described entering a cinema in a Black neighborhood as “we walked into Planet of the Apes. We walked into Africa, dude.” In the apology, Rogan said he “did not, nor would I ever, say that Black people are apes, but it sure fuckin’ sounded like that. “First of all, he said he would never say Black people are apes, but he said that. That’s literally what he said,” Noah responded. “You did say it, which is racist. And it’s not just racist. Let’s be honest – that’s like OG racism. That’s like the original, old-school racism. Like that’s on the Mount Rushmore of racism.” But what Noah found “particularly illuminating” was Rogan’s claim that he wasn’t being racist with the story, just entertaining. “No, Joe, I think you were using racism to be entertaining,” Noah said. “I’m not saying you were trying to offend Black people, by the way, but you knew that offending Black people would get a laugh out of those white friends who you were with.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel reacted to an overdue rebuke of Donald Trump by his former running mate, Mike Pence. “I heard this week that President Trump said I had the right to overturn the election,” Pence told a conference hosted by the conservative Federalist Society in Florida on Friday. “President Trump is wrong. I had no right to overturn the election.” “Strong words – ‘President Trump was wrong,’” Kimmel said. “You know he spent all day practicing that in front of a mirror as mother patted him gently on the britches.” Pence also said “there’s no idea more un-American than the notion that any one person could choose the American president.” “Well if that isn’t Stella getting her groove back, I don’t know what is,” Kimmel noted. “The vice-poodle has been unleashed. What a weird turn of events. I thought for sure Melania would dump Trump before Mike Pence did.” And in other Trump news, the former president was reportedly “confused” that staff did not enjoy him replaying footage from the January 6 attack on the Capitol. “Good old Captain Bonespurs, he’s always loved watching others do the fighting,” Kimmel mocked. “Can you imagine how spectacularly pathetic you have to be to get pleasure from watching that? He probably made Don Jr and Eric wrestle each other for spaghetti every Friday night.” Now out of office, Trump has been camped out at his Mar-a-Lago resort, which advertised a party this weekend with the former president as disc jockey. “DJ Don!” said Kimmel. “And I want you to imagine now what song this great lover of music might pick to get his guests up and going …” Kimmel’s pick: YMCA, “his inexplicable campaign rally song. The man basically lives in a catering hall. Also, he dances like a Rock ’em Sock ’em robot.”Most people have probably heard of Chernobyl, or the BP oil spill. You may also know about my legal battle over contaminated water in California, dramatized in the movie Erin Brockovich. Yet far fewer people have heard about what transpired in the Ecuadorian Amazon – though it’s considered by some activists, journalists, and members of US Congress to be one of the world’s worst environmental disasters. What if I told you that a multinational oil company allegedly polluted the Amazon for almost three decades? And that the oil company has spent even more years refusing to accept liability? Or that a US attorney who agreed to represent thousands of Ecuadorian villagers in a lawsuit against that oil company has lost his law license, income, spent hundreds of days under house arrest in New York, and in 2021 was sentenced to six months in prison? From 1964 to 1990, Texaco, which merged with Chevron in 2001, allegedly spilled more than 16m gallons of crude oil – “80 times more oil than was spilled in BP’s 2010 Deepwater Horizon disaster”, according to Gizmodo – and 18bn gallons of polluted wastewater in the Amazon rainforest. The pollution allegedly contaminated the ground and waterways with toxic chemicals that the plaintiffs – mostly Indigenous people and poor farmers – say has caused cancer, miscarriages, skin conditions and birth defects. (Chevron has said that Texaco’s operations were “completely in line with the standards of the day” and told the New Yorker, in 2012, that “there is no corroborating evidence” for the health allegations.) In 1993, Steven Donziger, a recent Harvard law school graduate and human rights attorney, began working on an environmental case on behalf of Ecuadorians allegedly affected by Texaco’s drilling. The case eventually became a 30,000-person class action lawsuit against Texaco in New York federal court. Texaco/Chevron did not dispute that pollution occurred, and “freely admits that large sludge pits still dot the Amazon”, the New Yorker reported. The company argued that the Ecuadorian government released it from liability after paying for an earlier cleanup, and that Ecuador’s state oil company, Petroecuador, was responsible for the remaining damage. The plaintiffs argued that the earlier cleanup was woefully insufficient; that Texaco, not Petroecuador, directed actual operations in the area; and that Chevron’s earlier agreement with the government of Ecuador did not bar lawsuits by individuals. (The government of Ecuador also disagrees with Chevron’s claims.) A jury trial in the US might have put Texaco under an embarrassing and costly spotlight, so, perhaps for that reason, the company lobbied to move the legal proceedings back to Ecuador, which has no jury trials and is heavily dependent on the oil industry. Texaco argued that Ecuador had a fair and competent legal system. A US judge agreed to relocate the case on the condition that Texaco accept the verdict of the Ecuadorian system. Texaco’s maneuver backfired: In 2011, Donziger and the plaintiffs won the case there. An Ecuadorian court ruled that Texaco, which had been bought by Chevron at this point, was “responsible for vast contamination”, according to the New Yorker, and “ordered it to pay $18bn in damages – the largest judgment ever awarded in an environmental lawsuit”. Both parties appealed the decision: Chevron said it was “illegitimate and unenforceable” and accused the plaintiffs of having ghostwritten an expert environmental opinion; the plaintiffs denied that the opinion was fraudulent and said that, if anything, the monetary judgment was too low given the scale of pollution. Chevron’s accusation that the judgment was illegitimate relied heavily on testimony by an Ecuadorian judge, Alberto Guerra, whom Chevron relocated to the US and, as of 2015, paid a $12,000 monthly salary. Guerra testified that the plaintiffs had bribed him to sway the Ecuadorian judgment against Chevron. Guerra later recanted much of his claim – admitting, Vice News reported in 2015, that “there is no evidence to corroborate allegations of a bribe or a ghostwritten judgment, and that large parts of his sworn testimony … were exaggerated and, in other cases, simply not true”. (Chevron disputes the significance of Guerra’s change in testimony, telling Vice News, in 2015, that trial “transcripts make clear that Chevron proved its case before the international arbitration tribunal”.) Part of the Ecuadorian judgment against Chevron was a fine for not apologizing for the pollution; in 2013, Ecuador’s national court of justice determined that “there had been no legal basis to sanction Chevron for not apologizing,” according to Reuters, and reduced the judgment to $9.5bn, but otherwise affirmed the original decision. Instead of accepting the legal outcome and the responsibilities that come when you acquire a company (see Dupont-now-Chemours or Monsanto-now-Bayer), Chevron “made clear that it would not be paying the judgment”, according to the Intercept, and “moved its assets out of the country”. The company went from claiming Ecuador’s legal system was fair to claiming it was too corrupt to trust. “We’re going to fight this until hell freezes over, and then we’ll fight it on the ice,” a Chevron attorney vowed – “a remark that became a watchword at the company”, according to the Wall Street Journal. Chevron has more than made good on that promise. It has pursued a years-long campaign against the plaintiffs, their lawyers, and even the entire country of Ecuador. Chevron’s legal strategy is masterminded by Gibson Dunn, a notoriously aggressive corporate law firm that the Montana supreme court rebuked in 2007, in a different case, for “legal thuggery” and “actual malice”. Randy Mastro, a former federal prosecutor and aide to New York mayor Rudy Giuliani, leads the firm’s Chevron file. A “merciless litigator”, according to the New Yorker, Mastro was once described as “the only person in the Giuliani administration who made the mayor seem like a nice guy”. Here’s the thing: a massive multinational corporation such as Chevron can afford to pay millions of dollars in legal fees, indefinitely – and doing so will almost always be cheaper than paying a fine or settling. Chevron “insists that delay is not its object”, Vanity Fair reported in 2007, but the plaintiffs and their attorneys “are persuaded that it is.” “Take $6bn as a figure,” Donziger explained to Vanity Fair’s William Langewiesche. “Simply by sticking the money into a savings account Chevron could make $300m for every year it doesn’t pay. That sum multiplied by the four years of the trial so far would amount to $1.2bn, which is far more than, say, $50m spent on legal fees, even if Chevron now loses the case. And what if Chevron wins – what would the calculation be then?” Corporations can also sue plaintiffs back – crushing any opposition under, to use Chevron’s words, “an avalanche of paper”. This is part of a disturbing legal playbook sometimes known as Slapp – strategic lawsuit against public participation. Massive corporations can fund endless litigation against activists or critics. They don’t even need to win in court, because they can intimidate or bankrupt their opponents in legal fees. (Chevron disputes that it engages in Slapp tactics, though an anti-Slapp organization twice named Chevron “corporate bully of the year” and in 2021 bestowed a “lifetime achievement award” on the company.) After Chevron “successfully defeated a lawsuit seeking to hold it responsible for the shooting deaths of protesters on an offshore oil platform in Nigeria”, it even tried, unsuccessfully, “to compel the impoverished Nigerian plaintiffs, some of whom were widows or children, to reimburse its attorneys’ fees”, the New Yorker reported in 2012. “That’s how they litigate,” Bert Voorhees, an attorney who represented the Nigerian plaintiffs, told the New Yorker’s Patrick Radden Keefe. “The point is to scare off the next community that might try to assert its human rights.” In 2018, an international tribunal ruled that Chevron had been previously released from liability for pollution in the Amazon and ordered Ecuador not to enforce the $9.5bn judgment. Ecuador continues to maintain that the judgment is legitimate. In retaliation, “the giant US oil company objected last June when Washington proposed allowing duty-free rose imports from the world’s poorest countries, including Ecuador”, the Wall Street Journal reported in 2021. “Letting Ecuador save money on flowers after blatant ‘acts of defiance’ would tell the world the US rewards bad behavior, the oil company said.” Chevron has also asked the international tribunal to order that “nearly $800m of Chevron’s legal costs [be] paid by Ecuador, a country whose gross domestic product is about half of Chevron’s stock-market value”. Then there’s Donziger. PR advisers for Chevron promised to “demonize” Donziger in the public eye. The oil company “hired private investigators to track Donziger, created a publication” which smeared him, and “put together a legal team of hundreds of lawyers from 60 firms, who have successfully pursued an extraordinary campaign against him”, the Intercept reported in 2020. Donziger has spent years of his life fighting seemingly endless litigation. In 2011, Chevron sued Donziger and members of the lawsuit in a US court for $60m in damages, accusing them of extortion and invoking a sweeping and controversial statute originally created to fight the Mafia. Chevron’s case rested in large part on Guerra’s since-recanted corruption claims; Donziger and his codefendants denied the charges. “The approach of accusing victims’ attorneys of being fraudsters has been honed with particular energy by [the] law firm Gibson Dunn,” Bloomberg noted in 2014. Shortly before the suit went to trial, Chevron dropped the demand for monetary damages, thus denying Donziger the right to a jury trial. During the suit, which Chevron won, the company demanded that Donziger turn over his phone and computer to their legal team. After Donziger refused, arguing that doing so would violate attorney-client privilege, the judge in the case charged him with criminal contempt of court. The US attorney’s office declined to prosecute Donziger for contempt, so the judge in the case made the extraordinary move of appointing a private law firm to represent the government in prosecuting Donziger – a development that two US senators have called “highly unusual” and “concerning”. The senators also noted that the firm appointed to prosecute Donziger previously represented Chevron. Because he was deemed a “flight risk”, Donziger spent more than 800 days under house detention, with an electronic ankle bracelet, while awaiting the outcome of the trial. In 2020, according to the Intercept’s Sharon Lerner, Donziger’s “bank accounts have been frozen. He now has a lien on his apartment, faces exorbitant fines, and has been prohibited from earning money. As of August [2019], a court has seized his passport and put him on house arrest. Chevron, which has a market capitalization of $228bn, has the funds to continue targeting Donziger for as long as it chooses.” Donziger eventually lost the contempt case, which he called a “charade”. As a consequence of the charges against him, he also lost his law license – against the recommendation of the judicial officer who refereed the professional conduct hearing. The officer, a former federal prosecutor, described Donziger as a stubborn gadfly who is “often his own worst enemy” but called the move to disbar him unjustified, and decried the “extent of his pursuit by Chevron” as “extravagant, unnecessary and punitive.” In October, Donziger reported to a federal prison to begin a six-month contempt sentence. (In December he was returned to home detention as part of a Covid-related early-release program.) He still cannot make a living as a lawyer, cannot collect any legal fees from the Ecuador judgment, and had to wear an electronic ankle bracelet until last weekend. In November, nine members of US Congress signed a letter calling Donziger’s treatment “unprecedented and unjust imprisonment”. International judicial monitors, lawyers’ associations, members of European parliament, and Amnesty International have also criticized the charges against Donziger as excessive and punitive, and 29 Nobel laureates from around the world signed an open letter arguing that Donziger is a victim of “judicial harassment”. I’ve dealt with similar cases myself, with different companies. In 1993, I was part of a team that filed a class-action lawsuit on behalf of 650 plaintiffs against PG&amp;E, alleging that the California utility company knew that harmful chemicals, particularly hexavalent chromium, were seeping into groundwater in Hinkley, California, and contaminating the town’s water supply. That case ultimately resulted in the largest medical settlement lawsuit in history at that time and changed my life. After Hinkley, we discovered other towns nearby in California where hexavalent chromium was causing health problems and wreaking havoc on lives. In 2006, PG&amp;E agreed to pay another $295m to settle a series of lawsuits over contaminated water affecting another 1,100 people. Imagine if instead of a movie telling my story, I’d gone to jail. That’s essentially what has happened to Steve Donziger. And, since this litigation started in 1993, Chevron has not paid a cent or performed any cleanup. So far the only people who have paid for Chevron’s alleged behavior are Donziger and those affected by the contamination – the poor and indigenous Ecuadorians who continue to live every day with the pollution’s effects. Erin Brockovich is an environmental advocate and author of the book Superman’s Not Coming: Our National Water Crisis and What We the People Can Do About It. She is a Guardian US columnistPet hamsters can transmit Covid to humans and are the likely source of a recent outbreak of the Delta variant in Hong Kong, data suggests. The research confirms fears that a pet shop was the source of a recent Covid outbreak in the city, which has seen at least 50 people infected and led to the culling of more than 2,200 hamsters. However, virologists emphasised that, although the pet trade could provide a route for viral spread, existing pet hamsters are unlikely to pose a threat to their owners and should not be harmed. Many animals are susceptible to catching Covid from humans, but until now, only one – the mink – has proved capable of transmitting it in the opposite direction. Hamsters are particularly vulnerable to the virus – dwarf Roborovski hamsters can die from it – so have been widely used as a model for studying the disease. Concerns that hamsters might also be capable of infecting humans first surfaced when a 23-year-old worker at the Little Boss pet shop in Hong Kong tested positive for Covid on 15 January – the city’s first Delta variant diagnosis for more than three months. A woman who visited the pet shop was also infected, and other members of her family tested positive in the days that followed. In response, public-health officials swabbed hundreds of rodents at the pet shop and at the warehouse supplying it. Viral genetic material or antibodies were detected in 15 of the 28 Syrian hamsters, but in none of the dwarf hamsters, mice, guinea pigs, rabbits or chinchillas tested. None of the hamsters had overt symptoms. After coronavirus was detected in the hamsters, Prof Leo Poon, a virologist at the University of Hong Kong, and his colleagues undertook further viral genome sequencing, which revealed that the hamsters were all infected with the Delta variant, and that their viruses were closely related. The nature of the mutations contained within these viruses suggested that transmission had been going on for some time – possibly since mid-November. The hamsters were imported from a supplier in the Netherlands during December and January. Meanwhile, analysis of samples from the pet shop worker and infected customer suggested that their viruses were closely related to the hamster viruses, but that they were unlikely to have transmitted the infection to each other. The study, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, is the first to provide “convincing evidence” that hamsters can become infected in real-life settings, and that they can pass the virus to humans, as well as to other hamsters. “Both genetic and epidemiological results strongly suggest that there were two independent hamster-to-human transmission [events], and that such events can lead to onward human transmission,” Poon said. “Importation of infected hamsters was the most likely source of virus infection.” Most surprisingly, the virus could still “transmit between humans quite effectively” even after replicating in hamsters, Poon told the journal Nature. Although his results point to the global pet trade as a route for viral spread, people are still much more likely to be infected by each other than by their pets, he added. Even so, the findings highlight the possibility that the virus may be spilling over to other animal species without being detected, providing an opportunity for further mutation and potential spillover back to humans. They therefore “highlight the need for awareness, surveillance and for appropriate quarantine and control policies for the pet animal trade”, said Poon.César Azpilicueta has said the chance to make history will drive him on when Chelsea attempt to win the Club World Cup for the first time. The European champions were beaten finalists on the only other occasion when they qualified and Azpilicueta, who was in the team that lost to Corinthians in 2012, is not short of motivation before Thomas Tuchel’s side look to reach a final against Palmeiras on Saturday by beating Al Hilal on Wednesday. The importance of the occasion is not lost on the 32-year-old defender, who is looking to become the first Chelsea player to win every major trophy at club level, and he knows from bitter experience that it would be a mistake to underestimate the Saudi Arabian champions. “It’s very difficult to be in this tournament and after 10 years you realise how difficult it is,” Azpilicueta said. “We lost against Corinthians and I had a different feeling. It was my first season at Chelsea and maybe it looks easier than it is. And then with time you realise how difficult it is, first of all just qualifying. So we have to make the most of it, starting with tomorrow’s game. Hopefully that bad experience will help. “I’m really motivated. In 2012 it hurt a lot. To win it for the first time for the club is huge, we have to make it everything for us. We know it’s going to be difficult. Maybe sometimes in Europe there’s a different perception of what the tournament is but we’re against champions of other continents. We have a huge motivation.” Azpilicueta, who joined Chelsea from Marseille in 2012, refused to say whether completing his medal collection could convince him to seek a fresh challenge this summer. The Spaniard is out of contract at the end of the season and could join Barcelona but he is not thinking about his future. “That’s not important right now,” he said. “It’s to win the trophy. We’re trying to create our own history.” Chelsea have travelled to Abu Dhabi without Tuchel, who is in quarantine after testing positive for Covid-19 last Friday. The manager could join up with the squad on Friday if he tests negative. Tuchel’s assistants, Zsolt Low and Arno Michels, will lead the team against Al Hilal. Low said that goalkeeper Édouard Mendy could fly to Abu Dhabi on Wednesday after winning the Africa Cup of Nations with Senegal last Sunday. However Kepa Arrizabalaga is expected to start in goal. Reece James is unavailable with a hamstring injury and Mason Mount is a doubt after limping off during Chelsea’s victory over Plymouth Argyle in the fourth round of the FA Cup on Saturday. “Mason is getting better every day,” Low said. “We’ll take the last decision tomorrow.” Al Hilal are managed by Leonardo Jardim, who led Monaco to the Champions League semi-finals in 2017, and could pose problems. They have the former Porto striker Moussa Marega, the former Manchester United forward Odion Ighalo and the former West Brom playmaker Matheus Pereira. However Jardim, whose side reached the last four after thrashing Al Jazira 6-1 last Sunday, believes the tournament’s schedule will give Chelsea a physical advantage. “I’d like to give a warning to Fifa and I find it unfair some teams have to play four matches in eight days and other teams, the best, have to play two matches with their teams rested,” he said. “There should be better care with the match schedule to recover so Asia and South America can have ambition to win this cup.” Chelsea’s Hakim Ziyech says he has retired from international football after being overlooked by the Morocco coach, Vahid Halilhodzic.Boris Johnson has made Jacob Rees-Mogg the new minister for “Brexit opportunities” and installed a key loyalist as his chief whip in a reshuffle intended to shore up his position after weeks of terrible headlines. Commenting on the purpose of the reshuffle, the PM’s spokesperson told at the afternoon lobby briefing: As the PM said last week, it is important that we both make immediate changes to improve both how the No 10 operation works and the work of the Cabinet Office, and further changes to strengthen cabinet government and improve that vital connection between No 10 and parliament. The changes being made today will strengthen that connection. We have changes to the whips’ office, improving engagement with MPs and helping to drive the government’s ambitious agenda. We have a new Brexit opportunities minister, a role that’s been created to drive forward the changes we are able to make now that we have left the EU, delivering on our post-Brexit agenda across Whitehall. The NHS waiting list in England, which already stands at a record 6 million, will keep on growing for another two years as millions more patients seek care, Sajid Javid has told MPs. Boris Johnson will not apologise for remarks falsely linking Keir Starmer to the failure to prosecute Jimmy Savile, his spokesperson has said, as Conservative MPs called on the prime minister to back down after protesters shouted abuse at the Labour leader on Monday. A Stormont minister has criticised the “huge” operating costs of Northern Ireland Protocol checks as he outlined the multimillion-pound bill for the first year in operation, PA Media reports. PA says: Agriculture minister Edwin Poots detailed around £8.65m of expenditure throughout 2021, but said other costs outside of his department meant the overall total was significantly higher. Poots, who last week ordered a unilateral halt to the agri-food checks, was responding to a Stormont Assembly question posed by Traditional Unionist Voice leader Jim Allister. A high court judge has suspended Poots’s direction to stop checks on incoming GB goods pending a full legal challenge into his decision next month. Addressing the assembly today, the minister said the salary costs of the additional staff needed to complete the checks at Northern Ireland ports was around £4,447,500. He said that total included almost £1m on agency staff. He said the running costs of the checking facilities in Northern Ireland and the service contract for lorry seal checks carried out on the GB side of the Irish Sea totalled £4.2m. Here is some Twitter comment on the reshuffle. From the Sunday Times’ Tim Shipman From the Sun’s Harry Cole After Shipman posted his tweet, Helen Wheeler did get promoted. See 3.14pm. From Catherine Haddon from the Institute for Government thinktank This is from James Johnson, a pollster who used to work in No 10 when Theresa May was PM, on the significance of the Savanta ComRes poll quoted earlier. (See 3.24pm.) It is a good explanation for the findings, which include almost a third of respondents saying that Boris Johnson’s comments were “completely responsible” for what happened to Keir Starmer. (This is an extreme and unlikely view, given that other politicians have been mobbed by protesters outside the Houses of Parliament in this manner in the past. Saying Johnson’s comments were “somewhat responsible – as 42% of respondents did – seems a lot more plausible.) In an interview with Sky News this afternoon, Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said Boris Johnson knew exactly what he was doing with his smear against Keir Starmer. She said rhetoric of this kind was like “battery acid” that would corrode trust in politics. [Johnson] knew what he was doing. He’s many things, but he’s not naive and any politician who choses to weaponise a conspiracy theory circulated around social media by the far right against an opponent knows what they are doing. And either they are trying to stir up the kind of hate that flows from that, or they don’t care about that being the consequence. And either way that is behaviour is just unbefitting somebody in Boris Johnson’s position. If he had a shred of decency - and I appreciate that that may be the flaw in the argument that I’m about to make - he will withdraw the comments that he made completely and he will fully, unreservedly, unequivocally apologise to Keir Starmer, and he will join with others in saying that we should hold each other to account ... but we should all draw the line at bringing the smears and the lies and the conspiracy theories of the far right, and the other trolls that populate social media, into the mainstream of our democracy. Because if we allow that to happen, it’s like battery acid that will corrode trust in our politics and corrode the very fabric of our democracy. James Cleverly will become the Foreign Office minister for Europe, No 10 has said, replacing Chris Heaton-Harris. (See 1.53pm.) Cleverly was already a Foreign Office minister, but responsible for the Middle East, North Africa and North America. Boris Johnson has said the UK stands “shoulder to shoulder” with Lithuania and its other Nato allies amid rising tensions between Russia and Ukraine. At a meeting with Ingrida Šimonytė, the Lithuanian PM, in Downing Street today, Johnson said: We are closer than ever before, I think it’s fair to say. We see eye to eye on a lot of very important matters .... We’re shoulder to shoulder with you and all our Nato allies and we want to make clear that we support you ... We support you when it comes to the immigration issues in Belarus and all the questions that we’re now facing. Šimonytė said: It’s very to good to know that, you know, we have a very strong partner and friend and at least that we are together, like Nato and others, and I think it’s extremely good what you are doing on Ukraine. Savanta ComRes has released the results of a snap poll suggesting that most Britons think there was a link between Boris Johnson’s Jimmy Savile smear and Keir Starmer getting harassed by a mob in Westminster yesterday. Here is an extract from the firm’s news release about the findings. Seven in ten (69%) say that the prime minister’s comments relating to Keir Starmer failing to prosecute child abuser Jimmy Savile are responsible for the behaviour of protesters who harassed the leader of the opposition yesterday, according to a new snap poll by Savanta ComRes. The figure includes a quarter (27%) who say that the prime minister’s comments are completely responsible for the protesters’ behaviour, while 42% say that his comments are somewhat responsible for the harassment. A quarter (26%) say that the prime minister is not responsible for the behaviour of the individuals, whose hounding of Starmer and the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, led to them both being escorted away in a police car. In the wake of many Conservative MPs calling for the prime minister to apologise and retract the comments he made during PMQs that, during his time as director of public prosecutions, Starmer failed to prosecute Jimmy Savile, the poll finds that 71% say the PM should condemn the behaviour of the protesters – which he has already done – while 68% say he should go further and both apologise publicly to Starmer and withdraw his comments officially in the House of Commons. And while recency bias is likely to have had some effect, the poll also shows that 57% of Brits say that Boris Johnson is the most likely prime minister to make false claims about opposition leaders in the House of Commons, considerably more than those who say Tony Blair (11%). All other ex-prime ministers, from Thatcher to May, only had between 1-3% of the public saying they were most likely to make false claims about opposition leaders in the House of Commons. With this incident raising some concerns about the safety of MPs going about their jobs, the poll finds that two-thirds (64%) say that politics has got nastier than it was five years ago, while a sizable proportion (36%) say that it is generally unsafe for politicians in the UK to go about their work. More reshuffle news. No 10 has announced that Heather Wheeler will become a junior minister in the Cabinet Office, while retaining her job as a government whip. Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, has posted this about what happened to Keir Starmer yesterday, saying politicians should “learn to disagree well”. That’s a diplomatic way of condemning Boris Johnson’s Jimmy Savile smear. Michael Ellis, currently a minister in the Cabinet Office, will become minister for the Cabinet Office. He will also attend cabinet for the first time, and retain the paymaster general role he already has. That is a promotion, and it means he is taking over some or much of the work that has been done by Steve Barclay, who has been minister for the Cabinet Office and who is now the PM’s new chief of staff. On at least two occasions recently (see here and here) Ellis has gone beyond the call of duty when defending Boris Johnson over partygate allegations in the Commons. His loyalty has not gone unnoticed. Record numbers of teachers and school leaders were absent from English state schools last week, PA Media reports. PA says: In total, nearly one in 10 - 9.1 % - of staff were estimated as absent on 3 February compared with 9% on 20 January, according to the latest figures. The Department for Education (DfE) estimates that the proportion of staff off for Covid-related reasons fell slightly from 4.5% on 20 January to 4.4% on February 3. Absence rates for pupils fell, with 320,000 pupils off school for Covid-related reasons on 3 February, down from 5.1% on 20 January. An estimated 249,800 pupils were off with a confirmed case of coronavirus, or 3.1% of pupils, down from 321,800 on 20 January. Levels have not fallen to where they were earlier last month when 159,000 pupils were absent with a confirmed case on 6 January . Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said that having “almost a tenth” of teaching staff absent represented a “major headache” for school leaders. “It is good to see that the number of students missing from schools last week fell, but the major headache for many education leaders remains one of trying to plug the gaps left by having almost a tenth of their teaching staff absent,” he said. Barton said that nearly a quarter - 23% - of schools had more than 15% of teaching staff absent last week, “with many having no option other than to continue to spend more of their dwindling budgets on supply staff, assuming suitable staff are available”. Turning back to the Sajid Javid statement, here is an assessment from James Illman from the Health Service Journal. And these are from Shaun Lintern, health editor at the Sunday Times Chris Heaton-Harris is the new chief whip. He was Europe minister until lunchtime, but he has served in the whips’ office before. Heaton-Harris is a diehard Brexiter who once sparked controversy by writing to universities asking for the names of professors lecturing students on Brexit, and for details of what they were teaching. A Johnson loyalist, he has also been one of the key operatives in “Operation Save Big Dog”. This might not be a major government reshuffle, but it is a significant shake-up of the whips’ office. The chief whip, Mark Spencer, has gone, and No 10 has just announced that Stuart Andrew, the deputy chief whip, is moving too. He has become housing minister, replacing Chris Pincher. (See 1.20pm.) Mark Spencer has replaced Jacob Rees-Mogg as leader of the Commons. He was chief whip. He is also lord president (of the privy council) - a separate post normally (but not always) held by the leader of the Commons. As leader of the Commons, he will attend cabinet, rather than serve as a full member, as Rees-Mogg did in that capacity. Again, this is a sideways move. As leader of the Commons, Spencer, whose only government jobs have been in the whips’ office, which he joined in 2017, will have a higher public profile. As lord president, he will also have regular meetings with the Queen. But he will no longer spend so much time in No 10 as a member of the PM’s inner circle. Jacob Rees-Mogg has got a new job. He was leader of the Commons, but is now minister for Brexit opportunities and government officiency. The No 10 announcement says he will be a minister of state but a member of the cabinet. Effectively this is a sideways move. As leader of the Commons, Rees-Mogg had a higher profile. But technically he only attended cabinet, rather than attended as a full member, and so in one respect he is moving up. His new job roughly corresponds to Lord Frost’s Brexit minister post, although (perhaps for understandable reasons) Rees-Mogg does not seem to have been given any responsibility for negotiating with the EU. Boris Johnson has been under pressure for some time from Brexiters to embrace the opportunities offered by Brexit more enthusiastically. Remainers argue that said opportunities are fairly minimal (at best). Turning away from the Sajid Javid statement, the reshuffle has started, Sky’s Sam Coates reports. Chris Pincher, housing minister and a former deputy chief whip, is seen as a possible new chief whip, replacing Mark Spencer. Pincher is one of the Johnson loyalists who have been running what is reportedly called “Operation Save Big Dog”, the effort to stop triggering a no confidence vote in the PM. In his opening statement Sajid Javid said that 10m was the number of people who stayed away from the NHS during the pandemic, contributing to the backlog now. He did not explicitly say he expected the backlog to rise to up to 10m, as an earlier post said. I have corrected that now and included Javid’s full quote. See 12.41pm. This is from the Health Service Journal summarising the key announcement from Javid. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, told Javid his elective recovery plan “falls seriously short of the scale of the challenge facing the NHS and the misery that is affecting millions of people stuck on record high NHS waiting lists”. He said: We’ve been waiting some time for his plan to tackle NHS waiting times, we were told it would arrive before Christmas, we were told it would arrive yesterday, and it’s not clear from his statement today that the delay was worth the wait. There’s no plan to tackle the workforce crisis, no plan to deal with delayed discharges and no hope of eliminating waits of more than a year before the general election in 2024. The only big new idea seems to be a website that tells people they’re waiting a long time, as if they didn’t already know. What we did hear was a series of re-announcements including some perfectly sensible proposals for community diagnostic and surgical hubs - we welcome those - but the secretary of state cannot pretend that they meet the scale of the challenge. In response, Javid accused Streeting of playing politics, and nurturing his own leadership ambitions. Third, Javid says tackling the waiting list will also give the NHS an opportunity to deliver more flexible personalised care. And, fourth, he says he wants to introduce more transparency. He says the My Planned Care platform announced yesterday should achieve this, by allowing people to get more information about their planned surgery, “putting patients at the heart of their care”. Javid says the government has already allocated an extra £2bn to tackle waiting lists this year, with another £8bn being spent over the next three years. And he says it is also spending £6bn on capital investment in the NHS He says the plan comprises four elements. First, there will be a focus on increasing capacity. The NHS already has more doctors and nurses then ever before, he says. Second, the NHS will prioritise the longest waiting lists. He says by March 2024 the government expects the waiting list to be reducing. By April 2023 waits lasting longer than 18 months should be eliminated, and by March 2024 waits lasting longer than 65 weeks should also be gone, he says. Javid also restates the targets announced yesterday. UDPATE: Javid said: Assuming half of the missing demand from the pandemic returns over the next three years, the NHS expect waiting lists to be reducing by March 2024. Addressing long waits is critical to the recovery of elective care and we will be actively offering longer waiting patients greater choice about their care to help bring these numbers down. The plan sets the ambition of eliminating waits of longer than a year, waits in elective care, by March 2025. With this no one will wait longer than two years by July this year and the NHS aims to eliminate the waits of over 18 months by April 2023 and over 65 weeks by March 2024. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is making a statement to MP on the elective recovery plan - the plan to tackle the NHS waiting list backlog generated by the pandemic. He says that before the pandemic there were 4.4 million people on a waiting list. He says that total is now up to 6 million, but that the NHS estimates it could rise to 10 million. UDPATE: Javid said: 1,600 people have waited longer than a year for care before the pandemic. The latest data shows that this figure is now over 300,000. On top of this, the number of people waiting for elective care in England now stands at six million - that is up from 4.4 million before the pandemic. Sadly, this number will continue rising before it falls. A lot of people understandably stayed away from the NHS during the heights of the pandemic, and the most up-to-date estimate from the NHS is that that number is around 10 million people. I want these people to know that the NHS is open. I want them to come forward for the care they need. At the No 10 lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesman confirmed that a mini-reshuffle is coming this afternoon. He said “a small number of changes” would be announced at ministerial level. Steven Swinford from the Times has summarised some of the moves we’re expecting. Kim Leadbeater, the Labour MP who represents the seat once held by her murdered sister, Jo Cox, told Radio 4’s Women’s Hour that Boris Johnson’s failure to apologise for his Keir Starmer smear was “absolutely the wrong thing to do”. Johnson was only interested in saving his own skin, she said. I don’t think Boris Johnson is interested in listening to me. He didn’t welcome me to parliament when I got the job. I’ve had very little to do with him. He did eventually write a note to me. But I don’t think Boris Johnson wants to listen to people like me. I think he wants to save his skin and he wants to make sure that he is still prime minister and, at the moment, it feels like that’s pretty much all he cares about. And I find that really sad. This is from Dan Hodges, the Mail on Sunday columnist, on Boris Johnson’s Jimmy Savile smear. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Commons Speaker, has joined opposition MPs, and some Tories, in suggesting there was a link between what Boris Johnson said about Keir Starmer last week and Starmer being hounded by a mob yesterday. In a statement to MPs he said he had asked for an update from the police about the incident. He said: I deplore the fact that members of this house were subjected to intimidating and threatening behaviour while simply doing their jobs. I know the whole house will join me in saying that we stand with our colleagues in condemning the behaviour they and the police experienced. While I do not comment in detail on security matters on the floor of the chamber, steps must be in place to keep passholders secure as they enter and leave the parliamentary estate. I have requested a situation report from the Metropolitan police via our security team on how this incident occurred. Commenting on the link between the abuse levelled at Starmer and Johnson’s comment last week, Hoyle said he had already described Johnson’s language last week as inappropriate. He said: I know it has been reported that some abuse was directed at the leader of the opposition yesterday related to claims made by the prime minister in this chamber. But regardless of yesterday’s incident, I made it clear last week that while the prime minister’s words were not disorderly they were inappropriate. As I said then, these sorts of comments only inflame opinions and generate disregard for the house and it is not acceptable. Our words have consequences and we should always be mindful of the fact. The Scottish Conservatives are set to publish a policy paper today, with one of the main recommendations to wind down Scotland’s test and protect scheme, PA Media reports. PA says: The “Back to Normality” document will call for the end of contact tracing in the coming months, with funds instead re-directed towards bolstering the NHS. The Scottish Tories also said the performance of test and protect has declined in recent months, adding that the requirement for confirmatory PCR tests after a positive lateral flow test being dropped has made the scheme “less useful”. Peers are attempting to block plans which could prevent women who are fleeing rape, forced marriage, trafficking or female genital mutilation from securing refugee status – a move that critics say was sneaked into the nationality and borders bill. My colleague Diane Taylor has the story here. This is from Kim Leadbeater, the Labour MP whose sister Jo Cox was murdered by a rightwing terrorist, suggesting that Boris Johnson’s Savile smear was linked to what happened to Keir Starmer yesterday. Brendan Cox, Jo’s widower, told the Today programme this morning that he also believed there was a connection. He said: I think that it’s very hard to draw a direct link and to say that in some ways, the prime minister is directly responsible for what happened. I think the people that are directly responsible for what happened yesterday were the people that did it. However, it’s also true that if you inject poison into politics, that has a whole set of unintended consequences that people will react to in different ways and at times that can lead over into intimidation, it can lead over to violence, it can lead over into extremism. Boris Johnson has been accused of making a “tactical, calculated” decision to say nothing on the Northern Ireland crisis triggered by continued opposition by unionist parties to his Brexit protocol. DUP MP Ian Paisley challenged the Northern Ireland minister Conor Burns to “account for the silence of the prime minister” on the events of last week in Northern Ireland. “This is a calculated tactical decision of the prime minister to keep quiet,” Paisley said at a Northern Ireland affairs committee hearing. Paisley said Johnson has said “absolutely nothing publicly” since last week when the DUP first minister resigned and the DUP agriculture minister ordered a halt to Brexit checks at ports and airports. Burns insisted Johnson was interested and said he had spoken to him on Friday. He also hinted that legislation proposing a statute of limitation prosecutions of those involved in historic killings in Northern Ireland was being watered down. While he said the law was still being planned, the government had listened to local victims groups who were opposed to the laws. He said: If we rushed this; if we reopened all wounds and it’s incredibly painful for many people who have suffered to talk about this … if we were to reopen all of that, and then find out that what we propose didn’t work, that would be unforgivable. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, will make a statement to MPs at 12.30 about the elective recovery plan. This is the announcement that we were expecting yesterday, but that was delayed. It is billed as an “update”, and so it is not clear how much more we will be getting. I am sorry we have not been able to open comments today. The lawyers are nervous about prejudicial comments given that arrests have been made in connection with the Starmer incident yesterday. This morning Chris Philp, the digital minister (see 9.46am), and Brandon Lewis, the Northern Ireland secretary (see 10.27am), have become the latest ministers to defend what Boris Johnson said about Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile in the Commons on Monday. It is an argument that Johnson has used himself (in a TV interview on Thursday), although its first public outing came in an interview earlier that day given by James Cleverly, the Foreign Office minister. The argument contains an element of truth, but in part it is wholly false, and in substance it is misleading. On Monday, in response to a speech from Starmer attacking him in particularly withering and damning terms, Johnson said: The report does absolutely nothing to substantiate the tissue of nonsense that [Starmer] has just spoken - absolutely nothing. Instead, this leader of the opposition, a former director of public prosecutions -although he spent most of his time prosecuting journalists and failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile, as far as I can make out - chose to use this moment continually to prejudge a police inquiry. This was obvious contentious because it implies that Starmer was involved in decisions not to prosecute Savile when he wasn’t. It has been argued that Johnson does not care anyway because even though news outlets carry reports saying this claim is wrong, for many casual listeners the mud will stick. The No 10 clarification/justification argument contains two strands. One is false, and another is largely misleading. 1) ‘Johnson was misunderstood’ Johnson claimed last week that he was talking not about what Starmer did personally, but about “his responsibility for the organisation as a whole”. Philp this morning said that Johnson’s original comment was “capable of being misconstrued”. But the original comment was not ambiguous. The people who understood Johnson to be implying that Starmer was personally responsible for not prosecuting Savile were not misconstruing him, but hearing him correctly. Johnson at no point said he was talking about Starmer having to apologise on behalf of an organisation he led for something for which he was not personally culpable. If Johnson and others had argued that what he meant to say in the Commons was that the PM and Starmer were alike in having to apologise on behalf others, that might have been plausible. But, as it stands, Johnson and his allies are just being dishonest about what was originally said. 2) ‘Leaders sometimes have to apologise for mistakes by their staff for which they are not personally to blame’ This is the part of the Johnson argument that is true. Starmer did apologise for the CPS’s failings in relation to Savile, even though he was not involved, and Johnson feels that his partygate apologies come into the same category. And it is probable that Johnson had no knowledge of some of the partygate allegations being investigated by the police. But the Savile/partygate analogy fails on two counts. First, Johnson is personally implicated. He seems to have attended six of the 12 events being investigated by the police on the grounds that they broke Covid regulations. He still has not admitted that he broke the rules, but he has admitted it is hard to defend at least one of the parties. Second, even if Johnson did not attend many of the No 10 lockdown-busting parties, many people believe that he was partly responsible because he set the tone for what was allowed in the building. Staff took liberties because they were working for a boss who was cavalier with the rules. But there is no evidence that the mistakes made by the CPS in relation to Savile were in any way linked to the management culture shaped by Starmer. Brandon Lewis, the Northern Ireland secretary, has become the latest minister to argue that Boris Johnson did not smear Keir Starmer in the Commons last week because what he said was misunderstood. Lewis told ITV News: What the prime minister was setting out - I think his clarification was clear, I was in the chamber when he made it [the original comment, not the clarification, which came it a subsequent TV interview] - I think he was very clear around the fact that ... somebody at the top of an organisation has responsibility for what happens in it. That’s the point the prime minister was making. I think that is a fair, reasonable point. This is a specious argument. I’ll explain why in a separate post shortly. In his London Playbook briefing Alex Wickham quotes an unnamed government source giving a particularly aggressive version of the argument that there was no link between Boris Johnson’s Jimmy Savile smear and what happened to Keir Starmer yesterday. The source told Wickham: This was a bunch of vile anti-vaxxers and anti-government loons. Their awful actions should be condemned. They were shouting a multitude of slurs and accusations at Starmer including things about Julian Assange. It is plainly wrong, and without evidence, to suggest that the PM’s comments in any way increased the likelihood that these loons would be on the street trying to cause trouble. The fact that some are trying to turn this into another day’s row about Savile feels like opportunism that is a distraction from where our condemnation should be directed. The Conservative MP Caroline Nokes has also implied a link between what Boris Johnson said in the Commons last week and what happened to Keir Starmer yesterday. In a Twitter thread my colleague Jesssica Elgot is keeping a tally of Tories who have criticised Boris Johnson in relation to this. The Conservative MP Steve Brine has posted a tweet this morning predicting that Boris Johnson will eventually apologise for his Jimmy Savile smear about Keir Starmer. He says MPs should always used “measured and moderate” language. Good morning. One of Boris Johnson’s more unique and reprehensible traits is that, after at least 20 years in public life where his conduct has frequently caused offence, he still retains the capacity to shock, by seemingly going further than before. It is one characteristic he shares with Donald Trump, and the Conservative MP Tobias Ellwood was just one of the people who made the link last night after Keir Starmer was intimidated by an aggressive mob, some of whom were were repeating the Jimmy Savile smear aired by Johnson in the Commons a week ago. Here is our overnight story about the incident, which led to calls for Johnson to apologise for his Savile comments from Conservative MPs as well as Labour ones. This morning Chris Philp, the digital minister on the morning broadcast round, has said Johnson will not be apologising. He has also refused to accept there is a link between what Johnson said in the Commons and what happened yesterday. He told BBC Breakfast: The first comments in the house on the previous Monday were capable of being misconstrued and that is why it is important and right that a couple of days later that Boris Johnson, the prime minister, did clarify that he was not suggesting at any time that Keir Starmer had personal responsibility for the case. But he obviously did have responsibility for the conduct of the CPS [Crown Prosecution Service]. I don’t think there is any way you can reasonably suggest that the comments on Keir Starmer’s overall responsibility for the CPS in any way provoked the very unseemly and totally unacceptable harassment we saw last night. Philp, of course, was giving a false account of what Johnson actually said in the Commons last week, although in doing so he was only parroting a line that has been widely used by other ministers since Thursday. As the BBC’s Chris Mason reports, Philp was simply using the line set by No 10. This row is likely to continue as the day goes on. But the “other stuff” mentioned by No 10 is expected to included a mini-reshuffle taking place as part of the Downing Street shake-up being implemented following the publication of the Sue Gray report. We are expected to get the appointment of a new chief whip, and a small number of other ministerial changes. Here is the agenda for the day. 9am: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 9.30am: Conor Burns, a Northern Ireland minister, gives evidence to the Northern Ireland affairs committee. 10.30am: Jonathan Brearley, the Ofgem chief executive, gives evidence to the Commons business committee. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 2.30pm: The NFU and other farming organisations give evidence to the Commons environment committee about the free trade deal with Australia. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comWith an almighty clang, Jane Campion has hit that tipping point at which the awards-season groupthink clusters around one particular movie. Her western psychodrama The Power of the Dog leads the tally list with a whopping 12 nominations. It is about a toxically dysfunctional confrontation between a rancher played by Benedict Cumberbatch in 1920s Montana and his sister-in-law, played by Kirsten Dunst, brother played by Jesse Plemons and his brother’s sensitive stepson played by Kodi Smit-McPhee. Clearly, the Academy has responded to the classic quality of The Power of the Dog: the way it speaks to US culture and history and positions itself unambiguously in the heartland, but a heartland coloured and contorted by anger and sadness, rather like Chloé Zhao’s much-garlanded Nomadland did last year. It’s a movie that reminded me more than a little of the work of George Stevens, though with a 21st-century twist. It is interesting that the director comes from outside the US, and so does its leading man: those tokens of Americanness are being imagined and fabricated by outsiders. Dune, with 10 nominations including best picture, is a film that displays its own “American classic” credentials: it is an eerie, wonderful spectacle orchestrated by Denis Villeneuve (who is not rewarded with a best director nomination) from the iconic Frank Herbert SF novel about a colonial imposition of power on a distant planet due to its fabulous mineral wealth. Kenneth Branagh’s Belfast, inspired by his own childhood in Troubles-era Northern Ireland, comes jointly into the “bronze” medal position with seven nominations. This film has been subject to the annual tradition of the awards-season columnist backlash, in which pundits take against the consensus around a certain film. The admittedly warm-hearted and gentle quality of Belfast (so different from the accepted mode of angry despair) has been held against it – although I can think of two Belfast-born or Belfast-raised commentators who support this film. My personal theory is that the success of the TV comedy Derry Girls has moved the dial about what’s considered the correct tone for depicting this subject. Steven Spielberg’s glorious West Side Story gets seven nominations as well, and perhaps its awards-season gleam will persuade people to see this wonderful movie. Elsewhere, King Richard, with six nominations, is a movie that, although not critically fashionable, has won hearts and minds. This is largely due to the barnstorming performance of Will Smith as Richard Williams, the formidable tennis-coach-slash-dad of the legendary Williams sisters. It is good to see Guillermo del Toro’s amazing noir melodrama Nightmare Alley come up with four nominations (I had feared an almost complete snub). Flee is an outstanding animated documentary about a gay Afghan man who as a child fled his country for Denmark after the 1989 Soviet withdrawal – remarkably, its three nominations span three separate categories in a triumphant style. I was hoping for more Oscar recognition for Paul Thomas Anderson’s staggeringly good comedy Licorice Pizza, but perhaps it is simply too wacky, too uncategorisable, and its age-gap theme too tricky a sell. I found myself disappointed that Lady Gaga’s hilarious turn in House of Gucci was overlooked. (Come to think of it, so was Jared Leto’s florid impersonation of a minor Gucci – probably rightly. But critics are wrong to mock his intentionally camp and absurd performance. I laughed with it, not at it.) Jessica Chastain is rightly nominated for her warmly sympathetic lead as the televangelist diva in The Eyes of Tammy Faye; as is Kristen Stewart for her amusing impersonation of Diana, Princess of Wales in the overrated arthouse-Crown extravaganza Spencer. Olivia Colman may well get her second Oscar for her great turn in The Lost Daughter. But Nicole Kidman didn’t do her best work in Being the Ricardos; I would have preferred to see Ruth Negga in there for Passing. Two years ago, Korean director Bong Joon-ho asked filmgoers to consider that subtitles aren’t so much of an obstacle, being only an inch or so high. Ryûsuke Hamaguchi’s marvellous Japanese film Drive My Car, an adaptation of a Haruki Murakami story, has had its own very heartening success with four nominations. In a way, this film is the success story of this year’s awards season. Join Peter Bradshaw and a team of Guardian film critics for a Guardian Live online event about the Oscars on Thursday 24 March.Pfizer has had an exceptionally good pandemic. Today it announced that its Covid-19 vaccine brought in $37bn billion last year, making it easily the most lucrative medicine in any given year in history. That isn’t all. For a company that was until recently the least trusted company in the least trusted industrial sector in the United States, Covid-19 has been a PR coup. Pfizer has become a household name over the last 12 months. The company was toasted on nights out in Tel Aviv, and there are cocktails named after its vaccine in bars across the world. The US president referred to Pfizer’s chief executive, Albert Bourla, as a “good friend”, and the great man parked his jet next to Boris Johnson’s at last year’s G7 summit in Cornwall. The global vaccine rollout has created levels of inequality so great that many call it a ‘vaccine apartheid’. Pharmaceutical corporations like Pfizer have led this rollout, setting the terms by which they sell vaccines and deciding who to prioritise. Ultimately, their approach affects who does, and does not, receive vaccines. Right from the start, Pfizer was clear that it wanted to make a lot of money from Covid. The company claims that its vaccine costs just under £5 per dose to produce. Others have suggested it could be much cheaper. Either way, the company is selling doses at a huge profit – the UK government paid £18 a shot for its first order, £22 for its most recent purchase. That means the NHS has paid a mark-up of at least £2bn – six times the cost of the pay rise the government agreed to give nurses last year. It has been claimed that the company initially tried to pitch their medicine to the US government for an eye-popping $100 a dose. Tom Frieden, a former director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, accused the firm of “war profiteering”. Pfizer has sold the vast majority of its doses to the richest countries in the world – a strategy sure to keep its profits high. If you look at its global distribution, Pfizer sells a tiny proportion of its vaccines to low-income countries. By last October, Pfizer had sold a measly 1.3% of its supply to Covax, the international body set up to try to ensure fairer access to vaccines. Pfizer wasn’t selling many doses to poorer countries, but neither would it allow them to produce the life-saving vaccine on their own, through licensing or patent sharing. That’s because, at the root of the Pfizer model, are a set of intellectual property rules, laid down in trade deals. These effectively allow big pharma corporations to operate as monopolies, with no responsibility to share the knowledge they own, however much society needs it. Early on, the World Health Organization (WHO) recognised that we would need to scale up production very rapidly – and that individual corporations like Pfizer simply wouldn’t have the necessary capacity. They urged companies to share vaccine recipes, creating a sort of “patent pool” known as CTAP, which would have allowed openness and collaboration. Companies would still have been paid, but they wouldn’t be able to restrict production. This sort of suspension of normal business rules during times of great need was previously common, such as with penicillin during the second world war, or sharing smallpox vaccine knowledge in the 1960s. But in this case, Pfizer’s chief went on the offensive, deriding CTAP as “nonsense” – and saying it was “dangerous” to share companies’ intellectual property. It has been claimed that 100 factories and laboratories around the world could have been making vaccines, but have been unable to do so because they cannot access patents and recipes like those held by Pfizer. Pfizer took a similar line on the new facility that has been set up in South Africa to try to get to grips with mRNA vaccines so that it can share this revolutionary medical technology with the world. Because neither Pfizer nor Moderna will share their knowhow, the scientists have had to start from scratch. News last week suggests that they’re getting there, confounding the pharmaceutical industry’s claims that you couldn’t possibly make such a vaccine in poorer countries. There are many who will argue that while large pharma companies do behave ruthlessly, we must accept it because the service they provide – inventing lifesaving medicines – is so crucial. But this doesn’t hold. Companies like Pfizer behave more like hedge funds, buying up and controlling other firms and intellectual property, rather than traditional medical research companies. The truth is, they aren’t the sole inventors of the vaccine. That was the work of public money, university research and a much smaller company, Germany’s BioNTech. As one former US government official complained, the fact we call it the “Pfizer” vaccine is “the biggest marketing coup in the history of American pharmaceuticals”. A Stat news analysis in 2018 concluded that Pfizer developed only a fraction – about 23% – of its drugs in-house. And a US Government Accountability Office report the previous year noted that the industry model is increasingly to simply buy up smaller firms that have already developed products. This allows them to monopolise that knowledge, and maximise the price of the resulting medicines. Pfizer has channeled $70bn (£52bn) to its shareholders , directly through dividend payments, and through stock-buybacks. This dwarfs its research budget for the same period. To put today’s figures in context, the world’s most lucrative drug in any single year up to this point was Humira, which treats autoimmune diseases, and which generated its owner, AbbVie, $20bn in 2018. Humira was studied by a US congressional committee, and is a classic case of how big pharma companies work today: buy up a drug that’s already been invented, patent it to the hilt, and increase the price 470% over its lifetime. Corporations like Pfizer should never have been put in charge of a global vaccination rollout, because it was inevitable they would make life-and-death decisions based on what’s in the short-term interest of their shareholders. We need to dismantle the monopolies that have handed these financialised beasts such power, and instead invest in a new network of research institutes and medical factories around the world that can actually serve the public. Nick Dearden is director of Global Justice NowA lumpen, headless couple have sex in a vitrine. The woman has flung her arm over the man but the arm is a strapped-on prosthesis, the hand a metal pincer, cast over his lumbering back. Both figures are made of stuffed black fabric and make a bulbous silhouette behind the glass. Go round the end and you can see his balls and stitched black anus. They’re at it again in another vitrine. This time the woman has an articulated prosthetic leg, its calf a nasty paint-chipped pink ending in a horribly delicate shoe. It is a miserable thing, the mark of some kind of psychic wound dragged too far into adulthood. There are vitrines everywhere, and sewn-together upholstered heads, and figures and legs dangling from the ceiling or hung out on stands. Ideas strung together by a thread, thoughts unspooling and reconnecting. Bourgeois’s art leads inevitably to psychoanalytic interpretation. She thought about Freud a lot, but hers was not a systematic appropriation. Her entire life and the things around her became her material. I don’t think she had a choice. Recounting the same old stories – her father’s affair with her nanny, her mother’s death, her relationships with her children, and rummaging about in the lumber rooms of memory and fixations – she kept coming up with marvellous, scary and provocative things. Bodies reappear everywhere. There’s sex and motherhood, replays of her traumas and jealousies in everything she did. Bourgeois could be funny, bitter and surprising at every turn. The Hayward’s architecture and the variety of its spaces is ideal for her work. It is almost 12 years since her death at the age of 99, and 15 since her Tate Modern retrospective. The Woven Child focuses on the last two decades of her long life. Increasingly agoraphobic, she rarely strayed from home. But the work kept coming. This is a wonderful, often surprising and sometimes frightening exhibition. Heads look back, staring at no one. Some are open-mouthed as though about to speak or gasp. Some might smile or sing – it is hard to tell. Some heads, Janus-like, wear several faces. Or several heads sprout from one neck. Other heads hang inverted, like decapitations, in one of her glass and wire-mesh cells. Elsewhere, another head represents her brother Pierre, institutionalised for much of his life, and with only one ear. Ratty old fabrics – raddled, repaired and disintegrating on their hangers – are suspended in one of her constructed rooms, above a precise model of her childhood home outside Paris. Delicate, diaphanous old white camisoles and chemises, bits of underwear and a pale pink blouse, along with a little black dress, hang from cow bones on a stand, like a carousel. On another stand, a smock-like dress has a long red tail trailing on the floor. Little sewn-together figures arch their backs or proffer their rears, which have become breasts. Their feet wear little high heels. A rudimentary body is covered in puffed-up French berets, like a cluster of bloated mushrooms. Body parts keep switching around. Another body twists into a spiral, as though caught in the dizzying whirlwind of frantic childhood play. There’s an element of play, too, in the way Bourgeois piles up little cushions into precarious towers, or uses bobbins, needles and thread to make sculptures that recall the cosmographies of Jean Miró. Bourgeois kept working right to the end, drawing, writing and sewing, constructing her cell-like lairs, doing, redoing and going over old wounds, ancient jealousies, anger and rage. It all kept resurfacing and driving her on. The stories she told herself and the dramas her art enacted were of a piece. She never threw anything away and she kept on accumulating. She used her own old clothes as material, and her mother’s, which she’d saved and kept in the basement of her brownstone in Chelsea, New York. The smell of the clothes and the associations they triggered – as well as the metaphorical associations of sewing and slicing, suturing and ripping, joining and mending, patching and repairing – were all part of it. The Woven Child is, inevitably, not just about textiles, but a way into Bourgeois’s later work in the light of her use of them. A giant steel spider stands over a cell whose walls are partially covered with ratty old fragments of tapestry. Another, smaller spider clambers over a woman in a chair. Is it the spider or the woman who spins and spins in her brocade-covered chair? Unpicking, reassembling and sewing together striped materials, Bourgeois made images of web after web, in beautiful later works. At the centre of some webs, there are flowers. She continued to draw spiders all the while. The spider, she said, was a repairer and a guardian. If you bash its web, the spider will patiently start another. She kept starting again, right to the end. Louise Bourgeois: The Woven Child is at the Hayward Gallery, London, from 9 February to 15 May.Steph Houghton is not in the England squad for the inaugural Arnold Clark Cup that starts next week, after the Manchester City captain aggravated the achilles injury she sustained in September. The 33-year-old defender returned to action in early January but played only five times before being sidelined again and will miss the four-team tournament in which England face Canada, Spain and Germany. “She is really, really disappointed of course but you need to do smart things too,” said England’s manager, Sarina Wiegman. “If you need more time to get fit you have to take that time, otherwise you’ll be out for a longer period and that’s what we don’t want, what Manchester City doesn’t want and what she doesn’t want.” Houghton picked up an achilles injury during Wiegman’s first game in charge, an 8-0 defeat of North Macedonia last September, and is in a race to prove her fitness for the rigours of a home Euros which kick off on 6 July. “She did well when she came out of the winter break, she played well, but now she needs a bit more time to get fit again,” said Wiegman. “Hopefully she’ll recover in a short while and can build up some playing minutes.” Wiegman has been able to call in Houghton’s clubmates Lucy Bronze and Ellie Roebuck for the first time after both missed the past three camps through injury. Arsenal’s Leah Williamson is also back, having captained the team in Wiegman’s first camp before being injured for November’s matches, but Chelsea’s Beth England is out injured. The manager said players not called up still had a chance of breaking into the group before the Euros. “It really starts with performing, and being fit, getting playing minutes so we can value you at games, and that’s what it’s all about. So yes, in April, if we think one player has done really, really well and she can be a good player for our squad, then I wouldn’t hesitate to select her.” The Lionesses are getting set for their toughest test before the Euros with friendlies against the Olympic gold medal winners Canada in Middlesbrough on 17 February, a Spain side laden with Barcelona’s European champions in Norwich on 20 September and the eight-times European Champions Germany in Wolverhampton on 23 February. Under Wiegman, England have played six 2023 World Cup qualifiers, scoring 53 times without reply. “This is what we need,” said Wiegman. “We had a very good autumn with these three camps and now we really need these games to know where we are and from there we can continue. This is a tournament where we play world-class opponents and we’ll really know where we stand in our preparations for the Euros.”Pfizer made nearly $37bn (£27bn) in sales from its Covid-19 vaccine last year – making it one of the most lucrative products in history – and has forecast another bumper year in 2022, with a big boost coming from its Covid-19 pill Paxlovid. The US drugmaker’s overall revenues in 2021 doubled to $81.3bn, and it expects to make record revenues of $98bn to $102bn this year. The bumper sales prompted accusations from campaigners of “pandemic profiteering”. The group Global Justice Now said the annual revenue of $81bn was more than the GDP of most countries and accused Pfizer of “ripping off public health systems”. The Covid jab Comirnaty, which the New-York based pharma firm developed with the much smaller German company BioNTech, brought in $12.5bn in revenues in the final quarter of 2021, taking the total for the year to $36.8bn. Pfizer said it had exceeded its target of manufacturing 3bn doses of the vaccine last year. The drugmaker made a net profit of nearly $22bn last year, up from $9.1bn in 2020. It increased its 2022 estimate for Comirnaty sales to $32bn and expects Paxlovid to contribute $22bn in revenues. The pill, which boasts nearly 90% success in preventing severe illness among vulnerable adults if taken soon after becoming infected with Covid-19, was approved for emergency use by the US regulator in late December. A few days later, Paxlovid received the green light in the UK, where the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency described it as a “life-saving” treatment. It has now received emergency approval in 40 countries. Albert Bourla, Pfizer’s chairman and chief executive, said that at the start of the pandemic it had “committed to use all of the resources and expertise we had at our disposal to help protect populations globally against this deadly virus”. “Now, less than two years since we made that commitment, we are proud to say that we have delivered both the first FDA-authorised vaccine against Covid-19 (with our partner, BioNTech) and the first FDA-authorised oral treatment for Covid-19,” he said. “These successes have not only made a positive difference in the world, but I believe they have fundamentally changed Pfizer and its culture for ever.” The Covid vaccine, together with that produced by US rival Moderna and the much cheaper jab made by Britain’s AstraZeneca, has saved millions of lives worldwide. However, pharmaceutical companies have been accused of not sharing the recipe for their vaccines, which would enable drugmakers in poorer countries to produce cheaper versions of them. Global Justice Now pointed out that Pfizer’s Covid-19 jab was invented by BioNTech, supported by €100m (£84m) in debt financing from the publicly owned European Investment Bank and a €375m grant from the German government. Tim Bierley, a pharma campaigner at the group, said: “The development of mRNA vaccines should have revolutionised the global Covid response. “But we’ve let Pfizer withhold this essential medical innovation from much of the world, all while ripping off public health systems with an eye-watering mark-up.” Moderna has said it would not enforce patent protection on its Covid vaccine, and last week scientists in South Africa said they had developed a copy of the jab. They hope it will boost vaccination rates across the continent, which are among the lowest in the world. Bierley said: “It’s nothing short of pandemic profiteering for Pfizer to make a killing while its vaccines have been withheld from so many. Pfizer is now richer than most countries; it has made more than enough money from this crisis. It’s time to suspend intellectual property and break vaccine monopolies.” Pfizer has charged the UK’s NHS an estimated £2.8bn above production cost for the 189m doses of Covid-19 vaccines the UK government has bought, Global Justice has calculated. According to Reuters, Pfizer has sold the vaccine to African countries at $3 to $10 a shot. It has indicated that a non-profit dose costs just $6.75, or £4.98, to produce, but it has reportedly charged the NHS £18 a dose for the first 100m jabs bought and £22 a dose for the next 89m, totalling £3.76bn, Global Justice Now said – amounting to an eye-watering 299% mark-up. Responding to Global Justice Now’s claims, a Pfizer spokesperson said it was “firmly committed to equitable and affordable access” to the Comirnaty jab. They said: “High- and middle-income countries pay more than low-income countries, but at a value that is significantly discounted from our normal benchmarks, during the pandemic. Low- and lower-middle-income countries pay a not-for-profit price. “However, we would highlight that the true costs of bringing this novel mRNA vaccine to patients include ongoing large-scale clinical studies and pharmacovigilance, continued and increased manufacturing efforts including process improvements, and global distribution and supply. “Covid vaccines are complex biologic products, and their manufacturing requires specialised experience, expertise and equipment. “It is not as simple as sharing the ‘recipe’. Manufacturing of the Pfizer and BioNTech Covid vaccine involves the use of over 280 materials. There is enormous collaboration already taking place.”His director of communications assures us that the prime minister is “not a complete clown” (Report, 7 February). I love all mountebanks, trick cyclists, contortionists, street cardsharps, living statues and the like. Why does my blood run cold at this incomplete clown? John Birtwhistle Sheffield • Given the jolly meeting of Boris Johnson and Guto Harri singing lines from Gloria Gaynor’s I Will Survive, how long before we hear Conservative MPs singing “Go … walk out the door, just turn around now, ’cause you’re not welcome any more”? Dave Harris Bristol • I am aware that the Guardian’s style guide frowns on the use of titles and ancestries, but perhaps an exception could be made for the Hon Kirstie Allsopp, daughter of the 6th Baron Hindlip, when she pontificates on why young people find it harder to buy a house than she did at their age(No, Kirstie Allsopp, cancelling Netflix won’t buy a house – in any location?, 7 February). Dr Chris Howell Newcastle upon Tyne • When our neighbour’s daughter gained admission to an upmarket school, little Jimmy observed: “She’ll be speaking all pound notey now” (Letters, 6 February). Mike Day Cambridge • I cannot remember more uplifting column inches than those penned by the young country diarists on Saturday (5 February). Ash and Rohan shared heartfelt observations. Maybe they are the Attenboroughs and Packhams of the future. Well done, Guardian, for giving young people space to tell us old cynics what they think. Frances Kitson Kingston upon Thames, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Charles Patmore is spot-on (Letters, 6 February). People will be encouraged to use services if they think they are safe. In July, just before “freedom day” in England, I wrote to the managing director of LNER, urging him to make masks a condition of carriage, or at least provide mask-only carriages, as Mr Patmore suggests. I suggested that no one was going to be attracted to trains by not having to wear a mask, and many would be deterred. Reply came there none. Since then, my wife and I have made three trips from Edinburgh to London. Previously we would have gone on the train. Instead, all three journeys were made by car – not good for us, the environment or LNER’s finances. Adam Rennie Edinburgh • A church in Sheffield (St Mary’s, Walkley) does exactly what Charles Patmore wants: you sit on one side if you want two-metre separation, masks etc, and on the other if you don’t mind dispensing with such rules. I expect it’s draughty enough anyway to blow any bugs away. Keith Burchell Derby • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The former Yorkshire chairmen Roger Hutton and Robin Smith have been heavily criticised for, respectively, failing to co-operate with the Professional Cricketers’ Association’s initial investigation into the racist abuse described by Azeem Rafiq, and for holding up progress. In a meeting of the the digital, culture, media and sport select committee Julian Metherell, the PCA’s non-executive chairman, accused Hutton, who resigned as Yorkshire’s chairman last November, of failing to respond to repeated attempts to make contact before eventually providing “nothing that was in any way helpful”. Meanwhile an interview with the Yorkshire Post given last week by Smith, who was chairman between 2002 and 2005 and again between 2018 and 2020, in which Lord Patel’s appointment as chair last year and his subsequent reforms were dismissed as “not valid”, was described as “abhorrent and totally obstructive”. The PCA had been called to defend their record after Rafiq described their initial response to his accusations as “incredibly inept”. Rob Lynch, their chief executive, admitted that “in this dispute with Yorkshire we did not meet the standards we would have wished to”, and said the organisation had since apologised to Rafiq. Metherell detailed his contact with Yorkshire over Rafiq’s allegations. “I personally tried to contact Mr Hutton on a number of occasions, both by email and telephone, and those calls and those emails went unanswered until I sent a note to Mr Hutton to say we were under increasing pressure to comment and we would be forced to go public and say Yorkshire were not returning any of our calls,” he said. “Mr Hutton did then get back to me, but nothing we received from Yorkshire at that time was in any way helpful. One of our failings at the PCA is we placed far too much confidence in Yorkshire and the ECB.” Julian Knight, the Conservative MP and chair of the DCMS committee, asked the PCA’s representatives to comment on Smith’s more recent intervention, which he summarised as a case of “individuals holding up progress for their own very particular reasons”. Unconvinced by Lynch’s initial response that he was “not across the detail” but it seemed “extremely sad”, he sought further comment from Metherell. “We only know what we read in the press but if [the report] is accurate it is abhorrent, it’s totally obstructive and frankly these are some of the great barriers we face in trying to make cricket more inclusive,” Metherell said. “These minorities cannot prevail, they won’t win and with your support we have to drive this out of the game.” Metherell also revealed that the PCA would be consulting Rafiq before drawing up a code of conduct surrounding issues of discrimination. “There is a clear code of conduct on gambling and drugs, and it is zero tolerance,” he said. “We don’t have that today on discrimination. We have to have that, and that is something we look forward to working with Azeem on in the near future.” After the hearing Rafiq tweeted: “Watching today’s session has been a refreshing experience. To hear someone in the game show leadership in the manner Julian Metherell has gives me some hope for the future. He’s clearly someone that should be considered heavily for the ECB chairman’s role.” While praising the current Derbyshire dressing room Anuj Dal, the 25-year-old who was elected the PCA’s vice-chair last year, described his own reaction to Rafiq’s evidence. “I was pretty heartbroken,” he said. “Not only because of what he had experienced but because a lot of what he said hit home for me personally. At times in my career I have had to face issues I felt uncomfortable with, that I felt hadn’t been dealt with in the correct way. “There were instances as I was growing up when Asian players were stereotyped as being lazy. I remember specific hand gestures that were made for players of colour, and also comments that were made while senior members of staff were laughing along, and that to me was heartbreaking. I didn’t want to be seen as a troublemaker, and I was in a position where I had to brush things under the carpet and get on with it. I think we’ve seen there are issues within the game as a whole. Clearly it’s not just at Yorkshire. I’ve experienced these things personally.”By a strange coincidence, I, like Kerry Hudson (I lived through fuel poverty as a child. This is how it really feels, 7 February), lived in Aberdeen with a baby in an “unfurnished, uncarpeted council flat that no one wanted on a street no one would choose to live on”, although I had a husband who was a student. We had only the one coal fire. It was 1980. We had coal delivered in sacks, but we had no coal bunker so it was all emptied out in a corner on the floor of the bedroom. In winter, we got dressed under the blankets and laid and lit the fire. To warm up the kitchen, we put the gas oven on and left the door open for a few minutes. I would get baby advice books from the library and they would recommend a certain temperature for “the nursery” – it would make me angry. Our bedrooms were unheated, even in Aberdeen in the winter, as they had been all my life growing up in Edinburgh. Your baby was dressed in a woollen vest, socks, babygrow, two woollen matinee coats (long cardigans), hat, gloves and a fleece all-in-one sleeping suit – and that was to go to bed. With blankets on top. Since this was exactly what I had experienced as I was growing up, I didn’t really think about it much. I had a bath once a week and in between “topped and tailed” at the bathroom sink, using a kettle of hot water. My life fortunately was much more stable than Hudson’s. A few years later we moved and had a house with central heating. My parents never did have a house with central heating, even though they could afford it; they had a gas fire and a paraffin heater, and always slept in an unheated bedroom. Jane Wheelaghan St Albans, Hertfordshire • Since reading Kerry Hudson’s article I have been thinking about ablutions, one small part of her very affecting account. When did daily showers begin to equate with personal hygiene? Not so very long ago, huge numbers of the population had no bathrooms, so they had to use restricted but ingenious methods to keep clean. Certainly, in pre-deodorant days, confined spaces were often malodorous, but generally speaking, I don’t recall daily revulsion in the workplace. Or were we just used to it? Gillian Howell Swansea • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The Parthenon marbles have been a source of tension between Greece and England for 200 years (The Parthenon marbles belong in Greece – so why is restitution so hard to swallow?, 5 February). Lord Byron urged their return in the 1820s. Last year, Unesco did the same. Opinion polls consistently show that a majority of Britons favour repatriation. Unfortunately, the debate has become a zero-sum game, with the suggestion that there can be but a single winner. Last month, at an event at Keats House in London, I tried to change that calculus: speaking alongside the Greek ambassador, I offered to reconstruct the marbles held by the British Museum. The copies, carved from the same stone, would be virtually identical to the originals. The museum justifies its retention of the marbles on the ground that this allows visitors to see Phidias’s masterpiece in the context of global culture. High-quality reconstructions would serve that purpose just as well. Reconstructions would also acknowledge Britons’ special attachment to the marbles. As the Cast Courts at the Victoria and Albert Museum have proved, people can fall in love with copies. The Institute for Digital Archaeology’s reconstructed Arch of Palmyra, unveiled on Trafalgar Square in 2016 before travelling to other cities around the world, has attracted more than 15 million visitors. Many have found the reconstruction more compelling than the original, embodying as it does a powerful gesture of international goodwill. The histories of Greece and Britain are deeply intertwined, and it is a pity that a prominent exhibit in our national museum has become a perpetual symbol of discord between the two countries. In the mid-19th century, Britain returned the Ionian islands to Greece to celebrate the coronation of the late Duke of Edinburgh’s grandfather as King of Greece. Perhaps the Queen’s diamond jubilee provides a fitting occasion to restore a treasured relic of antiquity to her late husband’s homeland. Roger Michel Institute for Digital Archaeology • Charlotte Higgins explains the three legal criteria by which items can be deaccessioned from the British Museum’s collection under the 1963 British Museum Act and its amendments. It is now time for another amendment, which could be set it motion by a pro-repatriation MP. Adding a fourth criterion, for the deaccession of items for repatriation, would allow for ethical decisions to be made independently by trustees. The British Museum’s vaults are huge, and other items can be brought into the daylight without diminishing the value of the museum to visitors. Anna Watson London • One of the many reasons why Britain has refused to return the marbles to Greece is Neil MacGregor’s suggestion that the British Museum is a “universal” museum based on Enlightenment principles, “a place of the world, for the world”, as Charlotte Higgins states. This reasoning looks particularly specious given the catastrophic fall in the number of school trips to the UK from Europe and other countries post-Brexit. Alan Gavurin London • Please can we have a moratorium on discussion about the return of the Parthenon marbles until the French return the Bayeux tapestry, (which was made in England, according to the experts)? Richard Pickvance LondonTime to wrap up - here are today’s main stories. Goodnight. GW In another sign of inflationary pressures, the aluminium price has hit its highest level since 2008. Aluminium jumped as high as $3,236 per tonne today, fuelled by concern over tight supply and falling inventories. The light-weight metal is widely used in products from electric cars and aeroplane parts to window frames and cans. Prices have climbed as China, a major producer, restricted output as part of a drive to cut power consumption and reduce pollution. An outbreak of COVID-19 in the aluminium-producing Chinese city of Baise also fuelled concerns that production could slow. France’s economic recovery will slow this quarter as the Omicron variant hits growth, before a spring rebound, statistics body INSEE has forecast. INSEE predicts that French GDP will rise by 0.3% in the current quarter, much slower than the 0.7% expansion in October-December. That’s down from 0.4% forecast in December. But the growth rate was then seen doubling to 0.6% in the second quarter, with household spending rebounding as the health situation improves. INSEE also predicts inflation will rise in the next few months, from 2.9% in January to 3.4% by mid-year, before easing back. In the City, the FTSE 100 has closed 6 points lower at 7567, down 0.1% tonight. Ocado led the fallers, sinking 13% to close at £12.25, the lowest since the end of March 2020, with news of its widening losses and high spending on investment worrying shareholders. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: Also on the slide, Ocado shares have slid to 22-month lows, despite improving full year revenues to £2.5bn, a decent improvement on last years £2.3bn. However, a big increase in costs has seen group EBITDA fall to £61m, while losses increased to £176.9m, a big fall from last years £52.3m loss. Higher capital expenditure of £680.4m over the year, along with higher spending of £800m for 2022 has raised concerns as to the timeline of when shareholders are likely to see the business return a profit. Oil companies also fell, tracking the drop in crude prices, while travel and hospitality companies rallied on hopes that the pandemic may be easing. IAG, which owns British Airways, jumped 3.7%. On the smaller FTSE 250 index, cruise operator Carnival and transport group National Express both gained 6%. Across Europe, Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC both gained around 0.25%. The Unite union has heavily criticised energy regulator Ofgem after it admitted to MPs that it had failed to properly monitor the financial health of suppliers. Unite general secretary Sharon Graham said the ‘useless’ regulator had blundered by allowing financially precarious companies to enter the market, before the surge in wholesale prices drove many to the wall. “Ofgem is not a watchdog but a lapdog that has allowed half-baked Tory ideas about diversification to turn an already broken energy market into a even greater calamity. “The lacklustre and complacent performance today by Ofgem’s representatives is a clear indication of the total ineffectiveness of the entire regulatory system that is supposed to hold the energy giants in check. No wonder we have the highest energy costs in Europe and rocketing fuel poverty. As we covered earlier, Ofgem CEO Jonathan Brearley told the Business select committee that closer financial scrutiny of suppliers was needed (although that’s too late for the 29 which have gone bust), and he blamed a focus on increasing competition to challenge incumbent suppliers. The US trade deficit has hit a record high, as America’s consumers and businesses spent heavily on imported goods as the economy recovered. The gap between US imports and exports jumped by 27% during 2021, to hit $859.1bn, up from $676.7bn in 2020. The surge was driven by a $168.7bn increase in the goods deficit, to $1,090bn and a decrease in the services surplus of $13.8bn to $231.5 billion. Imports of industrial supplies and materials increased by $169.7bn. That included a $56.3bn rise in crude oil imports, with rising prices pushing up the bill. There was also a $126.8bn surge in consumer goods imports, from mobile phones and games consoles to clothing: Cell phones and other household goods increased $22.9bn. Toys, games, and sporting goods increased $16.7bn Cotton apparel and household goods increased $11.3bn With America’s economy growing strongly last year, capital goods such as machinery and parts jumped by $117.5bn, including: Electric apparatus increased $16.2bn. Computer accessories increased $12.9bn. Medical equipment increased $12.3bn. Semiconductors increased $11.1bn Another interesting energy story today, is that thousands of homes could soon be paid to halve their electricity usage for a couple of hours daily when the UK’s power demand is high. The scheme to help reduce energy bills and create a zero carbon power supply system, our energy correspondent Jillian Ambrose explained this morning: From next week the trial by Octopus Energy and National Grid’s electricity system operator will offer the household supplier’s customers the chance to earn money by cutting their power use by between 40% and 60% below normal levels during a set two-hour period. They could be asked to delay a laundry cycle or a dishwasher load when demand on the UK’s power grid typically climbs, such as between 9am and 11am and again between 4.30pm and 6.30pm. If they meet their electricity reduction targets they could earn up to 35p for every kilowatt-hour of electricity saved. Households will be told about each two-hour trial window by 4pm the day before it is scheduled, so they can choose in advance whether to opt-in or not. Octopus Energy is poised to invite 1.4m of its customers with an installed smart meter to take part from Friday this week, and expects about 100,000 homes to sign up for the trial which runs until the end of March. The trial could be a welcome opportunity for eligible households after the energy regulator warned that the cap on energy tariffs would soar by almost £700 from April to an average of about £2,000 a year to reflect the recent surge in global gas market prices. Pharmaceuticals giant Pfizer almost doubled its sales last year, thanks to its Covid-19 vaccine, and predicted a bumper 2022 lifted by sales of its Covid-19 pill, Paxlovid. Pfizer has reported that its full-year revenues jumped 95% in 2021 to $81.3bn, up from $41.7bn in 2020. Most of the increase was due to almost $37bn of revenues from Comirnaty, its Covid-19 vaccine developed with BionTech. Without it, revenues were only up 6%. Adjusted income almost doubled too, to $25.2bn. Pfizer is also expecting to sell another $32bn of Comirnaty this year, based on contracts already signed. It also anticipates $22bn of revenue for Paxlovid, its oral antiviral treatment for Covid-19. That would lift revenues in 2022 to a record, between $98bn and $102.0bn, with Pfizer predicting a 46% jump in adjusted diluted earnings per share. Dr Albert Bourla, Pfizer’s chairman and CEO, says: “In the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic, we committed to use all of the resources and expertise we had at our disposal to help protect populations globally against this deadly virus, as well as to offer treatments to help avoid the worst outcomes when infections do occur. We put billions of dollars of capital on the line in pursuit of those goals, not knowing whether those investments would ever pay off. Now, less than two years since we made that commitment, we are proud to say that we have delivered both the first FDA-authorized vaccine against COVID-19 (with our partner, BioNTech) and the first FDA-authorized oral treatment for COVID-19.” But Global Justice Now, a social justice group, has accused Pfizer of profiteering from the pandemic. Tim Bierley, pharma campaigner at Global Justice Now, said the vaccine monopolies enjoyed by pharmaceutical firms need to be broken: “The development of mRNA vaccines should have revolutionised the global covid response. But we’ve let Pfizer withhold this essential medical innovation from much of the world, all while ripping off public health systems with an eye-watering mark-up. “Right now, there are billions of people who cannot access Covid-19 vaccines and treatments. Many are in countries with the facilities needed to manufacture mRNA jabs, but Pfizer’s jealous guarding of its patent stands in the way. And we’re seeing thousands of preventable deaths each day as a result. Wall Street, meanwhile, isn’t impressed with the new forecasts. Shares in Pfizer have fallen by around 6%, with investors having expected even higher Covid-19 sales this year. Stocks on Wall Street have opened cautiously, as anxiety over likely interest rate rises this year weigh on investors’ minds. The S&amp;P 500 index of US companies has dipped by 0.2%. Energy stocks are leading the selloff, following the dip in crude prices, followed by communications, real estate, healthcare, consumer discretionary stocks and technology firms. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US stocks is 0.2% higher, but the tech-focused Nasdaq is down 0.4%. Oil has dropped back from its highest level in seven years, as talks with Iran that could revive an international nuclear agreement resume. Brent crude has dropped by 2% today to about $90.80 per barrel, having hit $94/barrel on Monday for the first time since October 2014. The negotiations, attended by China, France, Germany, Russia, United Kingdom, Iran and the US, are resuming in Vienna after being halted at the end of last month. If a deal is reached, and sanctions on Iran are lifted, then more than one million barrels of oil per day could enter the market. That’s over 1% of global production, which would help to ease tight supplies. Ricardo Evangelista, senior analyst at ActivTrades, explains: The revival of indirect talks between the US and Iran could lead – in a best case scenario – to the reopening of international markets to Iranian oil. Oil price sentiment has been dominated by the imbalance between supply and demand, and in such a tight market, the mere possibility – albeit not a very clear-cut one – of increased supply was sufficient to take some of the pressure off the price of the barrel. Back in the markets, the UK’s FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has lost its earlier gains, and trading flat. Ocado is still the top faller, now down 18% at its lowest since March 2020, around £11.55 – around 60% below its record high of £29 set in September 2020. The selloff came after the online grocery business warned this morning that increased spending to fund international expansion would hurt its profits. It also reported a wider pre-tax loss for 2021 and said shortages of workers had hit sales growth in the second half of last year (see earlier post). Peloton, the troubled exercise equipment company, is replacing its chief executive and planning to axe 2,800 jobs as it deals with a post-pandemic sales crash. Co-founder John Foley, who has led the company for its entire 10-year existence, will step down as chief executive and become executive chair, the company told the Wall Street Journal, while the company will cut about 20% of corporate positions. The move comes weeks after activist investor Blackwell Capital called for Peloton to fire Foley and explore a sale of the company. Amazon and Nike have reportedly expressed interest. Barry McCarthy, former chief financial officer of Spotify and Netflix, will become chief executive and president and join Peloton’s board, according to the Journal. The cost of living squeeze, and the looming spike in energy bills, hasn’t deterred some households from planning trips abroad this summer. Tui has said UK customers’ holiday bookings this summer are nearly a fifth higher than before the pandemic, with a rise in long-haul trips to the Caribbean and Cape Verde thanks in part to less strict Covid rules, my colleague Julia Kollewe writes. The travel firm has had a total of 6m bookings for this winter and the summer. In November and December, bookings were affected by the spread of the Omicron variant and fresh Covid-19 restrictions, but Omicron is no longer an issue, its chief executive, Fritz Joussen, said. Holiday bookings have picked up since the start of the new year, as people grew more confident about travelling and the government relaxed testing requirements for travellers. UK summer bookings are up 19% on the summer of 2019 and Tui expects summer bookings overall to be close to pre-pandemic levels. Joussen said many UK households had accumulated high savings over the pandemic and were eager to travel. Long-haul destinations such as the Caribbean and Cape Verde were popular, he said, and customers are buying more upmarket holiday packages as they want to treat themselves after two years of the pandemic. Joussen said: People are selecting holidays that are more expensive. Rather than going to the Canaries, they are going to the Caribbean. MPs have been warned that the 54% increase in energy bills in April will have an immediate, serious impact on households – especially those already struggling. Jonathan Marshall, senior economist at Resolution Foundation, told the BEIS committee that in 2014, the last time fossil fuel prices surged, people cut back on social spending such as going to the pub or restaurant. But this time, the price cap means the overnight increase in bills will be “much more of a shock”, so families could be forced to cut non-discretionary spending, such as bills. Peter Smith, director of policy &amp; advocacy at charity National Energy Action warned that the people who will be hardest hit by rising energy bills are on the lowest incomes, in the least fuel-efficient homes. Households will be making trade-offs about which essential goods and services they can afford, he agrees. Smith warned: People used to talk about the choice between heating or eating. It’s getting to a situation where people won’t be able to do either satisfactorily. These rises will have massive, massive impacts on the poorest households, not only decimating their finances but also their health and wellbeing for a long time to come, sadly. There will be 6.5m UK households who can’t keep their houses warm, he continues. That doesn’t take into account the government’s proposals last week – because some poorest households won’t benefit from the £150 council tax rebate on properties in bands A-D. And the £200 temporary cut to energy bills announced by chancellor Rishi Sunak must be repaid, so is only a loan (repaid at £40/year for the next five years). Smith says National Energy Action are “bitterly disappointed” that the government hasn’t honoured its commitment to ensure interventions in the energy market would be targeted at the poorest households. Here are more key points from the hearing, from Yahoo News’s Nadine Batchelor-Hunt: The energy industry regulator has admitted that British households would have been better off weathering the winter gas crisis if it had acted sooner to crack down on financially unstable energy suppliers. The Ofgem chief executive, Jonathan Brearley, told MPs that households could face a bill of about £200m to cover the costs left by a string of energy provider collapses since gas market prices rocketed to record highs last September. “We need a retail sector that’s more resilient and more able to deal with the kind of shock that we’ve seen,” Brearley told the Commons business select committee. “And to be clear, chair, we accept that had we done that earlier this would have been better for customers.” The Ofgem boss, who stepped into the role in February 2020, identified multiple missed opportunities to strengthen the rules for energy suppliers that could have helped to avoid the number of supplier collapses, and the related costs for bill payers and the Treasury. Instead, regulatory decisions had been “dominated” by the desire to create more competition by increasing the diversity of suppliers within the market but that new regulation to protect customers against poorly-run companies was not put forward “with the pace and scale that I think with hindsight that we needed”. Here’s the full story. Q: It feels that Ofgem is good for benign times, and long-term transitions, but you’re rather struggling at the moment. Is that fair? Jonathan Brearley (who became CEO two years ago) rejects it, saying the regulator has protected 4 million customers whose suppliers failed, and reforming its frameworks. Ofgem has ‘moved incredibly quickly to respond to the crisis’, he claims, but adds there are lessons to learn - including how frameworks were set up in the past, and some decisions made. Q: What are the consequences for Ofgem executives for bad calls, such as not imposing tighter financial regulation and the £200m of consumer credit lost at failed suppliers? The top five of you rake in a million pound a year and have two million pounds in your pension funds.... Brearley says performance is assessed by Ofgem’s board, GEMA, but a lot of those calls were made by former executives. He repeats Ofgem has lessons to learn, and is making changes. Going back to the financial resiliency failings... Q: Some energy suppliers have been setting up businesses in their bedrooms. That’s completely wrong. Where did the responsibility lie -- with Ofgem or government? Ofgem’s Jonathan Brearley says there was a shared ambition to improve competition. And there was a time when Ofgem’s focus was on diversifying the market, rather than the financial resiliency of entrants. With hindsight we’d have done something differently. Q: What redress does Ofgem have against companies who enter the energy market offering low prices, win customers, pay themselves a lot of money as executives, and then go bust? We don’t have redress on those circumstances, Jonathan Brearley tells the committee. Q: Should you have? I think we should, yes, Ofgem’s CEO replies. Q: Why have 29 energy suppliers gone bust in the last year? Jonathan Brearley says there are three factors. The rise in the gas price, the fact that some suppliers weren’t financially resilient, and the price cap which prevented them from raising prices in response. Q: Major oil companies are making large profits -- would a windfall tax help consumers? Ofgem CEO Jonathan Brearley ducks this question.... saying as a regulator, he’s told not to get involved in government policy, and definitely not in tax decisions. Q: If the UK had more gas storage, would that lower energy bills? Brearley says it would only have a marginal impact on overall bills, given the global market for gas (the UK doesn’t get much directly gas from Russia, for example, but Russian supplies have a big impact on prices). More storage would help with energy resiliency, though. Q: Is the price cap going up again in October? We don’t know, Jonathan Brearley replies. The forwards markets [of future energy prices] show upward pressure now, but they have been ‘extremely bad predictors’ of what might happen in October, he says. Q: Why didn’t you act faster when wholesale prices began surging in July and August? Brearley says Ofgem expected that energy supplies would increase - it didn’t expect market dynamics to change as they did. Q: Why did you think supplies would rise? Brearley points to the amount of gas that has come from Russia, which had a ‘dramatic increase’ on prices at times, given the low gas storage levels in Europe. The problem wasn’t about how many holes in the ground there were, it was about how full they were - and they weren’t filled with Russian gas, Brearley adds. Background: European gas prices hit record levels last autumn as supplies became tight. Russia denied restricting supplies, even though a pipeline to Germany switched direction and flowed eastwards for some says late last year, keeping prices near record highs. On the cost of green energy, Ofgem says that levies on bills are coming down, as renewables projects are now paying back to customers. And on the energy price cap rises, Brearley says he knows it will have a huge impact on families. He adds that the scale of the rises can only be met by government action. Q: What would happen to energy bills if Russia invaded Ukraine? Ofgem CEO’s Jonathan Brearley tells the BEIS committee that this would lead to ‘significant rises’ in the price people pay for energy, as it would push up the wholesale costs. The futures market for next winter is suggesting that there could be another increase in the price cap, in October. But the data-collection process has only just begun, so wholesale prices could well change before the cap is set in August. But there’s no doubt that conflict over Ukraine could push up bills in the autumn, on top of the 54% jump in the price cap coming in April (the £693 average rise announced last week). Brearley says: We expect if Russia invades Ukraine, and there is a sanctions regime that meant Russia limited gas to Europe, that would drive high price rises and yes, that would ultimately feed through to customers. And that could be of the scale of what we’ve seen before. Jonathan Brearley says there was a very dark moment at Ofgem just before Christmas when wholesale gas prices hit record highs of 450p per therm. Prices have dropped back since -- the day-ahead gas price is now 189p per therm. That’s still historically very high -- it was below 60p a year ago. He says the regulator does also have concerns about turbulence if prices were to fall very quickly too. Q: Do you accept that poor decision making has led to customers paying higher bills? Ofgem CEO Jonathan Brearley defends the regulator’s decision to focus on bringing more competition into the market. There was enormous pressure (including from MPs) and concern that customers were getting poor service and poor value from the incumbents. But the regulator should have been more careful about the financial resilience about the suppliers who came into the market, he repeats. Ofgem CEO Jonathan Brearley then concedes that the regulator didn’t monitor energy suppliers financial resilience closely enough, before the pandemic. Ofgem now gets weekly information from suppliers on their hedging position (how well they are covered against volatility in the wholesale market), and their financial position, he tells the BEIS committee. Suppliers are now being asked to run stress tests too, to show their position under various scenarios. Q: Why wasn’t that done before? (another excellent question). Brearley says that the regulator’s previous financial responsibility proposals had been focused at the edge of the market -- it now needs something much more comprehensive. But before Covid, Ofgem only had a watchlist of companies, based on indicators of financial stress such as delays to paying renewables levies) Q: So pre-Covid, there wasn’t active supervision and reporting of energy companies’ financial position? Certainly not to the extent there should have been, no, Brearley agrees. Q: Why wasn’t consumer money ringfenced so that energy suppliers couldn’t spend it on other business costs? Ofgem’s Jonathan Brearley says a proposal to make suppliers return unspent credit balances was being implemented, but hadn’t been finalised. But there were arguments that this would have made it harder for small suppliers to operate (thus not boosting competition). But he agrees accounts should be ring-fenced, so that they’re protected in an administration - and proposals will be brought forward next month. Q: You started discussing this in March 2021 -- why couldn’t it happen sooner? Brearley says the consultation with industry took time. Q: But is it right that consumer have to pay £200m of their money, to cover credit belonging to their fellow consumers that was lost at energy companies which went bankrupt because they weren’t regulated properly? With hindsight, we should have ringfenced credit balances more firmly, Brearley agrees. But the only way to recover costs is by putting them on energy bills, and this lost consumer credit is only a small proportion of the ‘supplier of last resort’ process, he adds. Q: How much consumer credit has been lost at suppliers who have failed in the current crisis? The CEO of Centrica (Chris O’Shea) has estimated that £400m has gone missing - is he right? Ofgem CEO Jonathan Brearley estimates that the final bill will be lower, but it could still be around £200m. That’s still a shocking amount of money to have vanished in the crisis -- and which households will end up paying. Last week’s price cap announcement included £2.45 on our energy bills to cover £54m of lost consumer credit. But that final bill will be more. The final costs could be about £10 on everyone’s bills, Brearley estimates. Q: So if £2.45 accounts for £54m of lost credit, £10 would be £200m, asks Darren Jones MP? Something of that order of magnitude, yes, Brearley replies, but the figures are still being worked out. This lost consumer credit is around 10% of the total cost of moving customers onto new suppliers. Around 85% of the cost of the “supplier of last resort levy” was in ‘rehedging’ customers, Brearley explains. As my colleague Nils Pratley wrote in today’s Guardian, those missing balances are replaced via charges on everybody’s bills. In effect, we all pay for the missing millions. Nils wrote: It’s not as if Ofgem was unaware of the danger. In March last year – so a few months before gas prices surged – the regulator announced it was “concerned that some suppliers may use customers’ surplus credit balances to fund otherwise unsustainable business practices”. That concern was well founded: the predictable car crash happened. Q: Why did it take an energy crisis for Ofgem to recognise things need to change? Brearley says that the consensus has been that the energy market needed to diversify. That was the number one priority in the mid-2010s, so the focus was on getting smaller suppliers into the market to increase competition and challenge the dominance of the big incumbents. So some measures were not implemented at the pace or scale that, with hindsight, was needed. Brearley says that focus on competition should have been combined with more financial resilience. Ofgem CEO Jonathan Brearley adds that the regulator’s relationship with suppliers needs to change. That means working “more closely and collaboratively” with the sector. If we are moving to a sector which is less reliant on switching as the only mechanism to drive up performance and manage price, then we need a different form of regulation. he tells MPs. On an optimistic note, Brearley says we could build a retail sector that can handle the current problems and get to net-zero in a more cost-effective way. BEIS committee chairman Darren Jones MP begins today’s hearing by comparing the crisis in the energy market to the financial crisis, and asking if Ofgem has failed to effectively regulate and manage the sector. Jones points out that 29 suppliers have gone bust since the start of last year, meaning £2.5bn could be loaded onto customer’s bills to pay for those failures. Ofgem CEO Jonathan Brearley says there have been unprecedented changes in the wholesale energy market, with gas prices this winter five times higher than a year ago. That has led to a huge rise in bills, and Brearley says he knows that £700 increase in energy bills announced last week will be very worrying for customers, when they’re also facing “other, much bigger financial pressures”. And on top of that, around four million people have been affected by the collapse of those 29 suppliers, Brearley adds. As a regulator, I hope we never have to go through either of those two things again. Brearley adds that Ofgem did protect protected customers, by ensuring their energy supplies and credit balances were maintained as they moved to new suppliers. But our regulation needs to change, he adds. Brearley says the price cap did protect customers through the winter. But it must become more adaptable and flexible to keep up with volatile energy prices (Ofgem is proposing changing it every three months, not twice a year as at present). And “financial regulation needs to be tougher”, Brearley says, admitting that Ofgem should have done this before the crisis. We need a retail sector that is more resilient, and more able to deal with the kind of shock that we’ve seen. We accept that had we done that earlier, this would have been better for customers. [Many suppliers failed to hedge themselves against surging wholesale prices, and were unable to cope as the price cap prevented them lifting prices for consumers]. Over in parliament, the Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee are hold a hearing into the UK’s energy market. They’re looking at energy prices and the impact the energy price cap has on household energy bills. First up, Jonathan Brearley, Chief Executive Officer of Ofgem, along with Neil Lawrence, the regulator’s retail director, and Neil Kenward, the director of strategy and decarbonisation. Here’s our news story on the collapse of Nvidia’s planned acquisition of the Cambridge-based chip designer Arm from Japan’s Softbank: Elsewhere this morning, online grocery business Ocado says its growth was held back by a shortage of workers, as its shares slide to their lowest since early in the pandemic. Ocado reported that retail sales grew by 4.6% last year, and were 41.5% higher than in 2019 before the pandemic spurred demand for online grocery deliveries. But growth in the second half of last year was held back by the “well documented shortages of labour in the UK retail industry”, Ocado says. A fire at its fulfilment centre in Erith, south-east London also temporarily hit capacity, and led to some others being cancelled. Ocado grew its customer numbers by 22.4% last year to 832,000, with orders up 11.9% but average basket size down 5.8% to £129. Tim Steiner, CEO of Ocado Group, said: “The past year has further reinforced that demand for online grocery is here to stay. In the majority of mature markets, the fastest growing channel is online and to truly win here food retailers need to deliver the best offer with the best economics across all customer missions. Ocado made a pre-tax loss of £176.9m for last year, and also warned that core earnings in 2022 would fall short of market expectations as it steps up investment. Shares in Ocado have tumbled 12% this morning, hitting their lowest since April 2020. They’re trading around £12.41, down from over £28 in February 2021. In other energy news, UK electricity producer SSE has lifted its earnings guidance, thanks to the energy crunch. A strong financial performance from SSE’s gas-fired power division more than made up for a steep drop in output from its wind power business, which suffered from weak wind speeds across Europe in recent months. Electricity output from renewable sources was 19% below expectations in the 9 months to December 31 2021, “largely due to the summer months being exceptionally still and dry across the UK and Ireland”. Electricity output from SSE’s gas-fired plant was down 14% year-on-year. However, that didn’t hurt profits as the firm provided lucrative “vital balancing services to enable a renewables-led system” -- stepping in with extra power when renewable power generation was lower. Last November, National Grid launched a review of this balancing market, saying there had been some very high-cost days; costs which are ultimately borne by consumers. SSE now expects full-year adjusted earnings per share to be at least 90p, up from at least 83p forecast in November. BP also profited from its near 20% stake in Russia’s Rosneft last year, even as tensions between Moscow and the West rise. BP made almost $2.7bn of pre-tax profits from its stake in the Kremlin-controlled Rosneft during 2021, today’s results show, compared with a loss of $238m in 2020. On an underlying basis, profits from Rosneft were $2,451m last year, up from just $53m in 2020. BP says this recovery is due to higher oil prices and favourable foreign exchange effects during last year. This chart shows the details: In the last quarter alone, BP’s Rosneft stake provided $745m of underlying replacement cost profits before interest and tax, out of total underlying pre-tax RC profits of $7.049bn (or just over $4bn after tax in October-December). BP’s annual profits hit an eight-year high of $12.8bn in 2021 as it benefited from a surge in energy prices, prompting renewed calls for a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies to relieve the financial pressure on households facing a sharp rise in bills. The bumper annual results were boosted by a $4.1bn profit in the final quarter of 2021, as global gas demand recovered and oil prices rallied to seven-year highs. Annual profits compared with a $5.7bn loss in 2020, when the Covid-19 pandemic reduced demand for energy. Natural gas and electricity prices have soared since last summer on tight gas supplies and rising demand as economies bounced back from the pandemic, with the stand-off between Russia and Ukraine also pushing gas prices higher. BP’s results prompted fresh calls for a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies to fund extra help for hard-hit households braced for a sharp rise in energy bills and wider cost of living crisis. Last week, BP’s rival, Shell, reported a quadrupling of 2021 profits to $19.3bn. Rachel Reeves, Labour’s shadow chancellor and MP for Leeds West, tweeted: “The chancellor’s energy plans last week left families more worried than ever. It’s time for Labour’s plan for a one-off windfall tax on oil &amp; gas producers to cut bills.” Here’s the full story: BP CEO Bernard Looney has rejected calls to impose a windfall tax on British oil and gas producers after the company reported its highest profit in eight years. “We need to be encouraging investment in natural gas in Britain, not discouraging,” Looney told Reuters. Here’s ITV’s Joel Hills on BP’s decision to use surplus cash to buy back its shares: BP’s shares have hit their highest level since early in the pandemic. They rose 1.8% in early trading to 416p, for the first time since March 2020, after this morning’s profits beat expectations. Shareholders will also welcome the news that BP will buy back $1.5bn of shares this quarter using its surplus cash, taking its total buybacks for 2021 to $4.15bn (see earlier post). This year, BP plans to using 60% of its surplus cash flow for share buybacks, and allocate the remaining 40% to strengthen the balance sheet. BP has delivered a strong set of results this morning, says Stuart Lamont, investment manager at Brewin Dolphin: Buoyed by the rising oil price, BP has swung to a substantial profit, cut debt, invested in its business, and upped its shareholder distributions. Management is striking a positive tone on its progress as BP transitions towards net zero and the company looks to be in a strong position to deliver on its commitments building up to 2030.” Richard Hunter, head of markets at interactive investor, says BP is clearly making progress: Given that the oil price is currently standing at around $92, it is of little surprise that the headline numbers have exceeded expectations. BP’s own projections are based on a price of $60, let alone the “cash balance point” of $42 which the company previously identified. As such, attributable profit for the year rose to $7.6bn from a previous £20.3bn loss, and the underlying replacement cost profit came in at $12.8bn versus a loss last year of $5.7bn. Indeed, this figure exceeds the $10bn achieved in 2019. At the same time the significant cash generation has enabled the reduction of net debt, which has fallen to $30.6 billion from a previous figure of $38.9bn. An increased share buyback programme totalling $4.2bn has also become possible while, for traditional income-seeking investors the dividend yield of 3.9% remains relatively punchy in the current environment. Greenpeace UK’s head of climate Kate Blagojevic says: “These profits are a slap in the face to the millions of people dreading their next energy bill. BP and Shell are raking in billions from the gas price crisis while enjoying one of the most favourable tax regimes in the world for offshore drillers. And these are the same companies responsible for pushing our world closer to catastrophic climate change. This isn’t right. “The Chancellor’s response so far has been to protect Big Oil’s profits while offering completely inadequate support for vulnerable households. People will be wondering whose interests he’s serving. ”BP’s boss said his company is like a cash machine [last November]. Rishi Sunak should take the hint and make a very large withdrawal to help struggling families now and cut energy bills in future by insulating more homes Liberal Democrat Leader Ed Davey is also calling for a windfall tax on energy producers: “The truth is that this is about basic fairness. It simply cannot be right these energy companies are making super profits whilst people are too scared to turn their radiators on and terrified there will be a cold snap. The government has said that a windfall tax would harm investment but this is an absolutely bogus argument. These profits have come out of nowhere, no energy company was expecting them, no investor was either. “A windfall tax is the best way to get money to the people who need it quickly, but also to make sure there is some sense of trust and proportionality in the system.” During 2021, BP generated surplus cash flow of $6.3bn. That will fund $4.15bn of share buybacks for last year (a way of passing earnings onto investors), with BP announcing it will buy $1.5bn of shares in the first quarter of this year from 2021 surplus cash flow. If Brent crude averages $60 per barrel, BP expects to deliver share buybacks of around $4bn per year, and increase its dividend by around 4%, through to 2025. Brent crude is currently trading at $92 per barrel, close to yesterday’s seven-year high, up from around $50 per barrel at the start of 2021. BP has also announced it will pay a dividend of 5.46 cents per share for the last quarter, the same as in Q3, and up from 5.25 cents/share in Q4 2020. BP has also predicted that energy prices could remain volatile this year. In the outlook section of its financial results, BP says: We expect oil supply and demand to move back into balance through 2022; however with lower levels of spare capacity price volatility is likely. OPEC+ decision making on production levels continues to be a key factor in oil prices and market rebalancing. In gas markets, with ongoing geopolitical uncertainty, and low storage levels, we see the potential for continued price volatility. In the first quarter of 2022, we expect industry refining margins to remain broadly flat compared to the fourth quarter of 2021. Europe entered this winter with its lowest reserves of gas in at least 10 years. The UK has some of the continent’s lowest gas storage capacity, having clsoed its main gas storage site off the east coast in 2017. BP’s profit of $12.8 billion in 2021 is the highest in eight years, says Reuters: The quarterly results were supported by higher oil and gas prices and production which was partly offset by weaker oil trading results and the impact of higher energy costs on operations such as refining, the company said. Natural gas and electricity prices around the world have soared since the middle of last year on tight gas supplies and higher demand as economies rebounded from the pandemic. Labour’s shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves says BP’s jump in profits shows the need for a one-off windfall tax on producers, which could be used to lower energy bills: Good morning, and welcome to out rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. BP has reported a surge in profits as the oil giant cashes in on the jump in oil and gas prices which are fuelling the cost of living crisis. BP made an underlying replacement cost (RC) profit, its preferred earnings measure, of $4.065bn (£3bn) in the last three months of 2021 alone, up from $3.322bn in July-September. That’s almost 35 times the $115m RC profit which BP reported in Q4 2020, when the pandemic was hitting energy demand. BP says its underlying replacement cost profit improved as a result of higher oil and gas prices and refining margins and stronger trading results. For the full year, BP made underlying profits of $12.8bn, or £9.5bn, as it bounced back from a loss of $5.7bn in 2020 (when the pandemic hit demand and it wrote off billions of assets). Profit attributable to bp shareholders came in at $7.565bn for 2021, up from a $20.3bn loss in 2020. BP’s results are certain to intensify calls for energy companies to face windfall taxes to help cover the impact of rising energy bills on households. Last November, Bernard Looney, BP’s CEO described the company as a “cash machine” after soaring oil and gas prices boosted profits. This morning, Looney says: 2021 shows bp doing what we said we would - performing while transforming. We’ve strengthened the balance sheet and grown returns. We’re delivering distributions to shareholders with $4.15 billion of buybacks announced and the dividend increased. And we’re investing for the future. We’ve made strong progress in our transformation to an integrated energy company: focusing and high grading our hydrocarbons business, growing in convenience and mobility and building with discipline a low carbon energy business - now with over 5GW in offshore wind projects - and significant opportunities in hydrogen. Those high energy prices mean UK households will face a record energy bill increase of 54% from April after the regulator lifted the cap on default tariffs to £1,971. Later this morning MPs on the Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) Committee will question Jonathan Brearley, CEO of regulator Ofgem, on the energy price cap, and the impact it has on household energy bills. The other big news of the morning is that SoftBank’s sale of UK-based chip designer Arm to Nvidia has collapsed, after regulators in the UK, the United States and Europe raised serious concerns that the “largest semiconductor chip merger in history” would hurt competition. The two sides agreed to terminate the deal because of “significant regulatory challenges preventing the consummation of the transaction, despite good faith efforts by the parties,” SoftBank said in a statement (via Bloomberg). Softbank is now aiming to float Cambridge-based Arm on a stock market. The failure of the deal is a major setback to the Japanese conglomerate’s efforts to generate funds, at time when valuations across its portfolio are under pressure. Arm also announced that Rene Haas, head of the company’s intellectual property unit, will become its chief executive, succeeding Simon Segars. Masayoshi Son, chairman and CEO of SoftBank Group Corp, said in a statement: “Rene is the right leader to accelerate Arm’s growth as the company looks to re-enter the public markets.” The agenda 10.30am GMT: Business Committee to question Ofgem &amp; energy sector representatives on energy prices &amp; the energy price cap 11am GMT: NFIB index of US business optimism for January 1.30pm GMT: US trade balance for DecemberMy friend Ian Stone, who has died aged 89, was among the first BBC cameramen to evolve a fresh style of documentary filming in the 1960s and 70s, using lighter-weight cameras, sometimes hand-held, and filming in natural light. He shot notable documentaries for strands including Panorama, The World About Us, 40 Minutes and Horizon. He worked at the BBC for 30 years. So successful was Ian that Clive James wrote in the Observer that a 1977 observational Panorama programme, shot in a school, must have been set up, because it was so steady and sharp – “otherwise the cameraman must have been the greatest since Raoul Coutard”. Ian had shot the whole unrehearsed film with a hand-held Eclair camera; Clive James apologised. Ian was born in Caerphilly, south Wales, the son of David Stone, a farmer, and his wife, Mary (nee Coggins). His interest in film-making was first aroused by a documentary about his father’s sheep-dog trials. After Caerphilly grammar school, he studied English at Cardiff University, graduating in 1954. During his national service he became a sergeant in the Education Corps, and seemed destined for teaching. But by chance he saw a BBC advertisement for cameramen, applied, and was taken on as a trainee, working at first for the Farming Unit in Birmingham. Ian shot notable films for factual series such as Year of the French, The Human Brain, and Americans – but some of his most memorable work was for single documentaries, such as Public School, a candid film about Westminster school, which aired in 1979 on BBC1 with an audience of 12.5 million. He came to prominence as chief cameraman for Bird’s-Eye View, for BBC2, a series of helicopter films shot between 1969 and 1971, in which he pioneered spectacular techniques of aerial photography, perched precariously in an open doorway with a small camera mount. Over the years we worked on many films together, and remained lifelong friends. Ian enjoyed filming, with its opportunities for far-flung travel – especially to Japan, Pakistan, Indonesia and the US – and enjoyed fun in company after work, be it at a restaurant, a skating rink or a funfair. His assistants loved him for his kindness, integrity and warmth, and many stayed close to him. He retired from the BBC staff in 1988 to go freelance. Outside his work, Ian had a passion for elaborate DIY house improvement, exercising his skills in plumbing, electrics and roofing during many house moves. He renovated a barn in Brittany, then, after retirement in 1991, moved to France, a country he loved – enjoying the beaches, the food, and visits from old colleagues. Ian is survived by Stella (nee Simons), whom he married in 1956, their daughter Siân and grandson, Luc. Another daughter, Ceri, died in 2011.A sophisticated encrypted phone messaging system was used to supply a firearm for a murder and to hatch a failed plot to carry out another killing, an Old Bailey jury has been told at the trial of two men whose secret communications were intercepted. The so-called EncroChat service was allegedly used to procure a firearm to carry out a murder in London in 2020 and to plan another that did not take place. Paul Fontaine, 36, was a “criminal middleman” who supplied weapons, drugs and counterfeit currency to other professional criminals, communicating with them on encrypted phones, said the prosecuting counsel, Kevin Dent QC. In this role, he conspired with others to transfer a firearm that was used in the murder of Abdullahi Mahmoud in March 2020, the court heard. He is charged with conspiracy to supply a firearm in connection with that murder. Fontaine is also alleged to have conspired with Frankie Sinclair, 34, to murder a rival of Sinclair’s called Keiron Hassan, and others, in the course of a dispute between Sinclair and a rival group. Sinclair allegedly sought the assistance of Fontaine to procure a handgun and ammunition to carry out a “revenge murder” after his mother’s home in Cardiff had come under attack. Both men are charged with conspiracy to murder. During the messaging, Fontaine communicated his involvement in the murder of Mahmoud, indicating he had earlier arranged to supply a firearm for a murder, the court heard. Sinclair was alleged to have taken possession of a Walther PPK handgun and ammunition in order to kill Hassan. Sinclair was involved in a dispute with a rival group that had escalated and led to his mother’s house being targeted by three men armed with firearms and a crossbow in March 2020. He believed that group of men to include or have been directed by Keiron Hassan and he engaged Fontaine’s services to carry out the murder of the attackers, the court heard. The court heard that Hassan was soon afterwards taken into custody and thus the attack could not take place. Sinclair was said to have also been involved in supplying class A drugs, offences for which he has already pleaded guilty. “EncroChat devices are like mobile phones but they are highly secure,” said Dent. “They offer higher levels of security. An EncroChat device can only communicate with another EncroChat device, not the kind of mobile you could use for cinema tickets or to order a pizza … each device is assigned a unique handle or name.” The court heard that Sinclair’s handle was “Nudetrain” and Fontaine’s was “Usualwolf”. The handsets cost more than £1,000 and were not available in shops. “It is an expensive product but an extremely useful device for organised criminals to use in order to be able to communicate with others without anyone outside being able to find out,” the court heard. Although law enforcement agencies had later been able to access the information available on the devices, “at the time users thought that no one else could. We suggest that they [Sinclair and Fontaine] were pretty upfront and explicit, there was no beating about the bush.” In one communication, Fontaine had indicated that he was short of firearms “because part of his own stock had been used in a murder”. In another message Sinclair asked Fontaine for “sweets”, which the court was told meant bullets, which cost £10 each. “Need them sweets ain’t looking to waste none,” said another message. A further one read “I need 2 savages so can do 2 glides in 1 wA u saying I pay them,” which the prosecution suggested was Sinclair’s request to Fontaine for extra manpower and cars to assist him. Another reference in messages was to “duppy”, a slang term for ghost, indicating that death would be involved. Sinclair supposedly referred to the handgun in the messages as a “James Bond ting”. “They were both also involved in other criminal enterprises,” the court heard. “Paul Fontaine, as part of his role in serving the needs of criminals, was also involved in the supply of heroin and counterfeit currency.” Both men deny conspiracy to murder and all other charges. The trial continues.The singer and guitarist Jimmy Johnson, who has died aged 93, was one of the wonders – if sometimes half-hidden – of the blues world, both for his elegant, passionate singing and for his clean-cut, inventive guitar playing. In the 1960s and 70s he established himself in the clubs of Chicago, one of the generation of musicians such as Magic Sam, Otis Rush and Freddie King who would reshape the blues for a new world and new audiences. He maintained a distinguished position in that milieu for more than 60 years, and was described by Bruce Iglauer, founder of Alligator Records, which released some of his material, as “a searing guitar player and intense, distinctive singer whose music had the deep emotional impact of the best blues”. For all that, Johnson never attained the celebrity of Sam or Rush, nor of other, sometimes lesser, talents, and to the frustration of his admirers he often seemed to be set in the role of Chicago’s best-kept secret. His reputation was probably higher in Europe than in the US, and many of his recordings, especially in the 80s and 90s, were done for companies in France or Germany. Whether through luck or care, Johnson outlived most of his contemporaries and continued to sing and play into his 90s. He appeared regularly at the Chicago Blues festival, most recently in 2019, and during the coronavirus pandemic he gave livestreamed Facebook performances from his home every week. On his 92nd birthday his broadcast drew an audience of more than 80,000 – once again, much of it overseas. He was born in Holly Springs, Mississippi, the second of the 10 children of Verlie Smith and Sam Thompson. By his own account he had little schooling. “Most days we worked from sunup until sundown,” he said. “At the age of eight I was working in the fields, picking, chopping and ploughing cotton and helping to tend to the farm animals.” He sang in church as a boy and later in gospel groups in Memphis and Chicago, to where he moved in his 20s at the suggestion of an uncle. Working as a welder, he saved to bring his mother and siblings to the city, and in 1956 bought his first guitar. Three years later he played his first gig, under the surname of Johnson, which his younger brother Syl, an accomplished soul singer, had taken for his professional moniker. He returned home to tell his soon-to-be wife, Sherry (nee Ewing), that he had been fired: “I had to start practising.” During the 60s Johnson found most of his playing opportunities in gospel and soul music, and in leading house bands at various Chicago venues, where he backed singers such as Otis Clay and Denise LaSalle. His first album-length studio recording was made for the independent producer Ralph Bass in 1977. The blues writer Peter Guralnick, who happened to be at the session, wrote in his book Lost Highway: “Johnson plays with the same delicacy and feeling that you hear in the clubs, his somewhat thin, sensitive voice always retaining a brittle edge.” But the tapes were shelved for years, until finally acquired by a British company, and Johnson’s first released LPs – on a French label – were live recordings made in 1975–77 at the Chicago clubs Ma Bea’s and the Golden Slipper. In 1978 Johnson was showcased on the first volume of Alligator Records’ revelatory series Living Chicago Blues, performing songs such as Feel Like Breaking Up Somebody’s Home that were perfectly suited to his soulful style. The albums Johnson’s Whacks (1979) and North/South (1982), made for the other significant Chicago blues label, Delmark, gave him the chance to put aside covers and use his own material, such as The Twelve Bar Blues, with its punning lines such as “I drank a dozen Buds but I don’t feel any wiser”. Although he handled received ideas with respect, in his compositions he set original scenes and described them in witty and vivid language. His career was interrupted by a car accident in 1988 in which two members of his band died. He returned to music a few years later, and I’m a Jockey (1993) won a Blues Music Award as a comeback album, while in 2002 Two Johnsons Are Better Than One! was a fraternal get-together with Syl, as well as being an intriguing map of two roads travelled. Another brother, Mack – who kept the name Thompson – followed them into music, playing bass guitar with Sam. Over the years Jimmy won several other Blues Music Awards, was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame in 2016, and in 2021 was named Blues Artist of the Year by Living Blues magazine. His last album was Every Day of Your Life (2020). Mack died in 1991, and Syl just a few days after Jimmy, on 6 February. Jimmy is survived by Sherry, their children, LaSaundra, Geraldine, Lorenzo, Eric and Jimmy, and sisters Vivian and Marva. • Jimmy Johnson (James Earl Thompson), blues musician, born 25 November 1928; died 31 January 2022Barcelona’s chief executive, Ferran Reverter, has resigned after seven months, just as the club are expecting to announce a €280m (£236m) deal with Spotify for the title rights on the redeveloped Camp Nou and shirt sponsorship. The agreement with the music platform is understood to be worth that over three years, with the men’s and women’s teams carrying the company’s logo on their shirts. Spotify would also become the first holders of the title rights – known as a “surname” – for the stadium. The deal would come into effect this summer when Barcelona’s contracts with their primary sponsor, Rakuten, and secondary sponsor, Beko, end. The Rakuten shirt deal was worth €55m a season. Barcelona would not comment on the new agreement which is expected to be announced this week. Reverter had resigned for “personal family reasons”, the club said, but the timing was striking and the Catalan radio show Què T’hi Jugues suggested he had had a series of disagreements with the president, Joan Laporta, the latest of which was the Spotify deal and his attempts to secure a secondary sponsor for the sleeve. Reverter had been at the heart of negotiations over primary and secondary sponsorship deals, with reports suggesting he had conversations with a cryptocurrency company only to encounter opposition from the club’s board. Spotify faces a controversy after the singer Neil Young demanded the removal of his catalogue from the platform because of the continued presence of Joe Rogan, the podcaster Young accuses of spreading misinformation. Reverter, the former chief executive of the German retailer Mediamarkt, had been Laporta’s first “signing” as Barça president. He arrived with the backing of the vice-president, Eduard Romeu, whose energy company Audax had provided the economic guarantees that allowed Laporta to take the presidency. Reverter was at the heart of the administration’s attempts to resolve the financial crisis it inherited, Laporta saying last week that €159m had been cut off the wage bill. Reverter and Romeu were among those most opposed to Lionel Messi continuing at the club at a time when the wage bill was more than 100% of annual income. He was a firm defender of the super league project and the Espai Barça stadium redevelopment, for which the club took out a €1.5bn loan from Goldman Sachs. In a statement Barcelona thanked Reverter for a series of “targets met”, including the “restructuring of the debt, the approval by the fans of Espai Barça, the reduction of the salary mass, and agreements with new sponsors”. He will continue until a replacement is found.Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad face the prospect of their record-breaking Test careers coming to an abrupt end after England responded to the winter’s Ashes mauling by dropping eight players for next month’s Caribbean tour. A week on from Ashley Giles, Chris Silverwood and Graham Thorpe being sacked on the management side of things, the fallout from the Australian nightmare bled into the playing group when Andrew Strauss, the interim director of men’s cricket, named a new-look, 16-man squad for the three-Test series that begins in Antigua on 8 March. Anderson and Broad – with 321 caps and 1,177 Test wickets between them – represent the highest-profile casualties exactly a month on from blocking out a draw in Sydney to avert a whitewash defeat. Jos Buttler, Rory Burns, Haseeb Hameed, Dawid Malan, Sam Billings and Dom Bess also make way as part of the cull. An injection of fresh energy comes in the shape of four uncapped players – the Yorkshire seamer Matt Fisher, the Durham opener Alex Lees and the Lancashire seam/spin pairing of Saqib Mahmood and Matt Parkinson – plus a return for Surrey’s velvet-gloved wicketkeeper, Ben Foakes, behind the stumps. While the majority of the players can scarcely quibble after such a chastening campaign in Australia, the enduring excellence of Anderson and Broad – though aged 39 and 35 respectively, the pair’s numbers continue to stack up – means their omissions will need further explanation when Strauss speaks at Lord’s on Wednesday. It was Strauss who moved the pair on at the start of England’s white-ball reboot in 2015 and, after a selection meeting that also featured Paul Collingwood, the interim head coach for the forthcoming tour, and James Taylor, the head scout, the former captain is banking on the same play working for Joe Root’s flatlining Test team. Both senior players are understood to be shocked by the decision although neither is expected to make a snap call on their respective futures. The pair have central contracts that run until 1 October and announcing international retirement would see them forgoing the best part of a year’s salary. Strauss has also stressed that the next director of men’s cricket and the head coach this person hires – two roles hoped to be sewn up in time for the start of the English summer – will likely have their thoughts on the subject, even if it is clear that Strauss believes others can blossom only out of their shadows. In the official squad release, Strauss said: “With the start of a new cycle, it has allowed the selection panel to refresh the Test squad with a particular focus on competing away from home. We felt that it was time to draw a line after the Ashes defeat, look forward and give some impetus with an influx of new players.” Of Anderson and Broad, he said: “I want to emphasise this does not mean the end for them as England players. We feel that it is important to look at some exciting new bowling potential and give some added responsibility to other players who have featured previously. No one doubts the quality and experience that James and Stuart bring to the England set-up. It will be up to the new managing director and permanent head coach to decide on whether they will be involved this summer and beyond. This selection of this squad is the start of a process and a journey to get England Test cricket back to where it needs to be, and the hard work starts now.” The 2004 tour of the Caribbean was the last time an England Test touring party did not feature at least one of Anderson and Broad and also their only away series victory over West Indies in the past 54 years; Root, hugely fortunate to remain as captain after a record nine defeats in 2021, will need to overcome history the hard way. The 31-year-old has also lost one of his most trusted lieutenants in Buttler, who after three years of heavy investment failed to fire in Australia. The wicketkeeper’s tour ended with a broken finger, a batting average of 15.28 and memories of some harrowing dropped catches, such that white-ball specialism looks his likely career path now. Among those fortunate to earn reprieves are Ollie Pope and Chris Woakes, the former having averaged 11.16 from six innings in Australia and the latter now offered one last chance to show he can perform overseas. Woakes looks set to share the new ball with Ollie Robinson, while Mark Wood – arguably the one player to emerge from the Ashes with his reputation enhanced – will offer a point of difference through his extra pace. Lees, who averaged 39 for Durham in the County Championship last summer, will almost certainly open alongside Zak Crawley after both Burns and Hameed paid for their low-key tours. Root appears set for a return to No 3 given a lack of alternatives – he tends to face the hard new ball anyway – and it may be that Jonny Bairstow, the sole centurion in Australia, moves above Ben Stokes. The latter pulled out of this weekend’s Indian Premier League auction citing a desire to prioritise his Test career; Root, who replied “why wouldn’t you want class like that?” when asked after the Ashes if he wanted Anderson and Broad to plough on, will be leaning on his vice-captain more than ever.Boris Johnson is under growing pressure to apologise for remarks falsely linking Keir Starmer to the failure to prosecute Jimmy Savile after a senior cabinet minister and the Commons Speaker urged him to draw a line under the matter. No 10 made clear the prime minister would not apologise for the remarks, which provoked renewed anger when protesters shouted abuse at the Labour leader on Monday. Surrounded near parliament, Starmer was branded a “paedophile protector” and one demonstrator carried a noose. He and his Labour colleague David Lammy were bundled into a police car. Eleven Tory MPs have called for Johnson to retract and apologise for the claims he made in the Commons last week. Michael Gove, the levelling-up secretary, did not defend the comments when asked about them on Tuesday. “It’s a uniquely sensitive issue and I think the sooner the debate moves on, the better,” he told reporters at Convention of the North in Liverpool. The Commons Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, condemned the abuse of Starmer and the shadow home secretary and linked it to the prime minister’s comments last week, which he called “inappropriate”. Hoyle told MPs: “Those sorts of comments only inflame opinions and generate disregard for the house and it is not acceptable. Our words have consequences. And we should always be mindful of that fact.” Johnson’s official spokesperson said the prime minister had already “clarified” his remarks to make clear Starmer was not personally responsible for the Savile case because the comments were “capable of being misconstrued by a tiny minority”. Asked whether that “tiny minority” included the crowd that surrounded Starmer, he said: “I’m not seeking to link anything. I wouldn’t seek to look into the motivations of individuals.” Chris Philp, the digital minister, had earlier said the comment that Starmer had failed to prosecute the child sex offender was “not incorrect” but said Johnson had clarified he did not mean Starmer took the decision when he led the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS). “The first comments in the house on the previous Monday were capable of being misconstrued and that is why it is important and right that a couple of days later that Boris Johnson … did clarify that he was not suggesting at any time that Keir Starmer had personal responsibility for the case,” Philp told BBC Breakfast. “But he obviously did have responsibility for the conduct of the CPS. “I don’t think there is any way you can reasonably suggest that the comments on Keir Starmer’s overall responsibility for the CPS in any way provoked the very unseemly and totally unacceptable harassment we saw last night.” A No 10 source said the prime minister did not intend to go further than his condemnation of the abuse of Starmer. Johnson’s initial comments did not suggest Starmer had taken institutional responsibility but said as director of public prosecutions he had “spent more time prosecuting journalists and failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile”. Tories including the former chief whip Julian Smith and the select committee chairs Simon Hoare and William Wragg suggested Johnson should apologise. Others who also voiced concern at the consequences of the prime minister’s rhetoric included the former cabinet ministers David Davis and Caroline Nokes and the ex-ministers Stephen Hammond and Tobias Ellwood, as well as three MPs elected in 2019, Anthony Mangnall, Aaron Bell and Rob Largan. The husband of Jo Cox, the Labour MP murdered in 2016 by a far-right extremist, also warned about the consequences of politicians lending credence to far-right conspiracy theories. Brendan Cox said the prime minister’s choice to “inject poison into politics” with his comment had “unintended consequences”. “If it was a one-off, I think we could be more sanguine about it,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “I think the people that are directly responsible for what happened yesterday were the people that did it. “However, it’s also true that if you inject poison into politics that has a whole set of unintended consequences that people will react to in different ways and at times that can lead over into intimidation, it can lead over to violence, it can lead over into extremism.”A cash machine. That was how Bernard Looney, the chief executive of BP, described his company back in November following last year’s sharp rise in global oil and gas prices. And the size of the company’s bank balance has now duly been revealed: profits just shy of £10bn last year – the highest in eight years. Clearly, these are windfall gains. BP had not expected a fivefold increase in the wholesale price of gas during 2021. Nor did it forecast that the cost of crude oil would currently be nudging its way towards $100 a barrel. Unsurprisingly, therefore, there have been calls for the government to make a sizable withdrawal from the cash machine in the form of a windfall tax. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, was quick to repeat Labour’s call for a one-off increase in corporation tax on North Sea producers to fund lower bills for consumers. Hang on a bit, BP and the other energy companies say. High prices now are simply the corollary of rock-bottom prices during the depths of the pandemic, a period when crude prices briefly dipped below zero. What’s more, the government has been urging energy companies, such as BP, to invest more in renewables in order to speed up the UK’s transition to a net zero carbon economy. Ministers can either have a short-term, and partial, fix to Britain’s cost of living crisis or they can have a long-term solution to future energy needs. They can’t have both. Actually, they can. BP set out its plans to increase investment in renewables tenfold (from a low base) before it reaped windfall gains from rising fossil fuel prices. The fact that the company has earmarked more than £1bn for share buybacks – which boost the company’s share price – suggests BP would have no trouble sticking to its renewable investment strategy were a windfall tax to be levied. As things stand, a windfall tax is not part of Rishi Sunak’s plans, but he still has time to change his mind before the spring statement on 23 March. There are three reasons for a rethink: the cost of living crisis will leave millions of households a lot worse off even after the Treasury’s energy support package; previous Tory governments have found windfall taxes a useful way of raising money in tough times; and it would shoot Labour’s fox. Regulation of energy firms was too lax, Ofgem head tells MPs Regulation was too lax. Only when it was too late did the penny drop that there was dodgy stuff going on. In retrospect, it might have been a good idea to tighten up supervision rather than put so much trust in the power of market forces. Sound familiar? Of course it does. That, broadly, was the result of the postmortem examination into the near-collapse of banks during the financial crisis of 2007-09. And it was what Jonathan Brearley, the head of the energy regulator Ofgem, had to say to MPs when asked to explain why 29 companies had gone bust in recent months. In both cases, there was the unmistakable sound of stable doors being shut long after the horse had bolted. In both cases, the British penchant for light-touch regulation meant insufficient attention was paid to financial resilience. Brearley said that with “hindsight” there should have been tougher action to protect consumers against poorly run providers, a statement of the obvious if ever there was one. The point about regulation is that it is supposed to work in the bad times as well as the good times. Ofgem spectacularly failed that test. Annual growth rate will not last, says economic thinktank Later this week the government will be able to boast of the strongest annual growth since the second world war. The advice of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) – one of the UK’s most august thinktanks – is that ministers should make the most of it because the good news is not going to last. The NIESR says the Bank of England is raising interest rates as it plays inflation catch-up, so it makes no sense for the Treasury to tighten policy simultaneously through tax increases. Indeed, the chancellor has a choice: scrap April’s planned national insurance increase or risk boom turning to bust. That choice seems to have been made and it is the wrong one.Chris Heaton-Harris has been trusted by Boris Johnson to marshal Conservative MPs during the most hazardous period of his political career. The newly appointed chief whip is a longtime insider and minister who remains little known to the public – beyond the occasional mini-controversy. The MP for Daventry since 2010, who is now onto his seventh ministerial role in six years (though the first in the cabinet), is a die-hard Brexit supporter whose fervour for the cause brought perhaps his most uncomfortable moment in the spotlight. In 2017, when he was a junior whip under Theresa May, Heaton-Harris was accused of attempted McCarthyism when he wrote to the vice-chancellors of all English universities asking them to declare what they were teaching about Brexit, and to give a list of teachers’ names. His letter asked for a copy of each university’s syllabus and any online lectures on Brexit, with a series of university leaders calling the requests sinister and unprecedented. While Heaton-Harris argued he was seeking the information in his role as a whip, he was soon cut adrift by Downing Street, which said he had been acting purely as an individual MP. He remained a minister, becoming a junior Brexit minister in 2018. The following year he resigned in protest after May began talks with Labour on a possible end to the Brexit impasse. When May stepped down, Heaton-Harris backed Andrea Leadsom as the new leader – she was eliminated in the first round of Tory MP voting. Heaton-Harris returned to the government under Johnson, spending two years as a junior transport minister, with duties including helping to enforce Downing Street’s efforts to promote cycling in the face of scepticism from some Tory-run councils. In December last year, he began what became a brief stint as Europe ministerfc in the Foreign Office, but spent increasing amounts of his time helping Johnson with what was, in effect, an unofficial second whipping team, liaising with backbenchers increasingly disgruntled over reports about alleged lockdown-breaking parties. In a slightly unlikely sideline, Heaton-Harris is also a devoted fan of tweeting what appear to be deliberately bad dad jokes, although he has held off recently. A sample of his oeuvre is: “For my next trick, I will eat a percussion instrument in a bap. Drum roll please...” Being a chief whip is never the easiest of cabinet jobs even at the best of times – and this is far from that. If Heaton-Harris manages to even stem the trickle of no-confidence letters from Tory MPs, buying time for Johnson to plot a fightback, he will have repaid the PM’s confidence in him.A group of Conservative politicians and their allies are on the “frontline” of a new climate war and are attempting to derail the government’s green agenda, according to claims by leading climate scientists. Tory MPs and peers in the Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG) have gained widespread media coverage in the past month, attempting to link the government’s net zero agenda to the cost-of-living crisis and calling for cuts to green taxes and an increase of fossil fuel production. Some members claim the government’s plans to reach net zero emissions by 2050 have been dreamed up by out-of-touch elites and would impoverish working people, “making them colder and poorer”. The 19 Conservatives confirmed to be in the group say they do not dispute climate science or the need to decarbonise. Two leading members have links to an organisation, often described as “climate-sceptic”, that was founded by the long-term climate denier Nigel Lawson. The group’s chair, the MP Craig Mackinlay, has also been accused by a leading climate institute of using misleading and inaccurate information. Michael Mann, one of the world’s leading authorities on the climate and author of The New Climate War, said the group appeared to be attempting to drag climate policies into a culture war, which he described as a “dangerous new tactic being used by those opposed to addressing the ecological emergency”. “This is where the frontline of the battle is now, and yes, we do have to push back fiercely on this sort of pernicious disinformation,” he told the Guardian. Tory MPs involved in the Net Zero Scrutiny Group include the Brexit campaigner Steve Baker; the former work and pensions secretary Esther McVey; Robert Halfon, a former schools minister; and Peter Lilley. There are also several “red wall” MPs elected in 2019. Baker is a trustee of the Global Warming Policy Foundation (GWPF), launched by Lord Lawson in 2009. The organisation – which recently rebranded its campaigning arm to Net Zero Watch – is characterised by its opponents as being one of Britain’s biggest sources of climate science denial, a claim it denies. It and the NZSG of Conservative politicians have recently turned their attention to the costs of the government’s decarbonisation plans. Lord Lilley and Baker were at the thinktank’s annual lecture at the end of November last year where the main speaker, the US scientist Prof Steven Koonin, who admits the climate is changing and humans are responsible, questioned the scientific consensus around the climate crisis. He told the audience: “The first thing we can do is get authoritative bodies – the royal societies, the US national academies – to stand up and say there is no climate crisis. This is an issue, we can deal with it in due course, but let’s all relax.” Leading climate scientists, shown a video of the event by the Guardian, suggested it had “cherrypicked data” and “distorted” the facts of climate science. They also questioned whether members of the UK’s ruling party might be getting their evidence about the climate crisis from such events. In response, Koonin expressed disappointment at the criticisms, adding: “Viewers of my talk will see that my points are specific, relevant, and well-supported by references to the literature and data.” Analysis by the Guardian also found that more than half of the members of the NZSG were members of the European Research Group (ERG), which successfully pushed for the Brexit referendum inside the Tory party. This has led to fears they could push for a similar culture war over net zero – and even a referendum. Nigel Farage, another veteran of the Brexit campaign, has said he is agitating for a referendum on net zero, and Baker says the anti-net-zero campaign will be bigger than Brexit. A Tory MP told the Guardian he considered Baker to be “seeing this like Brexit: he sees net zero and the [global warming target of] 1.5C as an imposition from an unelected remote bureaucracy that must be defeated”. Dr Benny Peiser, a longtime policy lead for GWPF and director of its net zero watch campaign, said it did not dispute the need to decarbonise, but he was pleased that Tory MPs were now willing to put their name to opposition to net zero. He told the Guardian: “We are obviously delighted that MPs are beginning to recognise that there’s a problem. Now for the first time we have a proper debate about the pros and the cons of the different options.” The GWPF did not respond to subsequent written questions from the Guardian. A number of experts dismiss the NZSG’s claims around the cost of net zero, saying the costs are relatively small and diminishing, at less than 1% of GDP by 2050. They also point out the multiple benefits of moving rapidly away from fossil fuels, from cleaner air and water to well-paid green jobs and lower energy bills. Mackinlay was accused of misinformation by the Grantham Institute at the London School of Economics. It suggested he had relied on “inaccurate and misleading claims, particularly about the investments required to achieve the statutory target of net zero emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050, in order to promote [the NZSG] cause”. Some members of the group appear to have mocked climate policies or questioned the need for rapid action on reducing emissions. Scott Benton, the MP for Blackpool South, tweeted in November: “It’s Gender Day at #cop26 today. Apparently women and girls are more susceptible to climate change than others so the government’s naturally making £165 million available to address this apparent disparity. You really couldn’t make it up.” Mark Jenkinson, the MP for Workington, has lobbied for more coalmines to be opened, calling those who opposed the Cumbria coalmine “climate alarmists” and saying: “Apocalypticism risks becoming the new UK religion.” Lilley had an initial conversation with the Guardian but he and Baker did not respond to subsequent written questions about the article. Mackinlay confirmed his role as chair but declined to say more. Three members of the NZSG did respond, stating they did not dispute climate science or the need to decarbonise, although they did object to the government’s current net zero plans. Jenkinson said he was confident it was possible to reach net zero “without making my constituents poorer”. “I’m delighted that we’re having the adult discussions that so many outside the Conservative party are afraid of having, around the ongoing need for UK oil and gas for transition to net zero by 2050 and beyond it,” he added. Halfon said: “Millions are now being hit desperately hard by the cost-of-living crisis with heating and fuel bills soaring. We cannot sacrifice any further their ability to cope on the altar of climate change.” There is opposition to the group within the Conservative party. The MP Chris Skidmore, a former energy minister, has set up a new “net zero support group”, and a current environment minister told the Guardian that the NZSG was of “no concern to the government” and was being widely ignored. The former Tory environment secretary Theresa Villiers also urged her party not to slip into a “culture war” over the climate crisis: “It should be dealt with in the context of a normal political debate, I hope we don’t start to see a culture war in this area.” But as Boris Johnson – seen as a Tory standard-bearer for net zero – fights for his political life, attacks on the policy are continuing. After last week’s energy price hike, “senior cabinet ministers” were quoted on the front page of the Daily Telegraph urging the government to “rethink its net zero plans”. James Murray, the editor of the website BusinessGreen and a leading environmental commentator, said: “Those within government and beyond that accept the net zero transition is the defining economic project of the age would be wise not to underestimate the threat. Opposition to climate action may be on the periphery. But as the past few years have taught us, ideas that were on the periphery can become very influential, very quickly.”In the run-up to Christmas, as the UK government was frantically attempting to manage the latest wave of Covid infections, the Conservative MP and long-time agitator Steve Baker was apparently touring the tea rooms of parliament trying to persuade colleagues to sign up to his latest cause. The self-described Brexit hardman, who as the then head of the European Research Group had relentlessly harried Theresa May’s government over Brexit and then become a thorn in Boris Johnson’s side with his anti-lockdown Covid Recovery Group, had a new – and he believed potentially explosive – target: the government’s climate agenda. “When the full costs of net zero start hitting us,” Baker told an interviewer recently, “we could end up with something bigger than the poll tax, certainly bigger than Brexit.” Baker is a key member of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG), a Tory grouping set up by his fellow Conservative MP Craig Mackinlay last summer. Although the group says it accepts the fundamental facts of the climate emergency and the need to reduce emissions, it argues the government’s net zero plans – widely viewed as vague and lacking sufficient ambition by activists and experts – are in fact too bold, dreamed up by out-of-touch elites, and would impoverish working people, “making them colder and poorer”. Initially it appeared the group was gaining minimal traction. Evidence of the climate crisis was escalating as extreme weather events hit countries around the world and, in the run-up to last year’s UN climate summit in Glasgow, support for more urgent and far-reaching action to reduce emissions was growing. However, as gas prices soared and concern about a growing cost of living crisis escalated, it appears Baker and Mackinlay sensed an opportunity. According to several Conservative MPs who spoke to the Guardian, the pair stepped up their recruitment campaign in the corridors of Westminster ahead of the Christmas break, showing colleagues – particularly the new intake of Tory MPs elected in 2019 to represent former Labour-held constituencies – alarming graphs and data about the cost-of-living crisis. They argued the net zero target was becoming “politically toxic” and warned that the government’s obsession with the green agenda was putting their slim majorities at risk. One “red wall” MP who Baker spoke to said: “We have been approached by older, more established Tories, who want us to say our constituents will be hit hard by net zero policies. It’s all a bit cynical.” But at the beginning of January, their efforts appeared to bear fruit when 19 Tories, including the former cabinet minister Esther McVey, the senior backbencher Robert Halfon and several red wall MPs, identified themselves as members of the group, signing a letter to the Sunday Telegraph arguing for an end to green levies and calling for more fossil fuel extraction. It was the first time members of the group had gone public. The story was picked up across the media: “Gas prices: MPs and peers urge PM to act on energy bills,” reported the BBC; “Pressure grows on Boris Johnson over energy bills,” wrote the Daily Mail. The message was amplified on TV and radio, and for many climate scientists it suggested the consensus around the need for climate action in Conservative ranks – however inadequate it had been – was under threat for the first time in years. But many of those initial reports did not mention the links of some of the group’s key members. Baker is a trustee of the Global Warming Policy Foundation (GWPF), a prominent publisher of material questioning the consensus on climate science in the UK since it was launched by the former cabinet minister and long-time climate denier Nigel Lawson in 2009 . The GWPF is characterised by opponents as a source of climate science denial – a claim it denies. During the Cop26 climate summit last year, Lord Lawson wrote an article arguing that “global warming is not a problem”, defended burning fossil fuels, and said carbon dioxide’s “principal effect” is the growth of plants. Baker declined to be interviewed for this piece, pointing to Mackinlay as a spokesperson. Mackinlay also declined to be interviewed. Three members of the NZSG did respond, stating they did not dispute climate science or the need to decarbonise, although they did object to the government’s current net zero plans. Mark Jenkinson, the MP for Workington, who called those who opposed the Cumbria coalmine “climate alarmists”, said he was confident it was possible to reach net zero “without making my constituents poorer”. He added: “I’m delighted that we’re having the adult discussions that so many outside the Conservative party are afraid of having, around the ongoing need for UK oil and gas for transition to net zero by 2050 and beyond it.” Halfon said: “Millions are now being hit desperately hard by the cost of living crisis with heating and fuel bills soaring. We cannot sacrifice any further their ability to cope on the altar of climate change.” ‘Let’s all relax’ In the autumn, as the GWPF campaigning arm rebranded itself as Net Zero Watch, with a stated aim to “scrutinise policies, establish what they really cost, determine who will have to pay”, Baker and Mackinlay were apparently stepping up their Net Zero Scrutiny Group recruitment drive. Tories who spoke to the Guardian said the pair showed MPs polling that had been commissioned by the GWPF that set out a stark picture of a population deeply concerned about the cost of living and wary of paying “higher taxes to help reach net zero”. Peter Lilley, a former cabinet minister and self-described “global lukewarmist”, also signed the NZSG letter to the Sunday Telegraph and is a former trustee of the GWPF. The GWPF confirmed that both Lord Lilley and Baker attended its annual lecture at the end of November, where the main speaker, the US scientist Prof Steven Koonin – who admits the climate is changing and humans are responsible – questioned the scientific consensus around the climate crisis. During his talk Koonin told the audience: “The first thing we can do is get authoritative bodies – the royal societies, the US national academies – to stand up and say there is no climate crisis. This is an issue, we can deal with it in due course – but let’s all relax.” The Guardian showed a video of the event to three leading climate scientists – Simon Lewis, a professor of global change science at University College London, Julia Steinberger, a professor of societal challenges of climate change at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland and a lead author with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and Prof Peter Stott, who leads the climate monitoring and attribution team of the Hadley Centre for Climate Science and Services at the Met Office in Exeter. They suggested that the talk “cherrypicked data” and “distorted” the facts of climate science. And they questioned whether members of the UK’s ruling party should be getting their evidence about the climate crisis from such events. “It is really deeply worrying that members of parliament are going and getting their scientific information from there,” said Lewis. Steinberger suggested the talk was “a classic, if rather polished and polite, example of distorting climate science”. In response, Koonin expressed disappointment at the criticisms. He added: “Viewers of my talk will see that my points are specific, relevant and well supported by references to the literature and data.” After initially talking to the Guardian for this article, both Lilley and the GWPF did not respond to subsequent written questions. Taking root? There are tentative signs that the attack on the net zero agenda appears to be taking root. Members of the group have regularly surfaced across the media over the past few weeks to question the government’s plans. Last week a front page of the Daily Telegraph quoted “senior cabinet ministers” urging the government to “rethink its net zero plans”, with one arguing we should “not be running towards net zero so aggressively”. Outside parliament, a slew of rightwing commentators and talking heads – from Andrew Neil to Nigel Farage – have portrayed the climate agenda as a classic culture war, “dreamed up in the kitchen diners of Notting Hill, with no understanding of real people’s daily lives”, as Julian Knight, a Tory MP and member of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group wrote in a report last year. James Murray, the editor of the website BusinessGreen, said the emergence of this anti-net-zero narrative, and its amplification in sections of the media, threatened to unite the libertarian right and culture warriors against the need for urgent climate action. “The idea we should dilute and delay climate action is unpopular with the public, runs counter to global investment trends, and is contrary to the government’s own manifesto, but environmental campaigners and green businesses are still hugely concerned that they could be dragged deeper into a culture war that seeks to politicise any and all efforts to decarbonise.” He said soaring gas prices and the cost-of-living crisis presented a “huge opportunity” for those intent on scrapping “green policies they are ideologically opposed to and increase the UK’s reliance on polluting fossil fuels”. “The challenge for the government is that concerns over some of the near-term costs associated with the net zero transition are valid, and as such there is an urgent need to both promote the overwhelming economic benefits of climate action and ensure any costs are fairly shared.” Asad Rehman, an influential climate justice campaigner and director of War On Want, said the emergence of opposition to the government’s climate plans underscored the need for a global green new deal. “Climate justice means addressing the systemic issues of economic injustice and poverty that sit at the heart of the climate crisis. If it doesn’t, it simply hands an opportunity for rightwing populists to pit those already struggling to make ends meet against any proposals to transition our economy.” The most comprehensive analysis of the path to net zero was published by the Climate Change Committee (CCC), the UK government’s statutory adviser, which has repeatedly said the costs of action are small and diminishing, at less than 1% of GDP by 2050, while the costs of inaction are large and rising. Dr Ajay Gambhir, a senior research fellow at the Grantham Institute – Climate Change and the Environment, said that as innovation accelerated, even the CCC’s costings were probably an overestimate and did not take account of the many co-benefits of climate action, including cleaner air and water, more biodiversity, millions of well-paid green jobs and lower energy bills. It is not just environmentalists who champion net zero. Last week, Alistair Phillips-Davies, the chief executive of one of the big six energy companies, SSE, said: “Net zero is not only an environmental decision, it’s a rational economic one. Investing now will not only reduce our future exposure to gas markets but it will also support jobs and growth.” But as instability continues to engulf the Conservative party and Boris Johnson – seen as the party’s standard-bearer for net zero – appears weaker by the day, more voices, from local Tory councillors to rightwing commentators, are linking the cost-of-living crisis and the government’s green agenda. Lilley told the Guardian that Conservative MPs were being newly recruited to the group in the tea rooms of parliament. He said: “The Net Zero Scrutiny Group wasn’t my idea – it came up in discussion over a cup of tea in the tea rooms. It may well have been Steve Baker who was the inventor.” The peer said his colleagues in cabinet were “trying to show how virtuous they are” by pushing climate policies – and believes Britain is likely to have a gilet jaunes-style uprising over energy costs. “Whenever the cost of decarbonising has become a political issue, the advocates – the opponents of imposing those costs on people’s budgets – have won. Look at the gilet jaunes in France, the Netherlands municipal elections, the Australian elections. People agree with tackling global warming in the abstract – but they aren’t prepared to pay for something that won’t have an impact perhaps for a century or more,” he warned. There is some pushback from pro-climate action MPs within the Conservative party. Chris Skidmore, the MP for Kingswood and a former energy minister, has set up a new Net Zero Support Group. “I was a bit shocked about the amount of coverage [the Net Zero Scrutiny Group] was getting,” Skidmore said. “And I thought it doesn’t speak for me or the many many other Tory MPs who do support net zero and do support action on climate change.” He added: “My fear is that this group creates a narrative that it is the cost of green energy that is creating the energy price crisis – that it is either tackling the climate crisis or tackling the cost-of-living crisis.” Last week, the Tory peer and leading Conservative environmentalist Zac Goldsmith said: “Ninety per cent of the global economy is committed to net zero. The politics is clear … Choosing to be the outlier would be insane.” A current environment minister said Baker and Mackinlay’s group was of no concern to the government and was being widely ignored. But in a recent interview, Baker was unequivocal about the potential of the net zero campaign. “I’ve started three big projects of MPs on the issue of the day – one on Brexit, one on Covid, which of course affected everybody, and one on net zero. “Of the three of them, the one that grew fastest by miles was net zero, simply because members of parliament know this is going to hit all voters and hit them hard and hit them fast and they aren’t going to like it.”Some politicians might just wonder how low their careers can go after being asked to serve in a department run by Nadine Dorries. Not Chris Philp. Then again, the digital minister is no normal No 2. That’s a level of responsibility of which he can only dream. Philp is much more a natural No 5. And only then because there is no No 6. He is a man who can be guaranteed not to demonstrate having a conscience. Not because he is intrinsically evil or amoral, but because he is too dim to have an original thought in his head. He is someone who can be relied on to repeat the last thing someone said to him and believe it to be true. All of which made Philp the ideal candidate for the morning media round, as the only question he was going to be asked was whether the prime minister should apologise for his Jimmy Savile remarks after the previous evening’s protests in which Keir Starmer had been abused and harassed. And the Philpster duly adopted His Master’s Voice by parroting the lines he had been told to learn. He began by insisting Boris Johnson’s words had been misconstrued. Which bit of Big Dog saying that Starmer had failed to prosecute Savile had been misconstrued, he wasn’t entirely sure. After all, The Suspect had been completely unambiguous when he had called out the Labour leader in the Commons during his statement on the Sue Gray report. Undeterred, the Philpster then tried to realign himself with the prime minister’s subsequent remarks. What The Suspect had really meant was that Starmer – like Big Dog – had been forced to accept responsibility for things that weren’t his fault. Only it turned out that Johnson was being asked to take responsibility for things that were his fault. He had attended at least six of the parties and had probably known about most of the others. Hardly the same as apologising for a decision that had been taken by others in your organisation. Having – as he saw it – established the basic facts, the minister then went on to ad lib. Always a mistake when you’re not very bright. It was like this: there was no need for The Suspect to apologise for having incited a load of protesters. Rather, the protesters should have been apologising to him. After all, the mob had also shouted out slogans about anti-vaxxers and Julian Assange, so they should have known better than to drag the prime minister into the debate by also mentioning Savile. Besides which, it was evident that the protesters would have been out on the street giving Starmer a hard time regardless, so The Suspect could hardly be blamed even if they did shout out the odd “Jimmy Savile” line. In any case, it wasn’t as if Boris had invented the Savile slur himself. He’d just come across it by chance on a far-right, extremist website. As you do. So surely it was up to the people who were in charge of writing this stuff on the interweb to make sure their information was accurate before people like the prime minister got into trouble by repeating it? LBC’s Nick Ferrari looked at Philp as if he were an idiot. Fair enough. A lot of us have done the same thing. The case was cut and dried. It was straight out of the Trump playbook. Spew out enough lies and some of them will be believed. Then take no responsibility for any actions incited by the lies. So Ferrari tried taking Philp back to basics. Would he have used the Savile attack against Starmer? “Er … what Savile attack?” simpered Philp. He didn’t know about any Savile attack. The one we’ve just been talking about, Ferrari replied. Oh that one! That wasn’t an attack. That was just the prime minister trying to identify with the heavy burden of office that both men shared. Fine. But would he have said it? Oh God, no. He had never knowingly said anything controversial in his life. He was just an empty shell. Waiting to be filled with whatever his childminders told him. The best part of being Chris Philp is that you don’t really know when Chris Philp has been in a train wreck of interviews. As far as he was concerned, he had done a top job protecting The Suspect’s reputation. So he went back to his department blissfully unaware that most people outside the Boris cabal thought The Suspect had lied and needed to publicly apologise. Not that he would. Why break the habit of a lifetime? Not everyone in government was having such a good day. Jacob Rees-Mogg had just got the call that he was being moved from leader of the house to a new post of “minister for Brexit opportunities”. But what did that mean – other than a chance to celebrate the collapse of the Northern Ireland peace process? Boris had been at his most opaque. “Look at it this way, Jakey,” he had said. “You’re going to have a lot more time on your hands. Especially when I’m gone and you return to the backbenchers. Face it, no one but me would have you in the cabinet.” To be fair, Big Dog had said exactly the same to Michael Ellis when he had told him he was being promoted for three times defending him over partygate when no one else would. Then, that was the point of Mike. To do the jobs others had too much self-worth to do. Still, Ellis didn’t care about the cabinet job so much as the knighthood he’d craved for years. Come the resignation honours list, his life would finally have meaning. An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace Join Marina Hyde and John Crace looking back at the latest events in Westminster. On Monday 7 March 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereAn Arkansas doctor accused of prescribing ivermectin to inmates in his state without their consent has been praised by local officials for a “job well done” despite widespread outrage at his actions. In January, the Arkansas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) sued Dr Robert Karas, the physician at Arkansas’s Washington county detention center, on behalf of four inmates who said they were given ivermectin to treat Covid-19 as a form of “medical experiment”. “Plaintiffs ingested incredibly high doses of a drug that credible medical professionals, the FDA, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), all agree is not an effective treatment against Covid-19 and that if given in large doses is dangerous for humans,” the lawsuit said. According to the lawsuit, Karas told the inmates that the prescribed drugs “consisted of mere ‘vitamins’, ‘antibiotics’ and/or ‘steroids.’” The CDC, as well as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), have put out advisories warning against using ivermectin for Covid-19, though it is a cause celebre for some rightwing figures and anti-vaxxers. Despite the lawsuit, some prominent local leaders of Washington county have lauded Karas for his Covid treatment efforts. On Monday, Patrick Deakins, a Washington county justice of the peace, introduced a resolution to a local quorum court’s jail and enforcement committee to praise Karas for his handling of the pandemic in Washington county jail. “I don’t know the science behind Covid and I’m not so sure anybody does. I’m certainly not a doctor and I’m certainly not a virologist, and none of us on this panel are,” Deakins said. He went on to add, “I don’t know the value of one treatment or the appropriateness of it is. I don’t know the efficacy of ivermectin and I don’t know the most useful ways to treat any one individual, and those are not the debate of this resolution, I just want what’s best for the health and safety of the county.” “While over 850 cases of the infection have been recorded in the Washington county detention center, Dr Robert Karas and Karas Correctional Health have effectively treated those cases which have resulted in zero fatalities from the virus,” the resolution said. According to the document, Karas provided “exceptional medical care” to inmates and that the “Washington County Quorum Court commends Dr Robert Karas and Karas Correctional Health for a job well done despite the unique challenges.” Despite the resolution getting passed by the committee, other local officials pushed back against Karas. “If you talk to individuals at our local hospitals that are treating patients after Dr Karas has treated them, they are very ill,” said justice of the peace Eva Madison. “The reality is that he doesn’t know … He can’t possibly know what the side-effects are of the treatment that he has given,” she added. “How can we tout nobody died when the individuals in this lawsuit claimed health consequences from what he did to them,” Madison said in reference to the inmates. “You can agree or disagree with the lawsuit, Dr Karas, but why in the world would this body endorse a practice that’s being challenged in court?” In the lawsuit filed by ACLU last month, inmates complained that they suffered from various side-effects after ingesting ivermectin, including vision issues, diarrhea, bloody stools and stomach cramps. The inmates were also subject to payment of fees for medical examinations that they sought after experiencing the side-effects. Karas, who has had numerous lawsuits filed against him over the years for allegedly providing inadequate and poor medical care to inmates, has filed a motion to dismiss ACLU’s lawsuit against him.The pioneering visual effects artist Douglas Trumbull, best known for his work on 2001: A Space Odyssey and Close Encounters of the Third Kind, has died at the age of 79. His death was announced by his daughter Amy Trumbull, in which she said the “absolute genius and a wizard” died on Monday after “a major two-year battle with cancer, a brain tumor and a stroke”. She added: “My sister Andromeda and I got to see him on Saturday and tell him that [we] love him, and we got to tell him to enjoy and embrace his journey into the Great Beyond.” Part of the team behind a short film called To the Moon and Beyond made for for the 1964 World’s Fair, Trumbull was hired to work on Stanley Kubrick’s epic science-fiction film 2001 after the director was impressed with its realistic visuals. Along with Con Pederson, Tom Howard and Wally Veevers, Trumbull was responsible for 2001’s boundary-pushing effects, including the eye-popping Star Gate sequence. Trumbull subsequently embarked on a career dominated by supplying inventive visual sequences for landmark films. A dystopian fantasy called Saturation 70 was never completed, but Trumbull had considerable success with his work on the Michael Crichton-scripted The Andromeda Strain, released in 1971, which then allowed him to direct his own film, Silent Running, about a spaceship filled with forests in an attempt to preserve Earth’s trees. Silent Running was a financial flop, but Trumbull still found himself in demand in 1970s Hollywood. He was in charge of special photographic effects on Steven Spielberg’s alien-visit sci-fi Close Encounters (for which he was nominated for his first Oscar) and as director of special photographic effects on Star Trek: the Motion Picture, having taken over after the previous effects supervisor failed to deliver what was required. Though no longer keen to work for other directors, Trumbull agreed to work on Blade Runner for Ridley Scott – largely because no spaceships were involved – and left the movie half way through to start work on his second directing project, Brainstorm. A sci-fi thriller about a device that allows people to experience others’ sensations, Brainstorm became notorious as the final role for actor Natalie Wood, who died in mysterious circumstances during the film’s production. Trumbull did manage to complete the film but it fared poorly at the box office on its release in 1983. Trumbull then distanced himself from Hollywood, working on the high-frame-rate ShowScan film format he developed, which found its niche in theme park rides and similar attractions, for which he was given a Scientific and Engineering Academy Award in 1993. Trumbull also became an executive at Imax for a short time. Trumbull was subsequently lured back to film-making by Terrence Malick, working on the “creation” sequence in Malick’s 2011 Palme d’Or winner The Tree of Life. Always restless, though, Trumbull continued working on new film formats, including the Magicam realtime video compositing system. In 2012 Trumbull was given an honorary Oscar to recognize his technological contributions to the film industry.A former Conservative councillor who was thrown out of the party and now heads an anti-vax group peddling a range of conspiracy theories was among a mob that harangued Keir Starmer before the Labour leader was whisked away by police. As experts warned of a dangerous risk of extremism from a radicalised hard core as the pandemic wanes, the incident has focused attention on the rise of a plethora of protest groups. One group present during Monday night’s fracas, Resistance GB, is led by the former north London Tory councillor William Coleshill, who draws on bogus justifications about ancient English “Common Law” to justify direct action. Coleshill, who was initially suspended from the Tory party, was last year filmed chasing Michael Gove through Whitehall, and has also confronted the Labour MP Jess Phillips and the BBC journalist Nick Watt. Members of social media channels run by Resistance GB, a self-styled journalism platform, continue to disseminate debunked conspiracy theories about the role of Starmer in protecting paedophiles such as Jimmy Savile – alongside other claims about the coronavirus pandemic and vaccines. After the incident involving the Labour leader – where a man and a woman were arrested for assault after a traffic cone was thrown at a police officer – users of the same social media channels expressed their belief that the confrontation had been “staged”. Other comments included descriptions of Starmer as a traitor and a “controlled Zionist”. Under a video of the incident, another said: “They are all scum. Going to need more than a few goons as personal protection if things get any worse.” Footage of the incident, bearing the Resistance GB logo, is being shared widely across anti-vaccine social media networks and beyond. The most popular post on Telegram, a social media platform favoured by many far-right activists, was shared by the rightwing media outlet Unity News Network. It had garnered 90,000 views less than 24 hours after Starmer was targeted outside parliament. It was shared by a number of prominent anti-vax figures including Kate Shemirani, a former nurse who was struck off the register last year, and Mike Yeadon, a former Pfizer employee who has spread misinformation about Covid-19. A further post from Yeadon’s Telegram channel, which claimed the incident was “set up theatre”, has received 10,000 views. The post appears to be a reference to “false flag” or “crisis actor” narratives, in which it is claimed protesters are paid actors trying to discredit a cause. Before his expulsion from the Conservative party, Coleshill was pictured in a selfie on one occasion campaigning with Boris Johnson. Clare De Silva, a Conservative councillor in the same Enfield ward that Coleshill once represented, claimed her one-time party colleague had been expelled “very early on” after his first or second council meeting. He had then sat as an independent for a time before being thrown out for non-attendance last summer. “He clearly had views that were not representative of the Conservative party and was not around for very long. Conspiracy theories are something which have unfortunately got to a lot of people,” she said. Much of Coleshill’s output makes it way on to Resistance GB’s YouTube channel, which has more than 72,000 subscribers. Interviews conducted in the wake of Coleshill’s pursuit of Gove include chats with anti-lockdown street protesters, who accuse ministers of treason and leaving “the people” with “only one option”. “If we was really as angry as these people think we are we would have strung him up by the closest tree … To think that is going to happen today, it isn’t, but if we continue going down this path of vaccinating children then these people are going to start to get angry … it’s the only way it’s going to end up,” said one. Experts at organisations such as Hope Not Hate said there was an overlap between many of those involved in the same groups and support for the far right, far left and conspiracy theorist movements such as QAnon. Gregory Davis, a researcher at Hope Not Hate, said that the anti-vaccine, anti-lockdown movement had been fuelled by fears of universal vaccine mandates and perpetual lockdown, neither of which had materialised. Davis added: “But as less-motivated activists begin to drift away the worry is that existing groups become more extreme with only the most committed and radicalised members remaining active. “Conspiracy theories have long been around in the UK – whether it’s David Icke or others making dark predictions – but there is now a new level of expectation and mobilisation that we have not seen in the past. People are emotionally invested in this activism in a way and on a scale that was not there before.” A Resistance GB spokesperson said: “Our news outlet is on the frontline of debunking government and mainstream media misinformation and disinformation, such as that promoted by the Guardian. “It is nonsensical and alien to the concept of personal responsibility for us to be blamed for any of the tens of thousands of comments hosted by tech platforms.”“I’ve been accused of trying to homosexualize African men,” photographer Denisse Ariana Pérez told me as we discussed photos she’s showcasing in Fotografiska New York’s exhibit Nude, a worldwide selection of nude portraits as seen through the female gaze. Pérez specializes in photographing men, particularly Black African men, and she purposely works with her subjects to draw them out of dominant ideas of what men should be. “I like the challenge of it,” said Pérez, “of confronting more traditional masculinity and in some way trying to bend it and question it, and to create a space for men to explore and go beyond what they have been allowed to.” Pérez makes her captivating, emotion-laden images by inviting her subjects to interact with water, letting them connect with a powerful, elemental force of nature that helps them to strip off the facades of identity and ego and go inwards toward the core of who they really are. “Water is an element that forces you to let go and embrace that letting go,” she said. “It’s the element that makes me connect to myself the most, I see it almost as a maternal element. I wanted to bring that to others, even if for just a brief moment.” Pérez’s work is emblematic of Nude’s aim, which is to upset dominant ideas of the nude body in art by showcasing what a diverse group of talented female photographers construe as nude portraits. “This show is kind of rare in our exhibition history,” Amanda Hajjar, director of exhibitions for Fotografiska New York, told me. “All of the artists in this show have this past of trying to turn the portrayal of the nude on its head. They’re all trying to do something different, and this is the outcome.” Bringing together 30 artists from 20 different countries who are shooting portraits all over the world, Nude offers a global perspective on the human form. Among other things, this broad cultural range lets the the exhibition wrestle with the question of how the meaning of a woman taking a nude portrait differs from society to society, as well as how the female gaze changes from one context to another. For instance, the Swedish photographer Julia SH takes the museum as her setting, upsetting traditional western concepts of how that institution regards the female body. She does this by placing plus-sized women into striking, balletic poses on pedestals and in galleries that are more accustomed to displaying young, thinner women. As Hajjar noted, SH’s works are “nothing like what you would have seen in a museum before”. Hajjar added that, “We’re interested in dealing with the ‘nontraditional’ female body and what that looks like.” While SH explores the nontraditional female body by putting larger women on pedestals, Joana Choumali does so through intricate, layered photographs of both real women and mannequins manufactured and displayed in her native Ivory Coast. These vivid, destabilized photos possess a fidgety energy, examining how the Awoulaba, or “beauty queen” mannequin propagates certain ideas of Black female beauty, contrasting it to the Taille fine, which adheres to westernized beauty standards. In the delicate interplay of reproduced forms Choumali combines stereotypes and reality to produce something that feels at once monstrous and without control, yet also familiar and mundane. As those two artists would indicate, the range of subjects and artistic styles in Nude is large. Israeli Elinor Carucci cinematically depicts middle-age domesticity, while Brazilian Angélica Dass uses a sociological bent to document the true diversity of skin tones that are flattened under generic words like Black and white. The Chinese artist Yushi Li subverts the male gaze by using Tinder to find male subjects, whom she then photographs with a desirous lens. Although certain themes do emerge among subgroups of the photographers, these are not – as one might imagine – based in geography. “It’s not like I can say the American artists all have the same aesthetic,” said Hajjar. “The photos in Nude don’t fit neatly in groups like that, which is really nice.” In addition to bringing stylistic and cultural expansiveness, Nude also attempts to broaden the narrative around the artistic nude by incorporating transgender bodies – their presence in the show lends all of the exhibition’s photos a degree of ambiguity. With nude models stripped of many of the signifiers denoting queerness or heteronormativity, it can be hard to tell the trans from the cis, the queer from the straight. And while it is true that some of the individuals in Nude, such as those photographed by Japanese artist Momo Okabe, “look trans” due to their combinations of genitalia and secondary sex characteristics, most of the photos in Nude are not so easily read as anything other than human. This raises the question of what exactly separates a trans body from a cis one and if the lines between the two are really as firm and fixed as current discourse presumes. As Okabe suggested to me, the demarcation depends more on “preconceived notions” about the LGBTQ+ community than anything innate about humanity, going on to conclude that “trans bodies to me do not differ from any other body.” “I have come to the realization that all people are inherently strange and mysterious. I believe people are beginning to understand that everyone is queer,” said Okabe. As a collection of work, Nude reveals much of what is inherently strange and mysterious about bodies that may not normally appear to be worthy of sustained artistic attention. It does so through a female gaze that does not dominate or take but rather empathizes and asks for consent. A rich interplay of human connection underlies the photographs in Nude, a freeing of self born of a genuine desire to see who other people really are. This is what allows these women to find views of the everyday that do not look so normal. “I see the female gaze as the incorporation of a lot of care into the photographing process,” Pérez told me, “a lot of very empathetic caring for the process and for the subjects and how they are portrayed.” She recounted the making of one of her favorite photos, of two boys whom she happened to meet on the street one day in Senegal. “One of them told me, I’ve never done anything like this before, but I’ve learned so much today. He said that was a day he would never forget. We had created something, he felt included in the process.” It’s that kind of closeness, coming out of a spirit of care and generosity, that one senses again and again in Nude and that makes this show such a revealing experience. Nude will be showing from 11 February to 1 May at Fotografiska, New YorkWars have unintended consequences. They rarely turn out the way the experts tell us they will. Just ask the officials who provided rosy scenarios for the wars in Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq, only to be proven horribly wrong. Just ask the mothers of the soldiers who were killed or wounded in action during those wars. Just ask the millions of civilians who became “collateral damage”. That is why we must do everything possible to try and find a diplomatic solution to what could be an enormously destructive war in Ukraine. No one knows exactly what the human costs of such a war would be. But there are estimates that there could be over 50,000 civilian casualties in Ukraine, and millions of refugees flooding neighboring countries as they flee what could be the worst European conflict since the second world war. In addition, of course, there would be many thousands of deaths within the Ukrainian and Russian militaries. There is also the possibility that this “regional” war could escalate to other parts of Europe. What might happen then is even more horrifying. But that’s not all. The sanctions against Russia and Russia’s threatened response to those sanctions, could result in massive economic upheaval – with impacts on energy, banking, food and the day-to-day needs of ordinary people throughout the entire world. It is likely that Russians will not be the only people suffering from sanctions. And, by the way, any hope of international cooperation to address the existential threat of global climate crisis and future pandemics would suffer a major setback. We should be clear about who is most responsible for this looming crisis: Vladimir Putin. Having already seized parts of Ukraine in 2014, the Russian president now threatens to take over the entire country and destroy Ukrainian democracy. In my view, we must unequivocally support the sovereignty of Ukraine and make clear that the international community will impose severe consequences on Putin and his associates if he does not change course. With that said, I am extremely concerned when I hear the familiar drumbeats in Washington, the bellicose rhetoric that gets amplified before every war, demanding that we must “show strength”, “get tough” and not engage in “appeasement”. A simplistic refusal to recognize the complex roots of the tensions in the region undermines the ability of negotiators to reach a peaceful resolution. One of the precipitating factors of this crisis, at least from Russia’s perspective, is the prospect of an enhanced security relationship between Ukraine and the United States and western Europe, including what Russia sees as the threat of Ukraine joining the North Atlantic Treaty Alliance (Nato), a military alliance originally created in 1949 to confront the Soviet Union. It is good to know some history. When Ukraine became independent after the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, Russian leaders made clear their concerns about the prospect of former Soviet states becoming part of Nato and positioning hostile military forces along Russia’s border. US leaders recognized these concerns as legitimate at the time. They are still legitimate concerns. Invasion by Russia is not an answer; neither is intransigence by Nato. It is also important to recognize that Finland, one of the most developed and democratic countries in the world, borders Russia and has chosen not to be a member of Nato. Putin may be a liar and a demagogue, but it is hypocritical for the United States to insist that we do not accept the principle of “spheres of influence”. For the last 200 years our country has operated under the Monroe Doctrine, embracing the premise that as the dominant power in the western hemisphere, the United States has the right to intervene against any country that might threaten our alleged interests. Under this doctrine we have undermined and overthrown at least a dozen governments. In 1962 we came to the brink of nuclear war with the Soviet Union in response to the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba, 90 miles from our shore, which the Kennedy administration saw as an unacceptable threat to our national security. And the Monroe Doctrine is not ancient history. As recently as 2018, Donald Trump’s secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, called the Monroe Doctrine “as relevant today as it was the day it was written”. In 2019, Trump’s former national security adviser, John Bolton, declared “the Monroe Doctrine is alive and well”. To put it simply, even if Russia was not ruled by a corrupt authoritarian leader like Vladimir Putin, Russia, like the United States, would still have an interest in the security policies of its neighbors. Does anyone really believe that the United States would not have something to say if, for example, Mexico was to form a military alliance with a US adversary? Countries should be free to make their own foreign policy choices, but making those choices wisely requires a serious consideration of the costs and benefits. The fact is that the US and Ukraine entering into a deeper security relationship is likely to have some very serious costs – for both countries. We must vigorously support diplomatic efforts to deescalate this crisis and reaffirm Ukrainian independence and sovereignty. And we must make clear that Putin and his gang of oligarchs will face major consequences should he continue down the current path. At the same time, we must never forget the horrors that a war in the region would cause and must work hard to achieve a realistic and mutually agreeable resolution – one that is acceptable to Ukraine, Russia, the United States and our European allies – and that prevents what could be the worst European war in over 75 years.Steve Bannon compared Donald Trump’s infamous escalator ride to announce his candidacy for the White House to Triumph of the Will, the Nazi propaganda film made by Leni Riefenstahl, according to a book published on Tuesday. In Insurgency: How Republicans Lost Their Party and Got Everything They Ever Wanted, the New York Times reporter Jeremy W Peters shows the former campaign chair, White House strategist and close Trump ally repeatedly invoking Hitler when discussing the 45th president. Bannon has frequently been a source for books about Trump, often to his own detriment as well as that of his sometime boss. His standing in Trumpworld was badly damaged, for example, by his participation in Fire and Fury, Michael Wolff’s 2018 White House tell-all. But Bannon, a far-right gadfly with a huge audience for his War Room podcast, worked his way back into Trump’s good graces, securing a pardon on fraud charges and playing a central role in advancing Trump’s lie that he lost the 2020 election to Joe Biden because of electoral fraud. Bannon has pleaded not guilty to contempt of Congress, a criminal charge arising from his refusal to cooperate with the January 6 committee which could result in jail time. In Peters’ book, he is quoted as saying “Trump did not win in 2016 … Hillary Clinton lost” and complaining that Trump never recognised as much. He also complains that during the 2020 election, aides showed Trump misleading polling data in order to mask his deficit to Biden and thereby avoid outbreaks of fury. “It’s like showing Hitler fake armour divisions when the Reichstag is burning down,” Bannon says. The sometime documentary maker makes the comparison to Riefenstahl when discussing how Trump kicked off his takeover of the Republican party with his campaign announcement in June 2015. Riefenstahl is best remembered for Triumph of the Will, her landmark film about Hitler centered on the Nuremberg Nazi Party Congress of 1934. As Trump descended the elevator at his New York skyscraper, Peters writes, the film “flashed” through Bannon’s mind. “Triumph opens with a shot of Hitler’s aircraft high above Nuremberg as it begins descending through the clouds,” Peters writes. “When it touches down in a field, the massive crowd that has assembled to greet their leader rejoices. Hitler smiles as he drinks in the adulation. “Bannon thought that Trump’s entrance looked strikingly similar, and that he was witnessing someone with an uncanny sense for manipulating public perception.” The crowd which greeted Trump for his maiden speech as a 2016 presidential candidate was largely made up of actors, paid to pretend to support him. Trump has been linked to Hitler and the Nazis before. In 1990, Vanity Fair reported that he kept a book of Hitler’s speeches by his bed. “If I had these speeches,” Trump said then, “and I am not saying that I do, I would never read them.” In July last year, the former president denied telling his former chief of staff John Kelly, “Well, Hitler did a lot of good things.” That remark was reported in Frankly, We Did Win This Election, a book by Michael Bender, of the Wall Street Journal, about Trump’s defeat and refusal to concede. In his book, Peters also quotes Bannon on the danger Trump posed to US democracy by 2020, when he advanced his lie about voter fraud well in advance of election day, and into 2022, as he promises pardons for January 6 rioters and threatens prosecutors with mob justice. “This makes the Tea Party look like a church social,” Bannon is quoted as saying. Bannon also muses on how Trump would “end up going down in history as one of the two or three worst presidents ever”. “It’ll be James Buchanan, Donald Trump and Millard Filmore,” Bannon is quoted as saying, in reference to two presidents of the 1850s who failed to stop the slide to civil war.Sometimes it takes a single dazzling athletic feat to ignite the Olympic spirit. China’s Winter Games may yet capture the imagination of the world’s spectators. The Tokyo Olympics, though unpopular in Japan due to fears of Covid’s spread, provided welcome diversion for many. Even so, they lacked the energy of previous Games, and so far Beijing’s event is still more muted. Winter sports such as curling lack the broad appeal of sprinting or swimming. China’s commitment to a zero-Covid strategy has kept its citizens well away from the Games, and the Games well away from its citizens. But above all, a pall has been cast by the oppression of Uyghurs in Xinjiang, with the US, the UK and others mounting a diplomatic boycott. In 2008, the excitement of the moment largely drowned out domestic and overseas criticism of China’s human rights record. The charge sheet is longer and graver these days, and China harsher in responding. Beijing and the International Olympic Committee insist that the Games must not be politicised. Athletes have been warned against speaking out. But hosting the Olympics is always a statement of national intent. In China, where the government breeds a nationalist ethos to cement its legitimacy, it is a particularly political act. If the 2008 Games were in part a statement to the world about the country’s re-emergence as a major global power, this year’s are primarily directed at a domestic audience. Chinese audiences appear enthused by at least some of the sport (especially following Tuesday’s triumph for Eileen Gu, the American-born skier now competing for China, who has become a lightning rod for Sino-American tensions) and Beijing can dismiss foreign criticism as an attempt to contain it; hawkishness in the US, latching on to the very real ethical objections, makes this dismissal easier. The Games project China as a nation that can efficiently present an impressive large-scale global event even in the midst of a pandemic. Torchbearers included a People’s Liberation Army officer wounded as he commanded a regiment in a border clash with India, and one of the athletes who lit the cauldron was a Uyghur skier, Dinigeer Yilamujiang. The party’s purpose is to “turn the sports arena into a stage for political legitimacy and a tool to whitewash all those atrocities [in Xinjiang]”, said Teng Biao, a human rights lawyer now living in exile in the US. The IOC’s already tarnished reputation has been further damaged by its responses to the horrifying and well-documented abuses in Xinjiang and the case of Peng Shuai, the tennis star who disappeared after accusing a senior official of coercing her into sex and has since said (while accompanied by a Chinese Olympic official) that it had all been an “enormous misunderstanding”. For many, whatever the joy brought by a global sports competition, the apparatus around it looks increasingly hard to justify. Beyond China, campaigners point to the forced displacement of communities, as in Rio; the heavy public spending on venues that are then little used; the contrast between the financial struggles of many athletes, the lavish conditions enjoyed by the IOC and the hefty profits made by broadcasters and sponsors. Whether or not the world warms to these Games, even the IOC may one day come to wonder if they were really worth it. And though Beijing wanted the Olympics, and still considers them useful, they do not look like the Olympics that it wanted.