Wealth taxes will be needed to fund a £76bn a year increase in government spending by the end of the decade, caused by an ageing population and more expensive healthcare, a thinktank has said. The Resolution Foundation said the UK was on course to see the size of the state match that of Germany by 2030, and warned new methods of raising money to pay for higher spending would be needed. While stressing public spending pressures were nothing new for Britain, the thinktank said previous ways of raising money – such as reducing defence spending and raising national insurance contributions – would no longer be feasible. It predicted the government’s pension bill would rise by £24bn a year because the baby boomer generation would be retiring and people would be living longer. Extra pressures on the NHS resulting from demographic change would cost an additional £52bn. As a result, public spending would rise to 44% of the economy’s gross domestic product, up from 42% currently. Germany’s public spending pre-Covid was 45% of GDP. The Resolution Foundation said it was vital to avoid a repeat of the period after the financial crash, when slow growth drastically reduced tax revenues. It concluded that wealth – which had grown from three times national income in the early 1980s to eight times currently – was under-taxed. Dan Tomlinson, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “The swift demographic change that Britain will experience in the 2020s alongside rising health costs is set to increase public spending by £76bn a year. We’ll all benefit from people living longer, healthier lives – as well as reducing our carbon footprint – but it will have to be paid for. Tomlinson said that over the past seven decades, the UK has expanded the NHS, the state pension and education spending, and managed those costs by shrinking the army and growing the size of the state on the back of higher national insurance contributions. “We’re unlikely to be able to simply repeat that approach in future,” he said. “We’ll need to tax income more efficiently and fairly, and find new sources of tax revenue such as from better taxing wealth.”Having devoted his life to the conundrums of the cosmos, Prof Stephen Hawking has left behind a mystery of his own amid the eclectic contents of his former office. The Cambridge cosmologist, who died in 2018 at the age of 76, treasured a blackboard that became smothered with cartoons, doodles and equations at a conference he arranged in 1980. But what all the graffiti and in-jokes mean is taking some time to unravel. The blackboard – as much a perplexing work of art as a memento from the history of physics – goes on display for the first time on Thursday as part of a collection of office items acquired by the Science Museum in London. The hope for Juan-Andres Leon, the curator of Stephen Hawking’s office, is that surviving attenders of the conference on superspace and supergravity held in Cambridge more than 40 years ago swing by and explain what some of the sketches and comments mean. “We’ll certainly try and extract their interpretations,” Leon said. Joining the blackboard in a temporary display called Stephen Hawking at Work is a rare copy of the physicist’s 1966 PhD thesis, his wheelchair, a formal bet that information swallowed by a black hole is lost for ever, and a host of celebrity memorabilia, including a personalised jacket given to him by the creators of the Simpsons for his many appearances on the show. “People don’t have much of a glimpse into what everyday life was like for Stephen Hawking, and because he was a theoretical physicist, it’s hard to convey what he might do on a random Monday,” said Leon. “The office provides a lot of material and I think people knew that this was more than the collection of its parts, that it really reflects what made Stephen Hawking unique,” he added. The display contains only a fraction of the 700-plus items that staff at the Science Museum have sorted through since they arrived last summer. In time, all will be photographed and described online for all to see. Hawking’s academic work is portrayed through a handful of key works all written before his ascent to stardom in 1988. For his PhD thesis, Hawking took the process that forms a black hole – the cataclysmic collapse of a star – and ran it backwards, showing that the universe must explode into being from a single point in space and time. “Hawking used black holes as instruments, using them to understand even bigger things,” said Leon. In further work, Hawking showed that black holes are not so black after all, shedding radiation into space until they evaporate into nothing. Among the more unusual objects is a small glass apple – a gift from researchers at Intel and a nod to Hawking’s position as Lucasian professor, a post formerly held by Sir Isaac Newton. The ornament has been painted to evoke the cosmic microwave background, the afterglow of the big bang. Hawking described the tiny fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background – irregularities in the early universe that later formed the stars and galaxies – as the “fingerprints of creation”. His gift for a grand metaphor delighted publishers and led more than a few readers to see proof of divine intervention. The display does not attempt to exaggerate Hawking’s standing – according to Leon, most physicists would say he was “very good”, a “contender for a Nobel prize”, but not “the most revolutionary genius since Einstein”. What it does attempt to do is portray a sense of Hawking as a physicist, a wit and a celebrity. “We didn’t want the display to be solemn, all heavy with trombones and swirling galaxies and things like that. We wanted it to be playful,” said Leon. “He didn’t take things too seriously and I don’t think he’d have been such a celebrity if he didn’t have that spark of fun about him.” The Stephen Hawking at Work display is free and will run until 12 June at the Science Museum in London before moving to the Science and Industry Museum in Manchester, with further stops at the National Science and Media Museum in Bradford, the National Railway Museum in York and Locomotion in Shildon, County Durham.Anti-Jewish hate incidents have hit a record high in the UK, with reports of antisemitism in person and online rising above the previous 2019 peak after conflict erupted between Israel and Palestinians last May. The Community Security Trust (CST), a charity that monitors antisemitism, recorded 2,255 incidents last year including a surge in people shouting abuse from passing cars as well as 173 violent assaults. It is the highest annual tally of antisemitic hatred CST has ever recorded and is a 34% increase from the 1,684 incidents recorded in 2020. The biggest surge coincided with the bloody conflict in the Middle East in May. Incidents involving schools, pupils and teachers hit a new high, more than tripling the number in 2020. There was a similar rise in incidents among students and academics, with the highest volume of university-related hate ever recorded – and half of it happening in May 2021. Jewish people in Manchester and London endured 155 antisemitic incidents involving people shouting abuse from passing vehicles, more than half of which happened in May and June. Hundreds of Palestinians and 13 people in Israel were killed as Israel carried out airstrikes in Gaza and Hamas fired rockets into Israel. More than a third of all the UK incidents involved language, imagery or behaviour that referenced the conflict in the Middle East or demonstrated anti-Zionist motivation alongside antisemitism. The home secretary, Priti Patel, described the figures as “shocking”, while the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, said the new record was “truly appalling”. The government’s independent adviser on antisemitism, the peer John Mann, said it was time to “reconsider our efforts to tackle antisemitism”. “These record levels of anti-Jewish racism, reported by our Jewish community to CST and police, show how difficult last year was for Jews across Britain,” said Mark Gardner, the chief executive of CST, which also provides security for Jewish people and properties. “These hatreds boil away, taking any excuse to publicly burst out against Jews. This is exactly what happened during and after the Israel-Gaza war of May 2021, from schools and universities, through to the carloads of people who repeatedly drove to Jewish areas and yelled vile abuse at anyone who looked Jewish.” The report provides images of antisemitic graffiti in Tower Hamlets about “Zionist military police” and “mind control”, a candelabra to celebrate the festival of Hanukah smashed to the ground in Camden and graffiti on a pavement in Gateshead that read “Fuck Jews”. There was a decrease in online hate overall, possibly because of a fall in the number of incidents related to the Labour party. CST said it previously recorded surges in online antisemitic vitriol from people who felt allegations of antisemitism in the party were manufactured by the wider Jewish community to smear the former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn. There was also evidence of Covid-related antisemitism with leaflets distributed to homes in South Yorkshire saying “Don’t trust the Jew jab” and other similar slurs. A total of 78 incidents were related to the pandemic – from conspiracy theories about Jewish involvement in creating and spreading Covid-19 or the “myth” of Covid-19, to wishing that Jewish people caught the virus and died from it. Some reports related to the misappropriation of Holocaust imagery such as the yellow Star of David as part of anti-lockdown or anti-vaccine campaigns. Racists also found a new way to spread their hate. There were 16 reports of “Zoombombings” – video conferencing events being hijacked with antisemitic material during 2021. The conflict in the Middle East coincided with the easing of Covid-19 restrictions in the UK, which CST said may have fuelled the spike in hate incidents. In May businesses were allowed to reopen, most legal controls on outdoor socialising were lifted and two households were able to meet indoors. “It is possible that the relaxing of regulations, coinciding with a trigger event as emotive as renewed war between Israel and Hamas, provided the opportunity and impetus for a mass release of lockdown-induced frustrations,” the report said. “These factors may have played a part in the extent of the rise in antisemitic incident reports during and in the aftermath of this period.” Patel said: “Our Jewish community has been subject to appalling hatred … In addition to supporting the work of CST, I continue to support the police to ensure they have the resources to tackle these despicable incidents so that perpetrators can then be punished with the full force of the law.” Cooper said the increasing number of incidents “shows just how far we have to go to remove the stain of antisemitism from our society”. “We need urgent action to tackle these vile incidents wherever they arise, be it in schools, on our streets or online,” she said. “Hatred is unacceptable in all its forms, and it is our responsibility to stamp it out once and for all.”Students in England are being hit by stealth cuts and tax rises by a government which is using high inflation to “quietly tighten the financial screws”, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS). The IFS paper highlights a series of ways in which inflation is eroding the value of student loans and tuition fees, enabling the government to claw back money from students and universities to the tune of £2.3bn. The report, published on Thursday, comes at a time of concern about the impact of the cost of living crisis on already hard-up students and uncertainty about the future of higher education funding. According to the IFS thinktank, students will see substantial real-terms cuts to the value of maintenance loans, with the parental earnings threshold frozen at £25,000 when it should have risen to £34,000, meaning many students are not receiving full maintenance loans. In addition, the IFS says the rate at which the level of maintenance loans will be increased – at 2.3% – falls short of both the current level of inflation and predicted levels for the year ahead. “This means that many students will see their maintenance loans cut in real terms, even though the real value of their parents’ incomes will also have fallen,” the report said. The IFS also highlighted the recent government decision to freeze the student loan repayment threshold at £27,295 rather than applying the current rate of inflation, so that a graduate earning £30,000 will need to pay £113 more towards their student loan in the next tax year than originally agreed. Tuition fees meanwhile remain frozen for the fifth year at £9,250 which amounts to a 15% real-terms cut in the level of tuition fees over the past decade, the IFS said, hitting university income hard. “On the whole, as our updated student finance calculator shows, the government is saving £2.3bn on student loans under the cover of high inflation,” the IFS paper concluded. Matt Western, Labour’s universities minister, said: “The Conservative party’s cost of living crisis is hitting people’s pockets, yet the government’s response is to raise taxes on working people, introduce a buy now pay later energy scheme, and use a smokescreen to hammer students and graduates.” Ben Waltmann, senior research economist at the IFS, said: “The government seems determined to use high inflation as a cover for reducing the taxpayer cost of student loans. Large real-terms cuts in maintenance loans could cause genuine hardship for students on tight budgets. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “Our student finance system was designed to ensure those from the poorest families get the most support whilst they study. Those students currently have access to the largest ever amounts of living costs support in cash terms and we have increased maximum loans for living costs over the last two years. “The student loan system needs to be fairer for both students and the taxpayer. With graduate salaries rising it is only fair to ask borrowers who are benefiting financially from their higher education make a reasonable contribution towards its costs.” Another education report meanwhile, also published on Thursday, has confirmed that the gap between poorer pupils’ GCSE grades and those of their wealthier peers has failed to improve over the last 10 years. The Education and Policy Institute found however that fears that the switch to teacher assessed grades for GCSEs in 2020 would penalise disadvantaged students were unfounded, though the grade gap widened in 2020 for students in college and sixth form as A-level students gaining a grade more from teacher assessments than those who studied BTecs which more disadvantaged students take.One of Britain’s largest trade unions has invited the governor of the Bank of England to work as a care worker for a day to witness how people cope on low pay. The GMB, which represents about 500,000 full and part-time workers, said Andrew Bailey should see first-hand the challenges of making ends meet for people struggling on below average earnings – many of them low-paid women working in the care sector – after the central bank governor called for wage restraint to limit the rise in inflation. Bailey caused uproar last week when he suggested that workers should help curb inflation by refraining from making wage demands, on the same day the Bank of England announced the biggest fall in disposable income in three decades. The central bank forecast that inflation, which increased to 5.4% in December, was on course to hit 7% in April while its latest estimates found that earnings were increasing by 4% to 4.5%. Bailey, who declined to comment on the offer, said interest rates would need to rise further if wages increased in line with inflation, causing unemployment to rise and economic growth to slow. “I’m not saying don’t give your staff a pay rise, this is about the size of it frankly. Show restraint,” Bailey said after the central bank’s monetary policy committee, which he chairs, increased the base interest rate from 0.25% to 0.5%. Almost two-thirds (63%) of workers expect their pay to go up by less than the cost of living in 2022, according to a poll of 2,000 people by the TUC. Emphasising the lack of bargaining strength among much of the labour force despite the continuing economic recovery, 29% of respondents said that rather than win a pay rise, their earnings were likely to be frozen this year. Only 11% expect to receive a pay rise that will exceed living costs. TUC general Secretary Frances O’Grady said the current squeeze on disposable incomes across much of the workforce meant inflation adjusted earnings were lower in real terms than in 2008, ranking the last 13 years as the longest drag on living standards in more than 200 years. She said the latest spell of negative real wages beat the 12 year stretch between 1851 and 1863 when wages fell relative to inflation, but not the 24-year period during and after the Napoleonic wars between 1798 and 1822. Rejecting Bailey’s call for restraint, she said: “Let’s be crystal clear. Energy prices are pushing up inflation – not wage demands. “The last thing hard-pressed households need right now is for their pay to be held down.” Sharon Graham, the general secretary of Unite, said workers should reject calls from the richest members of society for wage restraint, especially after a long period of rocketing boardrom pay and bonuses. Bailey earned £575,538, including pension, in his first year as the Bank’s governor from March 2020, more than 18 times the UK average for a full-time employee. In the letter, GMB general secretary, Gary Smith, said Bailey should spend a day shadowing low-paid care workers to judge for himself how rising energy and food bills were affecting people on low incomes. “You do not appear to have called for restraint in price setting, or dividend payments,” he said. Smith continued: “Andrew Bailey should spend a day shadowing the low-paid workers in the care sector upon whom ‘restraint’ has been imposed for too long. “These are the predominately women workers at the frontline of the pandemic, who are putting their own lives at risk to care for some of the most vulnerable members of society. “The majority of those workers earn pennies more than the national minimum wage. After working a shift, I would be interested to know whether those workers should show ‘restraint’ against the mounting cost of living crisis. “I hope that Mr Bailey will be prepared to explain his reasoning to the people his apparent policy would affect.”The governor of New York, Kathy Hochul, announced she would allow the state’s indoor mask requirement to lapse tomorrow. Customers at most businesses in New York had previously been required to wear masks or show proof of coronavirus vaccination. “Given the declining cases, given declining hospitalizations, that is why we feel comfortable to lift this, in effect tomorrow,” Hochul said this afternoon. The chair of House Democrats’ campaign arm applauded Hochul’s decision, which comes days after several other Democratic governors announced plans to relax mask requirements. “It’s time to give people their lives back,” Congressman Sean Patrick Maloney said. “With science as our guide, we’re ready to start getting back to normal.” However, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the agency continues to “recommend masking in areas of high and substantial transmission”. According to the CDC’s own data, 99.5% of all US counties currently qualify as areas of high and substantial transmission, even as the number of new coronavirus cases across the country has decreased in the past few weeks. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has issued a subpoena to Peter Navarro, who served as Donald Trump’s top trade adviser. In its subpoena letter, the committee said it was seeking records and testimony in connection to reports that Navarro worked with Steve Bannon to overturn the results of the 2020 election. The National Archives is asking the Department of Justice to investigate Trump’s handling of White House documents, according to the Washington Post. The news follows revelations that the Archives took possession of 15 boxes of records at Mar-a-Lago that should have been turned over to the agency at the end of Trump’s term, reigniting questions about whether his administration violated the Presidential Records Act. – Joan E Greve Tracey Lindeman in Ottawa: Blockades on the busiest border bridge between Canada and the US could have a serious impact on the economies of both countries, disrupting the automotive industry, agricultural exports, and causing multimillion-dollar losses, the two countries’ governments have said. The warnings came as business associations said that manufacturing plants at the heart of North America’s automotive industry face potential shortages, shutdowns, layoffs as “freedom convoy” protesters continue to block traffic on the Ambassador Bridge, between the car-manufacturing cities of Detroit and Windsor. “I think it’s important for everyone in Canada and the United States to understand what the potential impact of this blockage is on workers, on the supply chain,” the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said on Wednesday. Tiff Macklem, the governor of the Bank of Canada said: “If there were to be prolonged blockages at key entry points into Canada that could start to have a measurable impact on economic activity in Canada,” he said. “We’ve already got a strained global supply chain. We don’t need this.” Late on Wednesday, Ford announced that it had been forced to close an engine plant in Windsor, and reduce hours at a second factory because of the blockade. David Adams, president of auto industry group Global Automakers of Canada, told the Guardian that between 5,000 and 7,000 trucks use the Ambassador Bridge daily to deliver automotive parts. The bridge is responsible for 27% of all Canada-US trade. “It’s a pivotal border crossing,” he said. Vehicles are Canada’s second-largest export, with the US buying more than 90% of that supply. Business associations warned that manufacturers in the region risk losing $50m a day because of delays. Meanwhile hundreds of protesters remain encamped in Canada’s capital, Ottawa, and others blockaded a second international bridge in Alberta also remained. Read more: One in five applicants to the white supremacist group Patriot Front claimed to hold current or former ties to the US military, according to leaked documents published and reviewed by the Southern Poverty Law Center and alternative media collective Unicorn Riot. Some 18 out of the 87 applicants, or 21%, said they were currently or previously affiliated with the military. One applicant, who claimed to be a former Marine, also said he currently worked for the Department of Homeland Security, according to the SPLC’s Hatewatch, a blog that tracks and exposes activities of American rightwing extremists. A white supremacist and neo-fascist hate group, Patriot Front emerged as a rebrand of the neo-Nazi organization Vanguard America in the aftermath of the 2017 Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia. According to the SPLC, the Patriot Front “represents one of the most prominent white supremacist groups in the country” and is led by Thomas Rousseau, a 23-year old man based in Dallas, Texas. “A nation within a nation is our goal. Our people face complete annihilation as our culture and heritage are attacked from all sides,” Rousseau once said. In January, Unicorn Riot published over 400 gigabytes of data that included “ostensibly private, unedited videos and direct messages [that] reveal a campaign to organize acts of hatred while indoctrinating teenagers into national socialism (Nazism),” the journalist collective said. Group members and applicants expressed an open admiration for Nazi ideologies, with the latter expressing various motivations for joining the group. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few days. Here’s where the day stands so far: The governor of New York, Kathy Hochul, announced she would allow the state’s indoor mask requirement to lapse tomorrow. Customers at most businesses in New York had previously been required to wear masks or show proof of coronavirus vaccination. “Given the declining cases, given declining hospitalizations, that is why we feel comfortable to lift this, in effect tomorrow,” Hochul said this afternoon. The chair of House Democrats’ campaign arm applauded Hochul’s decision, which comes days after several other Democratic governors announced plans to relax mask requirements. “It’s time to give people their lives back,” Congressman Sean Patrick Maloney said. “With science as our guide, we’re ready to start getting back to normal.” However, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the agency continues to “recommend masking in areas of high and substantial transmission”. According to the CDC’s own data, 99.5% of all US counties currently qualify as areas of high and substantial transmission, even as the number of new coronavirus cases across the country has decreased in the past few weeks. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has issued a subpoena to Peter Navarro, who served as Donald Trump’s top trade adviser. In its subpoena letter, the committee said it was seeking records and testimony in connection to reports that Navarro worked with Steve Bannon to overturn the results of the 2020 election. The National Archives is asking the Department of Justice to investigate Trump’s handling of White House documents, according to the Washington Post. The news follows revelations that the Archives took possession of 15 boxes of records at Mar-a-Lago that should have been turned over to the agency at the end of Trump’s term, reigniting questions about whether his administration violated the Presidential Records Act. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. In its subpoena letter to Peter Navarro, the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection accuses the Trump adviser of working with Steve Bannon to prevent the certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 election. In his book, Navarro refers to the plan to overturn the results of the election as “Green Bay Sweep,” and the former trade adviser has claimed that more than 100 members of Congress supported the idea. “Because you have already discussed these and other relevant issues in your recently published book, in interviews with reporters, and, among other places, on a podcast, we look forward to discussing them with you, too,” the letter says. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has issued a subpoena to Peter Navarro, who served as Donald Trump’s top trade adviser. In a statement, the committee said it was seeking records and testimony from Navarro in connection to reports that he was involved in efforts to disrupt the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 election. The committee also noted that Navarro has talked about those efforts in his own book about the final year of Trump’s presidency, entitled “In Trump Time: My Journal of America’s Plague Year”. “Mr. Navarro appears to have information directly relevant to the Select Committee’s investigation into the causes of the January 6th attack on the Capitol,” said committee chair Bennie Thompson. “He hasn’t been shy about his role in efforts to overturn the results of the 2020 election and has even discussed the former President’s support for those plans. More than 500 witnesses have provided information in our investigation, and we expect Mr. Navarro to do so as well.” The White House also confirmed earlier today that Joe Biden will meet with Democratic members of the Senate judiciary committee tomorrow to discuss the search for a supreme court nominee. “The President has also continued his conversations with Republicans this week, and he’s grateful to all of the members who are working with him in good faith during this process,” a White House official told the press pool. The official added, “He is considering a wealth of candidates, all of whom possess the best qualifications that any person could – first-rate legal minds, strong credentials, records, and character. They have also all lived the American dream, have compelling life stories and unique strengths. And any of them would be deserving of bipartisan support because of their deep qualifications.” Biden has pledged to nominate a Black woman to replace Stephen Breyer, who announced his retirement two weeks ago. If Biden’s nominee is confirmed, she will become the first Black woman to sit on the US supreme court. “There’s a long list of extraordinarily qualified Black women to serve on the Supreme Court,” Biden said on Twitter today. “After 232 years and 115 justices, we’re finally going to put one on the bench.” Russia and Belarus will begin 10 days of joint military drills on Thursday, setting in train one of the most overtly threatening elements of the Kremlin’s buildup of forces around Ukraine’s borders. Valery Gerasimov, the head of the Russian general staff, arrived in Belarus on Wednesday to oversee the drills. Russia has moved up to 30,000 troops, two battalions of S-400 surface-to-air missile systems and numerous fighter jets into Belarus for joint training exercises with the Belarusian army. Satellite imagery shows much of the hardware has been moved to locations close to the border with Ukraine. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, reportedly told France’s Emmanuel Macron this week that the troops would leave Belarus when the exercises ended on 20 February. Even if that does happen, the drills show that Belarusian dictator, Alexander Lukashenko, is a firm ally in Putin’s Ukraine policy. Joe Biden spoke to French President Emmanuel Macron this morning, as the US and its allies continue their diplomatic efforts to deescalate tensions along Ukraine’s borders, where Vladimir Putin has deployed more than 100,000 Russian troops. Macron traveled to Moscow and Kyiv earlier this week to hold meetings with Putin and Ukrainian officials and continue peace talks with the two countries. “President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. spoke today with President Emmanuel Macron of France. They discussed President Macron’s recent meetings in Russia and Ukraine,” the White House said in its readout. “They also talked about ongoing diplomatic and deterrence efforts, undertaken in close coordination with our Allies and partners, in response to Russia’s continued military build-up on Ukraine’s borders.” Despite those diplomatic efforts, Russia has continued to build up its troop presence along Ukraine’s borders, intensifying fears that the window of opportunity for a peaceful resolution to the crisis may be closing. The Post also has additional details on the Trump White House records that were included in those 15 boxes of documents recovered by the National Archives from Mar-a-Lago: Among the materials they recovered included correspondence with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, which Trump once described as ‘love letters,’ as well as a letter left for Trump by President Barack Obama, people familiar with the matter said. The Archives also retrieved a doctored map of Hurricane Dorian that had been altered with a black Sharpie by Trump in a failed attempt to show he hadn’t been wrong about the storm’s path, according to a person familiar with the contents of the boxes. The Archives in a statement earlier this week said that Trump representatives are ‘continuing to search’ for additional records. Trump attracted widespread criticism in 2019, when he used a Sharpie to alter a map of Hurricane Dorian’s projected path in an effort to substantiate his incorrect claims that the storm could hit Alabama. The National Archives is reportedly asking the Department of Justice to investigate Donald Trump’s handling of his White House records, following revelations that the former president withheld important documents from the agency. The Washington Post reports: The National Archives and Records Administration has asked the Justice Department to examine Donald Trump’s handling of White House records, sparking discussions among federal law enforcement officials about whether they should investigate the former president for a possible crime, according to two people familiar with the matter. The referral from the National Archives came amid recent revelations that officials recovered 15 boxes of materials from the former president’s Mar-a-Lago residence that weren’t handed back in to the government as they should have been, and that Trump had turned over other White House records that had been torn up. Archives officials suspected Trump had possibly violated laws concerning the handling of government documents — including those that might be considered classified — and reached out to the Justice Department, the people familiar with the matter said. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has subpoenaed a wide swath of documents from the Trump White House, which has reinvigorated questions over the administration’s potential violations of the Presidential Records Act. As of now, it is unclear whether the Department of Justice will actually launch an investigation into Trump’s handling of White House documents. Joe Biden asked the CEOs of electric utilities about the community response as their companies come to rely more on clean-energy options, such as wind energy. “Are you getting less resistance when you start talking about wind and windmills? I know they cause cancer,” Biden said. As some of the CEOs laughed at that comment, Biden added, “Bad joke.” The president’s comment appeared to be a reference to Donald Trump’s bizarre and baseless claim that the noise emitted by wind turbines causes cancer, which was widely mocked. Biden’s roundtable with the CEOs is still happening, but reporters were escorted out of the meeting after the president’s opening remarks. He did not take any questions as the reporters departed. Joe Biden is now meeting with CEOs of electric utilities at the White House to discuss his economic agenda, as congressional Democrats try to pass their Build Back Better Act. “You know, you have some of the most important jobs in America right now - keeping electricity systems running and running reliably,” the president told the CEOs. Bide noted he has spent time in the past year touring parts of the country, particularly on the west coast, that have been devastated by wildfires, underscoring the urgent need to embrace clean energy options. “It’s about building a clean energy future,” Biden said. “And we’re seeing incredible enthusiasm, support for the effort - not just from you all but around the country.” Recent polling suggests voters are increasingly concerned about crime and rate Joe Biden poorly on his handling of it. Increasingly, Republicans and Democrats view the issue as a potential political liability for Biden and his party in November. The administration has focused its efforts on combating illegal guns and prosecuting violent offenders, while the president has sought to balance support for law enforcement with his promise of police reform. At her press conference on Wednesday, Val Demings was joined by a handful of moderate Democratic lawmakers and law enforcement officials on Wednesday to urge Congress to pass the Violent Incident Clearance and Technological Investigative Methods, which would establish a grant program to help police departments investigate and solve homicide and violent crime cases. Demings said it was important to listen to the people in the communities most impacted by crime. The message she said she was hearing from them was: “We don’t want to defund the police, we want to fund the police. We don’t want to see less police, we want to see more police.” Florida congresswoman Val Demings, a Democrat and former Orlando Police Chief who is running for Senate, said the best way to combat a rise in violent crime was to fund, not “defund,” the police, distancing herself from an activist call that has divided Democrats and given political grist to Republicans. “The number one priority has to be the reduction of violent crime,” she said at a press conference today, while adding that the country must also “get serious” about addressing the social ills that often exacerbate crime, like mental health, addiction and poverty. Last week, Joe Biden sent a similar message during a visit to New York, which followed the murder of two NYPD officers and a spate of violent episodes across the city. Demings’ press conference comes one day after Missouri Congresswoman Cori Bush told Black journalists, according to Axios, that she would not stop calling for cities to “defund the police” by shifting funding for law enforcement toward violence prevention programs and social services. Many frontline Democrats have blamed the “defund the police” slogan for Democratic losses in 2020, and they believe it will be a liability again in 2022. On Wednesday, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, misleadingly, blamed the rise in violent crime on Democrats’ support for the racial justice movement. White House press secretary Jen Psaki is currently holding a briefing, and has commented on New York governor Kathy Hochul’s decision to lift the state’s indoor mask mandate despite federal public health guidance. Asked about whether the White House is out of step in its messaging compared with the moves that Democratic governors such as Hochul have made this week, Psaki said it was clear that the US is “moving toward a time when Covid won’t disrupt our daily lives” and won’t be a “constant crisis” any more. “We recognize people are tired of the pandemic and tired of wearing masks,” Psaki said. But she also pointed to comments made earlier today by the director of the Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (CDC), Rochelle Wallensky, who underlined that the agency still recommends wearing masks indoors in areas of high transmission. The CDC website states: “Everyone ages 2 years and older should properly wear a well-fitting mask indoors in public in areas of substantial or high community transmission, regardless of vaccination status.” Psaki said nonetheless, the CDC also understands the need to be “flexible” and that its guidance was regularly reviewed. Illinois governor JB Pritzker has announced that the state will lift its indoor mask mandate by 28 February, though it will remain in place for schools for now. The move comes shortly after New York governor Kathy Hochul made a similar announcement, days after other Democratic governors also eased mask requirements in their states. “All of us are getting tired of wearing masks, that’s for sure,” Pritzker told reporters on Wednesday morning, the Chicago Tribune reported. “We have done such a good job, you have done such a good job of keeping each other safe.” Though Covid-19 cases have been decreasing in the US in recent weeks, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to recommend wearing masks in areas of “high and substantial transmission”. Pritzker is expected to give a press conference on the matter shortly. Here’s where the day stands so far: The governor of New York, Kathy Hochul, announced she would allow the state’s indoor mask requirement to lapse tomorrow. Customers at most businesses in New York had previously been required to wear masks or show proof of coronavirus vaccination. “Given the declining cases, given declining hospitalizations, that is why we feel comfortable to lift this, in effect tomorrow,” Hochul said this afternoon. The chair of House Democrats’ campaign arm applauded Hochul’s decision, which comes days after several other Democratic governors announced plans to relax mask requirements. “It’s time to give people their lives back,” Congressman Sean Patrick Maloney said. “With science as our guide, we’re ready to start getting back to normal.” However, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the agency continues to “recommend masking in areas of high and substantial transmission”. According to the CDC’s own data, 99.5% of all US counties currently qualify as areas of high and substantial transmission, even as the number of new coronavirus cases across the country has decreased in the past few weeks. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Over at the White House pandemic response briefing, Dr Anthony Fauci was asked about the potential need for another round of coronavirus vaccine booster shots. Fauci, the president’s chief medical adviser, said that health experts would continue to track data on infections and hospitalizations of vaccinated individuals to get a better sense of if and when another booster shot is necessary. Fauci also emphasized that recommendations for more booster shots will likely be tailored to specific populations who may be at higher risk of becoming severely ill from coronavirus, such as the elderly. “There may be the need for yet again another boost, in this case a fourth-dose boost, for an individual receiving the mRNA that could be based on age, as well as underlying conditions,” Fauci said. “So I don’t think you’re going to be hearing, if you do, any kind of recommendations that will be across the board for everyone.” Speaking in New York City, Governor Kathy Hochul said she was not yet relaxing the mask mandates for schools, even as she let the mask-or-vax requirement for most businesses lapse. The Democratic governor said she would revisit the issue of mask requirements for schools next month, after students return from the winter break scheduled for late February. “After the break, after we have kids tested, we’re going to make an assessment in the first week of March,” Hochul said. The governor of New York, Kathy Hochul, has officially announced that she will allow the state’s indoor mask requirement to lapse tomorrow. Customers at indoor businesses had been required to wear masks or show proof of coronavirus vaccination, but Hochul said the time had come to lift that “emergency temporary measure”. “At this time, we say that it is the right decision to lift this mandate for indoor businesses and let counties, cities and businesses to make their own decisions on what they want to do with respect to mask or the vaccination requirement,” Hochul said. “Given the declining cases, given declining hospitalizations, that is why we feel comfortable to lift this, in effect tomorrow.” Several other Democratic governors have announced plans this week to relax mask requirements, and the governor of Illinois is expected to outline a similar policy today. However, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said moments ago that the agency continues to “recommend masking in areas of high and substantial transmission”. According to the CDC’s own data, 99.5% of all US counties currently qualify as areas of high and substantial transmission, even as the number of new coronavirus cases across the US has decreased in the past few weeks. A reporter asked Dr Rochelle Walensky whether the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will soon offer guidance to governors about relaxing coronavirus-related restrictions. “We are working on that guidance. We are working on following the trends for the moment,” Walensky said at the White House pandemic response briefing. But Walensky added, “Our hospitalizations are still high, our death rates are still high, so as we work towards that and as we are encouraged by the current trends, we are not there yet.” Several Democratic governors announced earlier this week that they would move to relax mask mandates for schools, and the governors of New York and Illinois are expected to announce similar plans today. Dr Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, just said that the agency continues to recommend masking in “areas of high and substantial transmission”. According to the CDC’s own data, 99.5% of all US counties currently qualify as areas of high and substantial transmission, even as the number of new coronavirus cases across the US has decreased in the past few weeks. Meanwhile, several Democratic governors are moving to relax coronavirus-related restrictions, with Kathy Hochul of New York expected to let her state’s indoor mask mandate expire tomorrow. The White House pandemic response team has been repeatedly asked about several Democratic governors moving to relax mask mandates in response to the recent decrease in coronavirus cases. Jeff Zients, the White House pandemic response coordinator, said the US is “moving toward a time when Covid won’t disrupt our daily lives,” and he emphasized the importance of using tools like vaccines to get to that point. “We certainly understand the need and desire to be flexible, and we want to ensure the public health guidance that we’re providing meets the moment that we’re in,” said Dr Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “But at this time, we continue to recommend masking in areas of high and substantial transmission.” The White House pandemic response team is now holding a press briefing, and the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provided an update on trends in coronavirus cases and deaths. Dr Rochelle Walensky noted that the seven-day average of new coronavirus cases in the US is now about 247,000 per day, marking a 44% decrease from a week earlier. But the CDC director added that deaths have increased slightly, by about 3%, compared to last week, and the US has now crossed the grim threshold of 900,000 total coronavirus deaths since the start of the pandemic. While several Democratic governors are moving to relax coronavirus-related restrictions, Walensky emphasized the importance of making data-driven decisions when it comes to pandemic response policies. “I know there will come a time when we move from a phase of crisis to a point where Covid-19 is not disrupting our daily lives,” Walensky said. “And as we all look forward to this next step, I want to instill in everyone that moving forward from this pandemic will be a process that’s led by our surveillance and our data. I’m confident that CDC and our public health partners are well positioned to lead the way.” As several Democratic governors move to relax mask mandates because of the decrease in coronavirus cases, Republicans are accusing them of belatedly embracing a new approach to pandemic response. “Keep in mind as you see blue states lift mask mandates and Democrats try to claim credit: The science on COVID hasn’t changed. The political science has,” Congressman Brad Wenstrup said on Twitter. “Remember: Republicans have fought to allow Americans to sensibly and methodically move past the pandemic. Democrats haven’t. Wenstrup’s message was retweeted by House minority leader Kevin McCarthy, who has previously accused Joe Biden of failing to deliver “a realistic response to the virus”. Of course, Republican governors have been criticized for refusing to enact policies, such as mask mandates in schools, that would have helped to limit the spread of the virus during past surges in cases. Now that coronavirus cases are decreasing across the country, a growing number of Democratic governors seem more comfortable with relaxing some of the restrictions they put in place to respond to those surges. The US postal service (USPS) is facing the mounting fury of the Biden administration, Democratic lawmakers and environmental groups over its plan to spend billions of dollars on a new fleet of gasoline-powered mail delivery trucks that critics say will upend a White House goal to slash planet-heating gases. The USPS has outlined plans to spend $11.3bn on as many as 165,000 new delivery trucks over the next decade to refresh what is one of the largest civilian vehicle fleets in the world. The familiar boxy white trucks with red and blue stripes will be replaced by a new design that has been likened in appearance to a duck. A full 90% of the fleet, however, will have traditional gas-powered engines, with just 10% being electric. While the new trucks will come with air conditioning, this means their fuel efficiency will be strikingly poor at just 8.2 miles per gallon (3.56 km per litre). This is worse than all of the most popular gas-hungry trucks currently on sale in the US and is even less efficient than the original Hummer, a vehicle infamous for the vast amount of fuel it burned through. “We were optimistic the postal service would listen to us about the benefits of an electric fleet, but it doubled down on its inexplicable preference for polluting trucks,” said Adrian Martinez, senior attorney at Earthjustice. Read the Guardian’s full report: The White House pandemic response team will soon hold a briefing, and its members will likely be asked about the push to ease mask requirements in several Democratic-led states. Meanwhile, Joe Biden will participate in a roundtable with CEOs of electric utilities this afternoon to discuss his Build Back Better economic agenda. The secretary of energy, Jennifer Granholm, is also expected to attend. Both of those events are still coming up, so stay tuned. Sean Patrick Maloney, the chair of House Democrats’ campaign arm, has said it is “time to give people their lives back,” as the country’s number of coronavirus cases decreases. “Democrats’ plan to fight COVID is working - cases are down &amp; vaccines are widely available. Now, it’s time to give people their lives back,” the congressman said on Twitter. “With science as our guide, we’re ready to start getting back to normal.” Maloney, whose district includes some of the northern suburbs of New York City, also applauded Joe Biden and New York Governor Kathy Hochul for their pandemic response policies. “We are making tremendous progress thanks to their strong, science-based leadership,” Maloney said. “I fully support the decision to roll back mask mandates.” Maloney’s tweet comes as Hochul is expected to let New York’s indoor mask mandate lapse tomorrow, as the state reports a sharp decrease in coronavirus cases. The Guardian’s Peter Walker and Ian Sample report on the UK’s plans to relax coronavirus restrictions: Boris Johnson plans to abolish the last Covid restrictions in England, including the requirement for people with the virus to self-isolate, in less than two weeks, a month earlier than initially proposed, he has announced. In an opening statement to prime minister’s questions, Johnson said he hoped to do this as soon as the Commons returned from its upcoming recess, on 21 February. “I can tell the house today that it is my intention to return on the first day after the half-term recess to present our strategy for living with Covid,” he said. “Provided the current encouraging trends in the data continue, it is my expectation that we will be able to end the last domestic restrictions, including the legal requirement to self-isolate if you test positive, a full month early.” The plans to end all restrictions were announced by Johnson last month, when he unveiled the scrapping of so-called plan B measures such as mask use. Read the Guardian’s full report: While some Democratic governors push for easing coronavirus restrictions as number of coronavirus cases decreases, the Biden administration seems a bit more hesitant to do so. Joe Biden met with a bipartisan group of governors at the White House last week, and one Republican governor, Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas, said the president was pushed on the need to return to some sense of normal in the US. “There’s a number of areas that we have full agreement on, and that is one: we need to move away from the pandemic,” Hutchinson said, per CNN. “And we asked the president to help give us clear guidelines on how we can return to a greater state of normality.” But Biden sounded a more cautious note, telling the governors, “I think it’s all about making sure we have the same standards we’re applying across the board.” It’s important to note that, while coronavirus cases have decreased in the past few weeks, the number of Americans dying from the virus remains alarmingly high. As of Monday, the seven-day average of daily coronavirus deaths in the US was 2,404, according to the data compiled by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. The governor of New York, Kathy Hochul, is expected to let her state’s indoor mask mandate lapse tomorrow, joining several other Democrat-led states that are easing restrictions as coronavirus cases decrease. Earlier this week, the governors of Connecticut, Delaware, New Jersey and Oregon announced plans to lift mask requirements in schools, and JB Pritzker of Illinois is also expected to outline his offramp strategy for mask mandates later today. “We are not going to manage Covid to zero,” New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy said Monday. “We have to learn how to live with Covid as we move from a pandemic to an endemic phase of this virus.” The easing of restrictions comes as many states, particularly those that were hit early by the surge in cases causes by the Omicron variant, report lower numbers of infections. According to data compiled by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the US is now averaging about 250,000 new cases a day. And while that is still high, it is a fraction compared to the 800,000 new cases a day that the country was seeing in mid-January. Those declining numbers have given some governors, even those who may have been previously hesitant to relax restrictions, the confidence to start doing so. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.That’s it from me, Helen Livingstone, for now. Please join us a little later for a new live feed where we will continue to cover the coronavirus crisis. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. I leave you with a summary of the latest developments from the past 24 hours: In the UK, The Metropolitan police is going to review its decision not to include the Christmas quiz in Downing Street on 15 December 2020 in its partygate investigation in the light of a new picture showing prime minister Boris Johnson with a bottle of prosecco and two staff members. Sweden scrapped almost all of its few pandemic restrictions and stopped most testing for Covid, even as the pressure on the healthcare systems remained high and some scientists begged for more patience in fighting the disease. New Zealand’s anti-vaccine protesters are being evicted from parliament grounds on the third day of their protest, with more than 50 arrested after clashes with police. Blockades on the busiest border bridge between Canada and the US to protest against coronavirus rules could have a serious impact on the economies of both countries, disrupting the automotive industry, agricultural exports, and causing multimillion-dollar losses, the two countries’ governments have said. The US government is planning to roll out Covid-19 jabs for children under the age of 5 as soon as 21 February. The US Food and Drug Administration is considering authorising the use of the Pfizer Inc and BioNTech SE vaccine in the age group even though it did not meet a key target in a clinical trial of two- to four-year-olds. Palestinian authorities have ramped up Covid testing and vaccinations in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and have warned that public indifference to calls for mask-wearing and social distancing is hampering efforts to fight the pandemic. The Palestinian Authority health ministry registered more than 64,000 active cases of Covid on Wednesday. Boris Johnson plans to abolish the last domestic Covid restrictions in England, including the requirement for people with the virus to self-isolate, in less than two weeks, a month earlier than initially proposed, he announced. Top European Union officials said low absorption of Covid-19 vaccines in African countries had become the main problem in the global vaccine rollout following a recent increase in supplies of jabs, Only five hospitals in Afghanistan still offer Covid treatment, with 33 others having been forced to close in recent months for lack of doctors, medicines and even heating, the Associated Press reports. It comes as the economically devastated nation is hit by a steep rise in the number of reported coronavirus cases. Spain’s King Felipe has tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday after displaying mild symptoms overnight and will remain in isolation for seven days, the Royal Palace has said. Japan is set to extend Covid restrictions in Tokyo and 12 prefectures by three weeks as the Omicron variant continued to spread. The country has been breaking daily records for coronavirus cases and deaths amid a surge in infections driven by Omicron. Denmark’s Queen Margrethe II has tested positive for coronavirus and is showing mild symptoms, the royal court said. The 81-year-old monarch received a third dose of the vaccine in November, the court said. The biggest Australian states, NSW and Victoria, have reported a combined 40 Covid deaths and around 20,000 new cases. Hello, this is Helen Livingstone taking over the blog from my colleague Nadeem Badshah. Firstly here’s an update on the clearing of protesters from parliament grounds in Wellington, New Zealand from our reporter on the ground Eva Corlett: Tensions are boiling over, as the wall of more than 100 police officers advances their line a few metres every half hour, ripping out tents as they go. Initial reports indicate up to 20 people have been arrested after tussles with police. The police are picking people off one-by-one at the front of the line, prompting scuffles to break out, and sparking shouts from the crowd of “shame on you, shame on you!” towards the officers. A drum is beating persistently and occasionally the group of a few hundred protestors erupts into songs in Māori and English, including New Zealand’s national anthem. A man eggs on the crowd through a loudspeaker: “thank you for standing up for New Zealand!” he shouts. Away from the front-line, the atmosphere is less volatile, with protestors sitting in deck-chairs, or filming on their phones. Blockades on the busiest border bridge between Canada and the U.S. to protest against coronavirus rules could have a serious impact on the economies of both countries, disrupting the automotive industry, agricultural exports, and causing multimillion-dollar losses, the two countries’ governments have said. The warnings came as business associations said that manufacturing plants at the heart of North America’s automotive industry face potential shortages, shutdowns, layoffs as “freedom convoy” protesters continue to block traffic on the Ambassador Bridge, between the car-manufacturing cities of Detroit and Windsor. Meanwhile anti-vaccine mandate protesters in France launched their own “freedom convoy”, with many displaying Canadian flags. Some 200 protesters assembled in a parking lot in Nice, on France’s Mediterranean coast, saying that they planned to head first to Paris, then on to Brussels to demand the scrapping of rules barring people from public venues if they do not have a Covid-19 vaccination. Canadian governor General Mary Simon, the personal representative of head of state Queen Elizabeth, said she had tested positive for Covid-19 and was experiencing mild symptoms. The Governor General swears in governments and formally signs legislation, Reuters reports. Scottish ministers have called on the prime minister Boris Johnson to provide more clarity after they claim he failed to give them “appropriate notice” on his latest plan to lift the final domestic Covid restrictions in England. The current self-isolation rules in England expire on March 24, but Boris Johnson told MPs at Prime Minister’s Questions that “provided the current encouraging trends in the data continue, it is my expectation that we will be able to end the last domestic restrictions - including the legal requirement to self-isolate if you test positive - a full month early”. Johnson said he will present his plan for “living with Covid” when Parliament returns from a short recess on February 21, with an aim of lifting the requirement to self-isolate within days of that, PA reports. A spokeswoman for the Scottish Government said the UK Government “failed to provide devolved nations with appropriate notice to consider implications ahead of the announcement by the Prime Minister”. Brazil had 178,814 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours and 1,264 deaths, data from the country’s health ministry showed on Wednesday. The South American country has now registered 26,955,434 confirmed cases since the pandemic began while the official death toll has risen to 635,074, Reuters reports. New Zealand’s anti-vaccine protesters are being evicted from parliament grounds on the third day of their protest with a number arrested after clashes with police. Police have brought in around 100 extra officers from around the country to try to clear the protesters from parliament grounds, where they had pitched tents and parked cars, blocking traffic. The protesters, inspired by the “siege of Ottawa” where truckers paralysed the city and caused a state of emergency, led a convoy of several hundred vehicles to parliament on Tuesday. A number stayed overnight, pitching tents on the lawns. The Canadian truckers blockade is posing a risk to the auto industry’s supply chain and U.S. officials were in close touch with their counterparts in Canada on the issue, the White House said. The nearly two-week long protests against Covid-19 pandemic mandates and other restrictions have at times this week halted or sharply slowed traffic at the Ambassador Bridge that connects Detroit, Michigan, and Windsor, Ontario, Reuters reports. “We are watching this very closely,” White House spokesperson Jen Psaki said. “The blockade poses a risk to supply chains, for the auto industry.” As the threat of the Omicron wave has receded in England, the government has been quick to move the conversation on to “living with Covid”. It was inevitable that this would mean the eventual lifting of legal restrictions, including the need to self-isolate. But even given the optimistic tone in recent weeks, Boris Johnson’s announcement on Wednesday came sooner than many expected. While he signalled the scrapping of restrictions in England by 24 February – a month earlier than had originally been planned – he provided no detail. A group of elderly Cubans, including several octogenarians, have begun swimming again off the coast of Havana after nearly two years landlocked by the coronavirus pandemic and restrictions that complicated exercise outside the home. The elderly swimmers told Reuters the loosening of restrictions had given them a new lease on life. “I turned 80 on Dec. 25. Two years of no swimming was tough on me...but I have started to swim, and I am happy again, both physically and mentally,” said Havana resident Fernando Sergio Paneque. Top European Union officials said low absorption of Covid-19 vaccines in African countries had become the main problem in the global vaccine rollout following a recent increase in supplies of jabs, Reuters reports. “The problem seems no longer to be the level of donations,” France’s Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian told a news conference in Lyon. “The problem is absorption,” he added at the end of a meeting of EU health and foreign ministers, which he chaired as France holds the rotating presidency of the EU. The U.S. government is planning to roll out Covid-19 jabs for children under the age of 5 as soon as February 21st, Reuters reports. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is considering authorising the use of the Pfizer Inc and BioNTech SE vaccine in the age group even though it did not meet a key target in a clinical trial of two- to four-year-olds. The drugmakers said they submitted data supporting authorisation at the request of the FDA in order to address an urgent public health need in the age group. Outside advisers to the FDA are scheduled to meet on February 15 to discuss whether to recommend the regulator to authorize the vaccine. White House press secretary Jen Psaki has commented on New York governor Kathy Hochul’s decision to lift the state’s indoor mask mandate despite federal public health guidance. Asked about whether the White House is out of step in its messaging compared with the moves that Democratic governors such as Hochul have made this week, Psaki said it was clear that the US is “moving toward a time when Covid won’t disrupt our daily lives” and won’t be a “constant crisis” any more. We recognise people are tired of the pandemic and tired of wearing masks,” Psaki said. But she also pointed to comments made earlier today by the director of the Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (CDC) in the U.S., Rochelle Wallensky, who underlined that the agency still recommends wearing masks indoors in areas of high transmission. The European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen said on Wednesday the EU would increase spending to boost vaccinations in African states. African nations have begun their vaccine rollouts much later than wealthier states which secured the limited doses initially available from late 2020. But in recent months supplies have increased exponentially, and many states are facing difficulties in absorbing them, with some countries, such as Congo and Burundi, having been able to use less than 20% of available doses, according to figures from Gavi, a nonprofit global vaccine alliance. EU diplomats said that vaccines’ short shelf-life, limited storage facilities, poor healthcare infrastructure and vaccine hesitancy were among the main reasons that hampered vaccination in Africa. “We have to make efforts to accelerate vaccinations, especially in African countries where vaccination rates are the lowest,” von der Leyen said at a conference in Dakar, Senegal. She said the EU would spend 125 million euros ($143 million) to help countries train medical staff and administer doses, in addition to 300 million euros already committed for this purpose by the EU and its states. An EU official said the EU wanted now to shift its message to Africa “from vaccines to vaccination.” However, von der Leyen said the EU will keep sending doses to Africa, with the aim of delivering 450 million vaccines by the summer, three times higher than the volume already shared. Gavi, which co-runs the world’s largest Covid vaccine-sharing programme Covax, said the usage rate of Covid shots in the 91 poorest nations it supports was 67%. But some African countries were lagging much behind. Zambia, Chad, Madagascar, Djibouti, Somalia, Burkina Faso and Uganda had used only about one-third of doses that they received, Gavi said, citing data updated to late January. Only about 10% of Africans have been immunised against Covid-19 so far. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: The Metropolitan police is going to review its decision not to include the Christmas quiz in Downing Street on 15 December 2020 in its partygate investigation in the light of the new prosecco picture. The Met issued a statement saying: “MPS previously assessed this event and determined that on the basis of the evidence available at that time, it did not meet the threshold for criminal investigation. That assessment is now being reviewed.” The image published by the Daily Mirror shows Boris Johnson with two members of staff, including his deputy principal private secretary, Stuart Glassborow, at the event on 15 December, which No 10 has said was a virtual quiz. At the time the photo was taken, London was under tier 2 restrictions, which banned social mixing between households. The government had explicitly told people they must not meet for Christmas parties. Story here. Sweden scrapped almost all of its few pandemic restrictions and stopped most testing for Covid, even as the pressure on the healthcare systems remained high and some scientists begged for more patience in fighting the disease. “As we know this pandemic, I would say it’s over,” minister of health Lena Hallengren told Dagens Nyheter. “It’s not over, but as we know it in terms of quick changes and restrictions it is,” she said, adding that Covid would no longer be classified as a danger to society. As of Wednesday, bars and restaurants will be allowed to stay open after 11pm again, and with no limits on the number of guests. Attendance limits for larger indoor venues were also lifted, as was the use of vaccine passes. Swedish hospitals were still feeling the strain, however, with around 2,200 people with Covid requiring hospital care, about the same as during the third wave in the spring of 2021. As free testing was reduced earlier this month and effectively stopped from Wednesday, no one knows the exact number of cases. More here. Boris Johnson plans to abolish the last domestic Covid restrictions in England, including the requirement for people with the virus to self-isolate, in less than two weeks, a month earlier than initially proposed, he announced. While guidance will remain in place for people to stay at home, as they would if they had flu, there will be no legal requirement backed up with fines of up to £10,000. Unions urged measures to improve sick pay and ensure people were not forced to work, warning about the potential of “a green light for bosses to cut corners”, while school leaders said there had been no prior discussion of the change. Ministers would publish new guidance, Downing Street said after Johnson’s announcement, adding it was possible some travel restrictions could remain such as passenger locator forms and quarantine for non-vaccinated people. Covid tests will remain free for now. Story here and explanation of the changes here. Spain’s King Felipe tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday after displaying mild symptoms overnight and will remain in isolation for seven days, the Royal Palace said in a statement. “His Majesty’s general state of health is good and he will keep up his institutional activities from his residence,” it said, adding that Queen Letizia and their daughter Princess Sofía showed no symptoms. Japan is set to extend Covid restrictions in Tokyo and 12 prefectures by three weeks as the Omicron variant continued to spread. Japan has been breaking daily records for coronavirus cases and deaths amid a surge in infections driven by Omicron.It will add one more prefecture to the list of regions facing quasi-emergency measures, including restrictions on the business hours of eateries, Fumio Kishida told reporters. The central government will create about 1,000 temporary medical facilities treating patients with coronavirus, together with Tokyo and Osaka regional governments, he added. More here. Denmark’s Queen Margrethe II has tested positive for coronavirus and is showing mild symptoms, the royal court said in a statement. The 81-year-old monarch received a third dose of the vaccine in November, the court said. She cancelled her planned winter holiday in Norway which should have started on Wednesday, and is isolating in a wing of the Amalienborg Palace in the heart of Copenhagen, in line with current health recommendations. The Metropolitan police has said that it is going to review its decision not to include the Christmas quiz in Downing Street on 15 December 2020 in its partygate investigation in the light of the new prosecco picture. It has just issued a statement saying: The MPS previously assessed this event and determined that on the basis of the evidence available at that time, it did not meet the threshold for criminal investigation. That assessment is now being reviewed. That means that the party of the event published by the Daily Mirror this afternoon was not considered by the Sue Gray inquiry. Gray passed all her evidence on to the police, who used it to decide which events seemed to involve a serious breach of the rules. This is potentially a worrying development for No 10. Dame Cressida Dick, the Met commissioner, told the London assembly recently that the threshold for criminal investigation in after the fact lockdown rule cases was particularly high; she said the Met would only consider cases that seemed to involve the “most serious and flagrant” breaches of the rules, and where those involved appeared to have no “reasonable defence”. You can follow all of Andy’s coverage here: Sweden scrapped almost all of its few pandemic restrictions on Wednesday and stopped most testing for Covid-19, even as the pressure on the healthcare systems remained high and some scientists begged for more patience in fighting the disease, Reuters reports. Sweden’s government, which throughout the pandemic has opted against lockdowns in favour of a voluntary approach, announced last week it would scrap the remaining restrictions - effectively declaring the pandemic over - as vaccines and the Omicron variant have cushioned the number of severe cases and deaths. “As we know this pandemic, I would say it’s over,” minister of health Lena Hallengren told Dagens Nyheter. “It’s not over, but as we know it in terms of quick changes and restrictions it is,” she said, adding that Covid would no longer be classified as a danger to society. As of Wednesday, bars and restaurants will be allowed to stay open after 11pm again, and with no limits on the number of guests. Attendance limits for larger indoor venues were also lifted, as was the use of vaccine passes. Swedish hospitals were still feeling the strain, however, with around 2,200 people with Covid requiring hospital care, about the same as during the third wave in the spring of 2021. As free testing was reduced earlier this month and effectively stopped from Wednesday, no one knows the exact number of cases. “We should have a little more patience, wait at least a couple of more weeks. And we are wealthy enough to keep testing,” Fredrik Elgh, professor of virology at Umea University and one of the staunchest critics of Sweden’s no-lockdown policy, told Reuters. “The disease is still a huge strain on society,” he said. Sweden’s health agency said this week that large-scale testing was too expensive in relation to the benefits. Sweden spent around 500 million Swedish crowns ($55 million) per week on testing for the first five weeks of this year and around 24 billion crowns since the start of the pandemic. On Wednesday, Sweden registered 114 new deaths where the deceased was infected with the virus. In total, 16,182 people have died either of the virus or while infected. The number of deaths per capita is much higher than among Nordic neighbours but lower than in most European countries. All remaining domestic Covid legal restrictions in England are likely to be scrapped later this month, Boris Johnson has announced. Here my colleague Peter Walker explains what we know – and what is yet to be set out: What will happen after Covid rules are scrapped in England? Palestinian authorities have ramped up Covid testing and vaccinations in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and have warned that public indifference to calls for mask-wearing and social distancing is hampering efforts to fight the pandemic, Reuters reports. The Palestinian Authority health ministry registered more than 64,000 active cases of Covid on Wednesday, in what officials described as an unprecedented daily increase due to the Omicron variant. “Three weeks ago we were recording up to 300 infections daily, but in the last few days we crossed the 11,000 mark,” said Mahdi Rashed, director of health services in Ramallah. “It’s clear this is a result of the Omicron variant spreading.” Rashed cautioned that the real number of infections is likely higher, because many people are not getting tested, and he blamed the rise on peoples’ “recklessness and indifference” by not adhering to health safety rules. The Palestinian health minister Mai al-Kaila warned that governmental hospitals in the West Bank were at full capacity on Saturday. In the past week alone, the number of people who were seriously ill more than doubled in Gaza and nearly doubled in the West Bank. Across Gaza and the West Bank, masking is mandatory inside public offices and government employees are required to get vaccinated, officials said. But Ahmed Al-Atrash, a 28-year-old resident of the West Bank city of Hebron, where he runs a clothing stand, said public apathy had set in. “No one cares about corona,” he told Reuters. “No one stresses about it. They do not care, and this has become a normal thing among Palestinians.” Palestinian authorities in both the West Bank and Gaza have opened more testing sites, approved rapid tests and are urging people to get vaccinated. Of the 3.1 million Palestinians living in the West Bank, 60% are fully vaccinated, while the rate for Gaza’s 2.3 million population stands at 43%, according to health officials. The death toll in the West Bank and Gaza from the virus has reached nearly 5,000. In August 2020, the Guardian spoke to workers in the live music industry who had their livelihoods destroyed by Covid. How are they faring in 2022? Michael Hann reports: ‘We all need a plan B now’: the dicey world of live music after Covid Here is our story on Boris Johnson’s plans to abolish the last domestic Covid restrictions in England, including the requirement for people with the virus to self-isolate, in less than two weeks, a month earlier than initially proposed. While guidance will remain in place for people to stay at home, as they would if they had flu, there will be no legal requirement backed up with fines of up to £10,000. Unions urged measures to improve sick pay and ensure people were not forced to work, warning about the potential of “a green light for bosses to cut corners”, while school leaders said there had been no prior discussion of the change. Ministers would publish new guidance, Downing Street said after Johnson’s announcement, adding it was possible some travel restrictions could remain such as passenger locator forms and quarantine for non-vaccinated people. Covid tests will remain free for now. Full story: Boris Johnson plans to lift England’s last Covid rules a month early Only five hospitals in Afghanistan still offer Covid treatment, with 33 others having been forced to close in recent months for lack of doctors, medicines and even heating, the Associated Press reports. It comes as the economically devastated nation is hit by a steep rise in the number of reported coronavirus cases. At Kabul’s only Covid treatment hospital, staff can only heat the building at night because of lack of fuel, even as winter temperatures drop below freezing during the day. Patients are bundled under heavy blankets. Its director, Dr Mohammed Gul Liwal, said they need everything, from oxygen to medicine supplies. The facility, the Afghan Japan Communicable Disease Hospital, has 100 beds. The Covid-19 ward is almost always full as the virus rages. Before late January, the hospital was getting one or two new coronavirus patients a day. In the past two weeks, 10 to 12 new patients have been admitted daily, Liwal said. “The situation is worsening day by day,” said Liwal. Since the Taliban takeover of the country six months ago, hospital employees have received only one month’s salary, in December. Afghanistan’s healthcare system, which survived for nearly two decades almost entirely on international donor funding, has been devastated since the Taliban returned to power in mid-August, amid the chaotic end to the 20-year US-led intervention. Afghanistan’s economy crashed after nearly $10bn in assets abroad were frozen and financial aid to the government was largely halted. The health system’s collapse has only worsened the humanitarian crisis in the country. Roughly 90% of the population has fallen below the poverty level, and with families barely able to afford food, at least a million children are threatened with starvation. The Omicron variant is hitting Afghanistan hard, Liwal said, but he admits it is just a guess because the country is still waiting for kits that test specifically for the variant. They were supposed to arrive before the end of last month, said public health ministry spokesman Dr Javid Hazhir. The World Health Organization now says Afghanistan will get the kits by the end of February. Between 30 January and 5 February, public labs in Afghanistan tested 8,496 samples, of which nearly half, were positive for Covid-19. Those numbers translate into a 47. 4% positivity rate, the WHO said. As of Tuesday, WHO recorded 7,442 deaths and close to 167,000 infections in the country since the start of the pandemic almost two years ago. In the absence of large-scale testing, these relatively low figures are believed to be a result of extreme under-reporting. Meanwhile, the new Taliban administration says it is trying to push vaccines on a sceptical population that often sees them as dangerous. With 3.2m vaccine doses in stock, Hazhir said the administration has launched a campaign through mosques, clerics and mobile vaccine clinics to get more people vaccinated. Barely 27% of Afghanistan’s 38 million people have been vaccinated, most with the single-dose Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine. Getting Afghans to follow even a minimum of safety protocols, like mask-wearing and social distancing, has been near impossible, Liwal said. For many struggling to feed their families, Covid ranks low on their list of fears, he said, despite the public health ministry running awareness campaigns about the value of masks and social distancing. Even in the Afghan Japan hospital, where signs warn people that mask wearing is mandatory, most people in the dimly lit halls were without masks. In the intensive care unit, where half of the 10 patients in the ward were on ventilators, doctors and attendants wore only surgical masks and gowns for protection as they moved from bed to bed. The head of the unit, Dr Naeemullah, said he needs more ventilators and, even more urgently, he needs doctors trained on using ventilators. He is overstretched and rarely paid, but feels duty-bound to serve his patients. Liwal said several doctors have left Afghanistan. Most of the hospital’s 200 employees come to work regularly despite months without pay. In December, a US-based charity affiliated with Johns Hopkins University provided two months funding, which gave the hospital staff their December salary and a promise of another paycheck in January. The public health ministry is now in negotiations with WHO to take over the cost of running the hospital through June, said Liwal. Liwal said other Kabul hospitals used to be able to take some patients, but now no longer have the resources. With a lack of funds and staff leaving, 33 facilities offering Covid-19 treatment nationwide have shut down, he said. The Afghan Japan hospital’s only microbiologist, Dr Faridullah Qazizada, earned less than $1,000 a month before the Taliban took power. He has received only one month’s salary since August, he said. He says his equipment and facilities are barely adequate. “The whole health system has been destroyed,” he said. The United Arab Emirates will gradually lift Covid restrictions as the number of infections and hospitalisations has gone down, the state news agency WAM reported on Wednesday. Venues will be allowed to function at maximum capacity by mid-February, it said, citing the National Emergency Crisis Management Authority. The UAE, which has one of the world’s highest vaccination rates, reported on Wednesday 1,538 new coronavirus infections and four deaths in the past 24 hours, according to WAM. The total numbers of Covid-related cases and deaths recorded in the country are respectively 862,514 and 2,273, it said. Despite the success of Covid jabs, there is huge – and understandable – mistrust of the pharmaceutical industry, writes Laura Spinney. An extract reads: It is true social media has done us a disservice and our social contract was fraying before Covid came along. But it’s also true that, if anti-vaxxers and their enablers are ready to stop at nothing in pursuit of fat profits, they have an excellent role model in big pharma. If governments, industry and physicians acknowledge this needs to change, at long last, then this crisis won’t have gone to waste. You can read the full piece is here: Yes, vaccines are lifesavers – but big pharma still needs to get its house in order Police have been urged to investigate another party in Downing Street after a new photograph apparently showed Boris Johnson at a Christmas quiz in December 2020, with an open bottle of champagne and staff wearing Santa hats and tinsel. The image published by the Daily Mirror shows the prime minister with three members of staff at the event on 15 December, which No 10 has said was a virtual quiz. Asked at prime minister’s questions if the Met police should add this to the events they are investigating, Johnson said the allegation was “completely in error”. At the time the photo was taken, London was under tier 2 restrictions, which banned social mixing between households. The government had explicitly told people they must not meet for Christmas parties. Johnson was challenged about the image at prime minister’s questions by the Labour MP Fabian Hamilton, who said: It looks a lot like one of the Christmas parties he told us never happened. Citing the case of a constituent who was unable to have family visit her in hospital when she was being treated for a tumour, Hamilton asked if Johnson would refer the event to police for investigation. Johnson replied only by expressing his sympathy for the constituent, saying: “I understand very much her feelings. But in what he has said just, I am afraid, he is completely in error.” Asked again in PMQs about the photo, Johnson replied: “That’s precisely the point. That event already has been submitted for investigation.” The Met police are examining potential law-breaking at 12 gatherings in Downing Street, three of which Boris Johnson is known to have attended. A fourth event, in his Downing Street flat, is also under investigation and the prime minister has declined to say whether he was in attendance. But the event on 15 December, which was a virtual quiz for staff, was not among those gatherings referred to the Met police and Johnson insinuated they had already seen the evidence before making the decision. The police said they had been handed more than 300 photographs of events in Downing Street and 500 pages of evidence. A full report from the Cabinet Office official Sue Gray, who was asked to investigate the rule-breaking, is also expected to be released once the police work is concluded. The former No 10 adviser Dominic Cummings, now a fierce critic of Johnson, said further pictures would soon come out. “There’s waaaaay better pics than that floating around, incl[uding] in the flat,” he tweeted. “The pics will come out and the public will think ‘Met [police] lying’, not ‘oh PM innocent after all’. Penny dropping with MPs.” The new picture came just hours after sources suggested Johnson did not intend to resign if he was given a fixed penalty notice by police, though MPs could trigger a vote of no confidence. More on this story here: Boris Johnson pictured at Christmas quiz with champagne and tinsel Spain’s King Felipe tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday after displaying mild symptoms overnight and will remain in isolation for seven days, the Royal Palace said in a statement. “His Majesty’s general state of health is good and he will keep up his institutional activities from his residence,” it said, adding that Queen Letizia and their daughter Princess Sofía showed no symptoms. Boris Johnson has said the UK government intends to end the last Covid restrictions in England, including isolating requirements, a full month early. During PMQs, Johnson said that after the half term recess he will announce a strategy for living with Covid. The isolation rules were due to end on 24 March. He said: It is my intention to return on the first day after the half term recess to present our strategy for living with Covid. Provided the current encouraging trends in the data continue, it is my expectation that we will be able to end the last remaining domestic restrictions, including the legal requirement to self-isolate if you test positive, a full month early. My colleague Andrew Sparrow has more over on the UK politics live blog: The Japanese prime minister said on Wednesday that the government would extend Covid restrictions in Tokyo and 12 prefectures by three weeks as the Omicron variant continued to spread, Reuters reports. Japan has been breaking daily records for coronavirus cases and deaths amid a surge in infections driven by Omicron. It will add one more prefecture to the list of regions facing quasi-emergency measures, including restrictions on the business hours of eateries, Fumio Kishida told reporters. The central government will create about 1,000 temporary medical facilities treating patients with coronavirus, together with Tokyo and Osaka regional governments, he added. Japan has declared various levels of emergency multiple times during the two-year pandemic. A full state of emergency might involve closures of venues serving alcohol, attendance restrictions at sporting and cultural events, and fines for non-compliant businesses. So-called quasi measures allow regional governors to order curbs on social movement and business hours. With the country’s borders shut for nearly two years, the lives of students and workers have been disrupted, prompting business leaders to warn about the possible economic impact, particularly amid a tight labour market. However, Kishida said he would “think about appropriate actions” on what he called the strongest border rules among the G7 nations, but did not signal any immediate easing. Denmark’s Queen Margrethe II has tested positive for coronavirus and is showing mild symptoms, the royal court said in a statement on Wednesday. The 81-year-old monarch received a third dose of the vaccine in November, the court said. She cancelled her planned winter holiday in Norway which should have started on Wednesday, and is isolating in a wing of the Amalienborg Palace in the heart of Copenhagen, in line with current health recommendations. Despite lifting all domestic Covid restrictions last week, Danish authorities still recommend patients isolate for at least four days. New York governor Kathy Hochul will on Wednesday announce the end of the state’s mask mandate for most indoor public places, The New York Times reported, joining several states due to lift face-covering rules as the latest US Covid surge eases. The Democratic governor intends to let the mask mandate, which has been challenged in court, expire rather than seeking to renew it, the newspaper reported, citing three individuals briefed on the move. It remains unclear whether Hochul’s administration would renew or drop a separate compulsory masking rule in New York public schools that is due to lapse in two weeks. Representatives for the governor did not immediately respond to a Reuters request for comment. Hochul called the general mask mandate temporary when she imposed it 31 December as the Omicron variant threatened to strain healthcare systems. Officials in several other Democratic-led states - New Jersey, California, Connecticut, Delaware and Oregon - announced on Monday that they were lifting mask mandates for schools and other public settings in the coming weeks. In all those instances, authorities cited the receding Omicron wave of Covid infections, hospitalisations and deaths that began sweeping the United States during the year-end 2021 holiday season. But the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) director, Dr Rochelle Walensky, told Reuters on Tuesday that with cases still high nationwide, “now is not the moment” to drop mask mandates in schools and other public places. The relaxation of masking rules signals an inclination by politicians to take pandemic-weary residents off an emergency footing and shift toward treating the virus as part of everyday life. A New York state judge struck down Hochul’s mask mandate last month, ruling she had overstepped her authority. But an appeals court judge stayed that decision the next day, keeping it intact while the case remained under judicial review. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ The prime minister of Slovenia, Janez Janša, has tested positive for Covid. He shared the news on his Twitter account, posting a photo of his antigen self-test and saying his symptoms were mild. Slovakia has reported a new record for daily Covid cases. The health ministry said there were 20,582 new infections yesterday, exceeding previous pandemic records. Hong Kong’s daily Covid cases almost doubled today to a record 1,161 infections. It comes after authorities, who are following a “dynamic zero” strategy as followed by mainland China, brought in its toughest pandemic measures to date. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has accepted Gillian Keegan’s apology and “continues to support her in her role”. Keegan, a health minister, issued an apology after admitting to continuing a visit after receiving a positive Covid test. The MP for Chichester, who said she is isolating at home and feels fine, said she “took precautions” after getting her result, but “with their consent” carried on the meeting. Russia has reported a record 183,103 Covid cases. The government’s coronavirus taskforce also reported 669 deaths from the last 24 hours. Poland may lift Covid restrictions in March if daily infections continue to fall as they are now, the health minister has said. In an interview, published today, Adam Niedzielski told the Fakt tabloid: “If the tempo at which infections are falling remains the same, there is a realistic prospect of lifting restrictions in March.” A senior World Health Organization adviser has said Covid numbers are still “absolutely staggering”. Asked about whether learning to live with coronavirus is dangerous, Dr Bruce Aylward, senior adviser to the body’s director general, said: “It’s a very dangerous virus.” Sajid Javid, the UK health secretary, has pledged to recruit 15,000 new health workers by the end of March to tackle the pandemic treatment backlog. Writing in the Daily Telegraph, he said the NHS planned “to recruit 10,000 more nurses from overseas and 5,000 more healthcare support workers by the end of March” to improve capacity. Hong Kong’s deepening Omicron crisis is leading citizens to accuse its government of holding them hostage as the leadership pursues a controversial “dynamic zero” Covid policy. That’s it from me for today. Handing over now to Lucy Campbell. Thanks for reading. The prime minister of Slovenia, Janez Janša, has tested positive for Covid, reports AFP. “For two years we have been successfully avoiding the coronavirus. Yesterday, during a self-test both of my children were positive, I was negative. Today, unfortunately, mine is also + (positive),” the conservative wrote on his Twitter account, posting a photo of his antigen self-test and saying his symptoms were mild. Janša, who took over the government in March 2020 days after an epidemic was declared, has been accused of mishandling restrictions and the country’s vaccination campaign, leading to a comparatively high mortality rate. Slovenia has had more than 6,000 Covid deaths and has one of the European Union’s lowest vaccination rates at 57% of the population. Andrew Sparrow’s UK politics blog is now up and running. This blog will continue with global Covid news. Slovakia has reported a new record for daily Covid cases. The health ministry said there were 20,582 new infections yesterday, exceeding previous pandemic records. According to Reuters, the country has administered at least 6.8m vaccine doses so far, or the equivalent to two doses for 62.6% of the population. More on UK health minister Gillian Keegan (see also 08:16), PA Media cites a quote from November when she was asked about how new Covid rules about face coverings would be enforced. She then told BBC Radio 4’s Today: Well, largely due to the good sense of British people who will hopefully listen to the rules, try to protect each other, and do what the right thing is. That’s largely what … how it’s always been. That’s pretty much what it’s always been, but the police do have powers to enforce. Hong Kong’s daily Covid cases almost doubled today to a record 1,161 infections (see also 07:02). It comes after authorities, who are following a “dynamic zero” strategy as followed by mainland China, brought in its toughest pandemic measures to date. Leader Carrie Lam yesterday implemented a two-person limit on public gatherings and closed churches and hair salons. Citizens have accused the government of holding them “hostage”. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has accepted Gillian Keegan’s apology (see also 08:16) and “continues to support her in her role”. Keegan, a health minister, issued an apology after admitting to continuing a visit after receiving a positive Covid test. A spokesperson for the health secretary said: The secretary of state has spoken with the minister who has taken responsibility for her actions and made a full apology. He accepts her apology and continues to support her in her role. The UK health minister, Ed Argar, has said he understands the health secretary Sajid Javid has accepted an apology from his fellow minister Gillian Keegan after she continued a meeting despite getting a positive Covid test (see also 08:16). He said Keegan had “clearly issued a fulsome apology”, adding that he believed she had apologised to Javid. He told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: I saw that Twitter thread, I think, late last night, I think it was. She’s clearly issued a fulsome apology there, that she did make an error of judgment, she was open about that and she accepted she made an error of judgment. He added: I understand – I haven’t spoken to or seen Gillian yesterday or today, so I don’t know first hand – but I understand from her Twitter thread that she set out the circumstances and apologised, and I understand that she has also spoken to and apologised to the secretary of state, who has accepted that apology. The BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, responding to UK health minister Gillian Keegan’s tweet (see also 08:16 and 08:38): And the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy: More from the UK: The Labour mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has told Sky News that if he were in Gillian Keegan’s position, he would have left the meeting on getting a positive Covid result (see also 08:16). Russia has reported a record 183,103 Covid cases. The government’s coronavirus taskforce also reported 669 deaths from the last 24 hours. The UK health minister, Gillian Keegan, has apologised after admitting to continuing a visit after receiving a positive Covid test. The MP for Chichester, who said she is isolating at home and feels fine, said she “took precautions” after getting her result, but “with their consent” carried on the meeting. In a series of tweets, she said she should have “immediately ended the meeting and on reflection this was an error of judgment”, adding that she wanted to “be upfront about what happened and to apologise for the mistake I made”. Poland may lift Covid restrictions in March if daily infections continue to fall as they are now, the health minister has said. In an interview, published today, Adam Niedzielski told the Fakt tabloid: “If the tempo at which infections are falling remains the same, there is a realistic prospect of lifting restrictions in March.” It comes after a wave of Omicron cases led to record infections late last month. Infection numbers have since dropped. Niedzielski said masks in closed spaces, currently required, could instead be made guidance and that returning to in-person schooling was a priority. He also said he wanted to reduce the required isolation period for those infected from 10 to seven days. Northern Ireland’s health minister, Robin Swann, has said he is still waiting for legal advice removing Covid restrictions, reports the BBC. Swann has said he wants to remove most or all of the remaining rules, which include face masks and track and trace, and replace them with guidance. The Northern Ireland executive had planned to review restrictions tomorrow, but the meeting will no longer take place after the resignation of the first minister, the Democratic Unionist party’s Paul Givan. “Thursday 10 February is the legal review point,” Swann said. “My department must make a review of current regulations that are in place but I haven’t received the legal advice up to date yet. I’ll hopefully have an update on Thursday.” Only five hospitals in Afghanistan still offer Covid treatment, reports the Associated Press, after 33 have been forced to close in recent months. Kathy Gannon reports for AP from Kabul: Only five hospitals in Afghanistan still offer Covid-19 treatment, with 33 others having been forced to close in recent months for lack of doctors, medicines and even heat. This comes as the economically devastated nation is hit by a steep rise in the number of reported coronavirus cases. At Kabul’s only Covid-19 treatment hospital, staff can only heat the building at night because of lack of fuel, even as winter temperatures drop below freezing during the day. Patients are bundled under heavy blankets. Its director, Dr Mohammed Gul Liwal, said they need everything from oxygen to medicine supplies. The facility, called the Afghan Japan Communicable Disease Hospital, has 100 beds. The Covid-19 ward is almost always full as the virus rages. Before late January, the hospital was getting one or two new coronavirus patients a day. In the past two weeks, 10 to 12 new patients have been admitted daily, Liwal said. “The situation is worsening day by day,” said Liwal, speaking inside a chilly conference room. Since the Taliban takeover almost six months ago, hospital employees have received only one month’s salary, in December. Afghanistan’s healthcare system, which survived for nearly two decades almost entirely on international donor funding, has been devastated since the Taliban returned to power in August following the chaotic end to the 20-year US-led intervention. Afghanistan’s economy crashed after nearly $10bn in assets abroad were frozen and financial aid to the government was largely halted. A senior World Health Organization adviser has said Covid numbers are still “absolutely staggering”. Asked about whether learning to live with coronavirus is dangerous, Dr Bruce Aylward, senior advisor to the body’s director general, said: “It’s a very dangerous virus.” He told BBC Radio 4’s Today: If we look at the situation today – there’s still 2 million reported cases alone, over 5,000 deaths every single day right now. The numbers are absolutely staggering, and what we’re learning to live with is not just this virus, but what should be an unacceptable burden of disease, an unacceptable number of deaths every single day, especially when there are the tools to stop or at least slow this thing, manage it, control it. He said protecting the whole world is critical and that $16bn investment is needed to get out of the “acute phase” of the pandemic. “That sounds like a lot of money, but it is less than what the world is losing every single month right now,” he said. Sajid Javid, the UK health secretary, has pledged to recruit 15,000 new health workers by the end of March to tackle the pandemic treatment backlog. Writing in the Daily Telegraph, he said the NHS planned “to recruit 10,000 more nurses from overseas and 5,000 more healthcare support workers by the end of March” to improve capacity. It comes after he told MPs that the waiting list in England, which is already at a record 6 million, will continue growing for another two years. Eva Corlett reports from the anti-vax protest in Wellington, New Zealand: “Remove your mask,” a man demands, as I walk through the crowd. When I say I would like to keep it on, he immediately asks if I’m from mainstream media. I reply that I am and he says “don’t twist the truth just because you’re on the government dollars”. He is not the only one demanding I remove the mask. Hi, I’m looking after the blog for the next few hours. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.uk Hong Kong’s deepening Omicron crisis (see earlier post) is leading citizens to accuse its government of holding them hostage as the leadership pursues a controversial “dynamic zero” Covid policy. Our correspondent Helen Davidson reports on a viral Facebook message from “HK Moms” which levels the accusation at city chief executive Carrie Lam: “You have tried for two years, and failed. When will you stop holding the citizen of this once Asia’s city hostage? When does the goalpost stop moving further and further away every time we get closer? When do we say enough is enough Carrie Lam?” Strong stuff. Read Helen’s full dispatch here: The huge economic impact of the pandemic has found another illustration with the European Union’s $49bn splurge on chipmaking capacity to ease chronic shortages of the vital industrial components. As she announced the plan to ease dependency on Asian producers, European commission president Ursula von der Leyen said: “Chips are at the centre of the global technological race. They are, of course, also the bedrock of our modern economies.” It follows Joe Biden’s decision to spend $42bn improving US capability in making chips, which go into everything from cars to dishwashers, and shows how the pandemic has changed the way that the global economy works. Per Hong, a partner and supply chain specialist with the US consultancy Kearney, told me that the disruptions to the global supply chain could go on for months because the Omicron strain was still having a huge impact on all areas of the economy, especially in China. Hong said: “They are looking at shortened lead times, and moving production nearer consumption. But we are moving from a just in time model to just in case. There are a number of factors at play reshaping the economy, forcing companies to reassess what they’re doing.” You can read the full story here: To Australia, where nurses in New South Wales have voted overwhelmingly to go on strike next Tuesday amid growing anger at staffing levels in the state’s hospitals. More than 97% supported a motion to hold the first statewide strike in almost a decade. The action will come days after the lifting of the pause on non-elective surgery due to the weeks-long Omicron outbreak in the state. Nurses wanted to see the moratorium extended to ease burdens on “exhausted” staff. Full story here: The standoff pitting truckers and other Covid-related malcontents with the Canadian government has worsened after their protests caused traffic at the busiest border crossing in North America to grind to a halt. After weeks of protests in the Canadian capital, Ottawa, about vaccine mandates, 23 people were arrested for unlawful demonstrations on Tuesday and many trucks were immobilised, police said. But despite the crackdown, trucks began blocking the Ambassador Bridge linking the cities of Detroit and Windsor late on Monday. On Tuesday, entry to Canada remained blocked while US-bound traffic slowed to a crawl. Here’s the full story: The World Health organisation has urged rich countries to pay their fair share of the money needed for its plan to conquer Covid-19 in developing countries by contributing $16bn as a matter of urgency. The World Health Organization said the rapid cash injection into its access to covid tools accelerator (ACT-A) could finish off Covid as a global health emergency this year. The WHO-led plan is aimed at developing, producing, procuring and distributing tools to tackle the pandemic: vaccines, tests, treatments and personal protective equipment. ACT-A needed $23.4bn for its programme for the year October 2021-September 2022 but only $800m has been raised so far. Further north in mainland China, organisers of the Beijing Winter Olympics said on Wednesday that a total of five new Covid cases were detected among games-related personnel on Tuesday. Three of the cases were found among new airport arrivals, Reuters reports. Two others were among those already in the “closed loop” bubble that separates all events personnel from the public, both of whom were classified as either an athlete or team official, the notice said. An elderly man who died in Hong Kong after returning a positive test for Covid-19 could become the city’s first death potentially linked with the virus in five months as it struggles to cope with a worsening outbreak. It was not clear whether his death would be classified as Hong Kong’s 214th Covid death as preliminary positive cases have to undergo further tests to be classified as positive. The city is due to report a record of at least 1,160 new infections on Wednesday, according to broadcaster TVB, citing an unidentified source. It has recorded more than 2,600 cases over the past two weeks compared with just two in December. The Chinese territory announced stringent new coronavirus restrictions on Tuesday and record new infections as it sticks to a controversial “dynamic zero” strategy employed by mainland China to suppress all coronavirus outbreaks. Good morning/afternoon/evening wherever you are and welcome to our rolling coverage of developments in the coronavirus pandemic. To kick off, here are some of the main news lines from the past few hours: Traffic has ground to a halt at the busiest border crossing in North America, as Canadian truckers and others angry with vaccine mandates spread their protest beyond Ottawa. Police in New Zealand have arrested several anti-mandate protesters who have set up camp on the lawns of parliament. Organisers of the Beijing Winter Olympics said a total of five new Covid cases were detected among games-related personnel on Tuesday. Three of the cases were found among new airport arrivals. Hong Kong reported its first potential Covid death in five months after an elderly man who returned a positive test died on Tuesday. The global financial hub is expected to report a record of at least 1,160 new infections on Wednesday, broadcaster TVB reported. A global scheme to help poorer nations cope with Covid is “running on fumes” because of a budget shortfall, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) and other aid groups. New York governor Kathy Hochul plans to end her state’s mask mandate for most indoor public places on Wednesday, according to the New York Times, joining several states lifting face-covering rules in the weeks ahead as the latest COVID-19 surge loosens its grip. The drugmaker Pfizer made nearly $37bn from its Covid-19 vaccine last year – making it one of the most lucrative products in history – but bringing accusations from campaigners of “pandemic profiteering”. The company forecast another bumper year in 2022, with a big boost coming from its Covid-19 pill Paxlovid. France, Portugal and Greece have relaxed their entry requirements for fully vaccinated travellers, with changes coming into effect in time for half-term. Vaccinated tourists travelling to Portugal will no longer need to provide a negative test result to enter, although unvaccinated passengers will. Qantas has seen a surge of booking from people travelling to Australia after the government said the ban on international arrivals would be lifted soon. Australia’s national carrier said bookings doubled on the first day following Monday’s announcement that borders would open on 21 February.One in three people across America have detectable levels of a toxic herbicide linked to cancers, birth defects and hormonal imbalances, a major nationwide survey has found. Human exposure to the herbicide 2,4-D has substantially risen amid expanding use among farmers despite a multitude of health and environmental concerns, according to the first nationally representative study evaluating the footprint of the chemical. The herbicide was developed in the mid-1940s and quickly became the go-to weedkiller for farmers focused on increasing crop yields, while also gaining popularity among gardeners looking for a pristine lawn. Its popularity dipped in favor of Roundup (glyphosate) and genetically modified cotton and soyabeans resistant to this herbicide, but it has seen a resurgence since the spread of Roundup-resistant weeds. 2,4-D is currently riding high thanks to this Whac-a-Mole approach to pest control in industrialised farming, with about 600 US agricultural and residential products now containing the chemical which can be ingested through the skin, mouth and nose. Researchers from George Washington university examined the urine samples of 14,395 people (aged six and older) from all walks of life who take part in the annual National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. They looked for biomarkers to the pesticide, and compared the exposure levels detected with the use of 2,4-D from 2001 until 2014. As the pesticide grew in popularity among farmers and gardeners, so did evidence of human exposure, rising from a low of 17% in 2001-02 to a high of almost 40% a decade later. Exposure to high levels of 2,4-D, an ingredient of Agent Orange used against civilians during the Vietnam war, has been linked to cancers including leukemia in children, birth defects and reproductive problems among other health issues. While little is known about the impact of low-level exposure to the herbicide, it does disrupt the endocrine system – a network of glands that make hormones which control growth and development, reproduction, metabolism and our organs and moods. The study, published online in Environmental Health, found exposure was not uniform, with several subgroups including children aged six to 11 and women of childbearing age showing substantially higher levels of 2,4-D in their urine. Exposure to toxins is often more detrimental during developmental or key growth periods like pregnancy and early childhood. “Further study must determine how rising exposure to 2,4-D affects human health–especially when exposure occurs early in life,” said Melissa Perry, professor of environmental and occupational health and senior author of the paper. “Children and other vulnerable groups are also increasingly exposed to other pesticides and these chemicals may act synergistically to produce health problems.” The study also found that Black participants, who multiple previous studies have shown to have higher exposure to all sorts of environmental pollutants, showed signs of lower exposure to the weedkiller than white Americans. This may be a result of historic racist policies restricting access to homes with gardens and green spaces for Black communities, the researchers argue. Overall, the amount of 2,4-D applied in agriculture increased 67% between 2012 and 2020, but its use will almost certainly grow sharply over the next decade due to the widespread use of the controversial weedkiller Enlist Duo – a relatively newly approved combo (2,4-D and glyphosate) for genetically modified crops. This will make both toxins – which are both banned in some countries – increasingly difficult to avoid. “Our study suggests human exposures to 2,4-D have gone up significantly and they are predicted to rise even more in the future,” Marlaina Freisthler, a PhD student and co-author of the study. “Given the potential for human and environmental health impacts of such widespread exposures, we believe increases in use and exposures are not the direction to be going.”Australian basketball star Joe Ingles has spoken of his devastation following news the Utah Jazz has traded him to the Portland Trailblazers as part of a three-team NBA deal. Ingles, who was a key part of the Boomers’ first Olympic medal in Tokyo last year, has become a cult hero for the Jazz since arriving in 2014 after being cut by the Los Angeles Clippers. Last season the 34-year-old was in career-best form and finished runner-up in the NBA’s Sixth Man of the Year award, but sustained a season-ending ACL injury at the end of January. He has been dealt to Portland, while the Jazz will receive Blazers guard Nickeil Alexander-Walker and San Antonio Spurs forward Juancho Hernangomez. Because of his injury, Ingles’s value to the Blazers comes from his expiring $US13m ($AUS18m) contract. Since Ingles is a free agent after the season, the Australian native could return to Utah in the off-season. Ingles confirmed the reports on Thursday via Twitter and indicated he would at some point elaborate on his situation. “Today hurts … I knew it was a possibility but didn’t want to believe it, we have been lucky to call this place home for 8 years,” he wrote. “I got a lot more to say, but I’m going to have a beer &amp; relax with some good friends.. Go get a win fellas! I’ll always be watching.” Ingles had acknowledged a trade was possible last week after sustaining his injury. “If I’m able to get someone back that would help them make a push for the end of the year, I understand that,” he told medai. “I’m not going to sit here and be sour and upset.” Alexander-Walker was traded for the second time in two days after being dealt by the Pelicans in the deal that will bring C.J. McCollum to New Orleans. The 17th pick in the 2019 draft, Alexander-Walker is averaging 12.8 points per game this season. The Spurs will receive Tomas Satoransky, along with one of Utah’s second-round draft picks; while in addition to Ingles, the Blazers will get forward Elijah Hughes from the Jazz and another of their second-round picks.The bravery and advocacy of Grace Tame and Brittany Higgins has not only changed the way society thinks about sexual assault but also renewed momentum to solve decades-old problems of economic disparity, according to the head of an expert women’s panel to advise on the New South Wales state budget. Chief Executive Women president, Sam Mostyn, said the combination of pandemic-related upheaval and the emergence of “courageous young women” such as Tame and Higgins had created a fresh appetite to deal with systemic issues holding women back. On Monday it was announced Mostyn would lead a panel looking at ways to close the gender pay gap, make childcare more affordable and accessible, and get more women into the workforce in New South Wales. They have three months to come up with a “bold and brave” suite of ideas for the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, to introduce in the budget and develop in future economic plans. Mostyn said the work of Higgins and Tame in raising awareness of gender power dynamics – on display again in Canberra on Wednesday – had created a widespread appetite for change. “2021 was a year where we were given acute evidence of the lack of respect for women,” Mostyn said. “We learned much from the most courageous young women who put the issues of disrespect, safety and discrimination before us as a community. “Whether it’s Brittany Higgins or Grace Tame or Chanel Contos, they made us pay attention to the things that women have known, felt and experienced for decades. “Suddenly, we were having a conversation around the country about an urgent agenda for change.” Mostyn said the pre-budget panel, which includes a range of experts and leaders including the Muslim Women Association chief executive, Maha Abdo, and Council on Early Childhood Development co-chair Leslie Loble, planned to make the most of the “momentum coming out of Covid, not to settle for a return to the systems and structures in place before”. Mostyn said Australia had seen it was possible to quickly implement wide-scale policies “when the the issue was clear and they had a mandate to act” and now the public and the government understood the same could be done to fix other issues. “For women’s economic participation, those structural barriers can be fixed by bold, fast action that involves investment, just as we saw governments do in Covid,” she said. Mostyn also wants the government to look inwards, implementing schemes that make it a best-practice employer and an exemplar to others, and to consider benchmarks for companies tendering for state contracts. Abdo said she was eager for the group to turn the “pain of women who’ve walked this path before us” into real change, and felt there was genuine support from the government and community to do so. Critical to that was lifting up and empowering women with diverse backgrounds. “My wish list would be to see more ethnically diverse women being in more senior positions, whether it’s in business or government,” she said. “Having women with a multicultural background participate without having to feel that ‘I’m so thankful because I’ve got a job’, but instead, ‘The company that is employing me is so blessed that they have me’.” Abdo vowed to keep the pressure on the government to act on the panel’s recommendations at the other end of the process. “We’re not going to sit silently and say ‘all right they tried but it didn’t work’. No, then we can challenge and actively push for it to be implemented,” Abdo said. Loble agreed the pandemic had created an opportunity for real change, with increased attention being paid to caring roles within the community that were often unstable or underpaid, and predominantly done by women. “There’s been really important conversations about women’s roles and respect and treatment,” she said. “Covid has demonstrated that even though childcare is such an essential part of many families’ lives, it is a fragile sector and needs to be seen as a core piece of economic and social infrastructure. “What makes this such a great time for tackling this is the urgency that Covid has introduced. “This panel has an important opportunity to connect those urgent and shorter-term steps with longer-term and more sustainable opportunities for women.”The European Union has announced a €43bn ($48bn) plan to overcome its dependency on Asian computer chip makers as governments and businesses around the world battle with a global supply chain crisis that experts believe could persist for much of the year. With consumers having to wait months for cars, dishwashers and other durables thanks to chip shortages, the bloc’s plan marks one of the most significant developments yet seen as a result of the tectonic shifts in the global economy set off by the coronavirus pandemic. European commission president Ursula von der Leyen said on Tuesday: “Chips are at the centre of the global technological race. They are, of course, also the bedrock of our modern economies. “The pandemic has also painfully exposed the vulnerability of its supply chains,” von der Leyen said. “We have seen that whole production lines came to a standstill. While the demand was increasing, we could not deliver as needed because of the lack of chips.” Von der Leyen said a “chips act” would link research, design and testing and coordinate EU and national investment. The plan pools public and private funds and allows for state aid to get the massive investments off the ground. The plan still needs the backing of the EU parliament and the member states. The EU move mirrors Joe Biden’s $52bn push to invest in a national chip-producing sector to make sure more production occurs in the United States, and one expert said it highlighted how the pandemic was reshaping the world economy. Per Hong, a partner and supply chain specialist with the US consultancy Kearney, said the disruptions could go on for months because the Omicron strain was still having a huge impact on all areas of the economy, especially in China. “We’re still in the early days of the disruption from Omicron running through every stage of the system, from suppliers to distribution to retail,” he said. “China is seeing its most serious surge of Covid cases since the original outbreak in Wuhan. The government is showing little sign of backing down from its zero-Covid approach so mass lockdowns, forced quarantines, and much stricter checks at ports to prevent cases from coming in are continuing.” The impact had been felt particularly in the manufacturing hub of Zhejiang, home to the world’s largest cargo port, Ningbo. Authorities had quarantined tens of thousands of residents and closed shipping terminals and suspended operations, forcing ships to reroute. In Xi’an, Samsung suspended operations at its semiconductor factory and staff were in full lockdown for three weeks in January, with disruptions extended by the week-long Lunar New Year holiday. Supply chain managers were adept at adjusting to unexpected natural disasters such as typhoons and fires, he said, but the consequences of the pandemic had been “far reaching” and went beyond contingencies. Shifts in geopolitics, the rise of nationalism and climate change were adding to the mix and were leading companies – as well as governments dealing with the computer chip crisis – to rethink how they do business. Hong said: “They are looking at shortened lead times, and moving production nearer consumption. But we are moving from just-in-time to just-in-case. There are a number of factors at play reshaping the economy, forcing companies to reassess what they’re doing.” Along with delays with key products and materials, businesses continue to be dogged by labour shortages thanks to ongoing surges of the virus and lockdowns, as well as by inflation not seen for decades. The recent round of company reporting in the US, Europe and Asia Pacific was punctuated by a litany of references to the problems managers are facing because of the supply chain issues. In the US, Harley Davidson said its customers would have to bear the brunt of component price rises, and Starbucks said it was raising its prices for the third time since October, while FedEx’s air cargo arm was booming as businesses sought a way around bottlenecks. In Europe, the UK’s biggest private employer, Tesco supermarket, said food inflation will hit 5% this spring on the back of tighter supply, the price of beer was rising due a “vicious cycle of costs”, and truck maker Iveco reported protracted supply chain issues on Tuesday. In Australia, analysts at Commonwealth bank this week said Covid-induced supply chain disruptions and labour shortages continued to drive a big lift in price pressures for businesses, weakening business confidence. On the upside, small-town butchers were thriving thanks to supply shortages leaving supermarket shelves bare.The mining company Kepco has failed in its final legal bid to challenge a decision to reject its plans for an open-cut coalmine in the New South Wales Bylong Valley. Environmentalists and members of the Bylong Valley community are now calling on the South Korean company to walk away and sell its land back to farming families rather than submitting a revised development proposal for the project. The high court on Thursday declined to hear Kepco’s appeal that sought to challenge the NSW Independent Planning Commission’s (IPC) decision in 2019 to reject its development application. The commission refused development approval for the greenfield coalmine, citing the unacceptable impact the mine would have on agricultural land and the environment – including through greenhouse gas emissions – and the costs to future generations. Its decision was subsequently upheld by the NSW land and environment court and the court of appeal. The high court’s decision exhausts the company’s final legal avenue for the project in its current form and brings to an end a lengthy battle for Bylong Valley community members who have fought the project for years. “KEPCO needs to eat some humble pie, pack its bags, and leave,” said Phillip Kennedy, the president of the Bylong Valley Protection Alliance. “KEPCO must not submit a revised project, it must not delay, it must only sell its land back to the farming families of Australia and leave the Bylong Valley for good. “The Bylong Valley community only wants some certainty, and we’re looking forward to that with this win.” The Bylong Valley Protection Alliance had joined as a party to the original judicial review to defend the IPC’s ruling after the commission itself declined to take an active role in proceedings. The alliance’s legal representative, the Environmental Defenders Office, said the high court made its decision based on written submissions, without the need for a hearing. “We could not be more delighted for our clients, the Bylong Valley Protection Alliance, who have dedicated years of their lives to challenging this destructive and inappropriate coal mine proposal,” managing lawyer Rana Koroglu said. “The IPC’s decision to refuse this mine was sound. It was based on the evidence and the science, including evidence about the ‘problematical’ greenhouse gas emissions.” Koroglu said the project would have generated more than 200m tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions. She said the commission’s decision had been tested to its limits through the courts and in every appeal had been upheld. “It means the IPC can be assured that an evidence-based decision to reject these kinds of destructive fossil fuel projects in the future is legally supported.” A spokesperson for Kepco said the company was “disappointed with the high court’s decision to dismiss the special leave application”. “KEPCO will now take some time to consider its next steps,” they said.An image hangs before a classroom of children. Stitched from primary colours, the mural depicts animals, two-by-two, leaving a wooden structure beneath the arc of a rainbow. It is a mural of the Biblical flood narrative, when judgment threatened creation but the holy few found safety within the ark. It is one of my earliest memories of school. I have remembered this image recently, as my own son starts school. Growing up attending a Christian school, I came to see the ark as a metaphor for what religious environments can offer. Each school day, children lined up before wooden classrooms, one girl alongside one boy, and entered an environment where we felt included, and protected from the harm outside. I felt safe. The question of safety has never been more relevant for religious schools as Citipointe Christian College made headlines for condemning homosexuality and suggesting that transgender teens would only be recognised by their “biological sex” in school contracts. The contracts were consequently withdrawn as the principal stood aside, insisting that the school “would never discriminate against any student on the basis of their sexuality or gender identity.” The chaos unfolded a week before the federal government’s religious discrimination bill returned to the parliament. While a religious school was a safe environment for me, they may not always be for everyone. Research demonstrates that a religious upbringing is healthy for the development of young people, unless the young people are LGBTQIA+, in which case it can be a risk factor for suicidal ideation. Given the controversial legislation has now passed the lower house with amendments, this raises a question I asked myself many times; can I send my son to a school that might be unsafe? Religious schools already have exemptions from the Sex Discrimination Act that allows them to discriminate. I have heard stories from a number of different schools. I know one devout teacher who was fired from a religious school for being gay. I know another who lost employment, not because of their orientation, but because they were affirming of queer communities. I know of another teacher who was asked repeatedly to sign a contract with anti-gay statements of belief, despite the fact that they had queer children. The religious discrimination bill will provide further allowances for religious schools to discriminate like this. While last minute amendments will protect queer students from expulsion, that may also now guarantee that LGBTQIA+ children simply remain in non-affirming school environments that can refer to their characteristics as “immoral” and “offensive”. Condemning and denouncing people’s orientation might still be protected under the legislation’s statements of belief clause, and research has shown that LGBTQIA+ young people exposed to a non-affirming religious message are considerably more likely to have thoughts of self-harm and suicide. Queer teenagers are five times more likely to have attempted suicide in their lifetimes and suicide is already the single biggest killer of young people in Australia. For queer young people in non-affirming religious schools, the government’s legislation will increase this risk. If some religious schools are harmful for the vulnerable, a suicide risk for children, how can our law empower that? For parents choosing schools for their children, how can we empower this? My partner and I sat in the office of a Christian school, different to the one I knew, our son playing with wooden toys in the corner. We had been considering the options for our son’s education and I asked the school representative if queer kids and parents would be affirmed or condemned in their school. I asked if transgender teens would have their gender identity accepted or rejected. I asked if their teachers had their employment made dependent on a non-affirming practice and punitive theology. The school representative smiled politely; we will adhere to our beliefs. I didn’t ask the question that was really on my mind; what if my own son was queer in this school? I looked over at my son in the corner and noticed the toys he was playing with; small wooden animals and the structure of an ark. My son lines up outside his classroom on his sixth day of school. I have just dropped him off at the local state school. It has a policy of respect and diversity regarding sexuality and gender and, as he enters, I know he feels safe. The Biblical flood story is a parable that begins with judgment, but ends in a promise of safety. I know many who have worked in religious schools for decades caring for children. I know there are religious schools that are inclusive and crucial for special needs young people. I know many families make the best choices they can. Like the mural from my memory, however, I know there are many leaving the ark behind, seeking the safety promised by the rainbow outside. If the religious discrimination legislation can’t promise safety, then it should be abandoned. The fight to amend the legislation now moves to the Senate and it is time for the major parties to reject it, and to start discussing a comprehensive Human Rights Act that offers safety to all teachers and students. Our laws must protect us all equally, and no true religion discriminates. Some religious schools have strived to be an ark for the holy few. It is time we remember the rainbow instead. • Anthony N Castle is an Adelaide-based writer and the community director at Activate Church • Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636Tasmania’s education minister, Sarah Courtney, has announced she is resigning from politics amid criticism for taking a French holiday as stressed parents prepared to send their children back to school during the pandemic. Courtney’s holiday went for several weeks and overlapped with the return to school and uncertainty over Covid restrictions and concerns, drawing criticism from Labor and the Greens. Courtney, who caught Covid while overseas and had previously held the health portfolio, announced on Thursday she was going. “I am resigning as both minister and member for Bass,” she said. “I have given my heart and soul to this role for eight years and have taken every step to ensure it is my first priority. “However, I believe the time has come for me to move on.” Courtney added that she was not resigning over the criticisms surrounding her holiday, but as a result of a “range of different factors”. “The decision was the culmination and confluence of a range of different factors. I’ve been reflecting on my time. The past two years in particular has been especially gruelling; rewarding, but very gruelling and exhausting,” she said. “When I was on leave, it gave me the opportunity to properly consider what future is personally right for me and my family. “It has not been a quick nor an easy decision.” Courtney contracted Covid while on holiday, forcing her to isolate in France days out from the school year beginning. She only returned to the state this week. She also referenced a recent family tragedy, saying a funeral was to be held tomorrow for her grandmother who had died with Covid. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Having the opportunity to spend meaningful time with the people I love is very dear to my heart,” Courtney said. “When I was in isolation recently with Covid, my grandmother died. I’m very close to the women in my family. The funeral is tomorrow.” Courtney was elected to parliament in 2014 and also holds the tourism, hospital and events and disability services portfolios. Tasmanian opposition leader, Rebecca White, told reporters Courtney’s resignation created a “mess.” “We no longer have a minister to support our students and our teachers when they are facing the most disruptive weeks of learning in our memory.” “We had always called on Sarah Courtney to come back to do her job. And instead of that she’s resigned and left Tasmania in a bigger mess.” White added that “no Tasmanian” would accept Courtney’s explanation for her resignation. “There’s not a single Tasmanian that I’ve spoken to who thought that the minister taking a holiday to France in the lead up to schools going back was a good idea.” “There can be no doubt that the minister’s resignation today has everything to do with the criticism she rightfully received for being absent with the risk of Covid returning to schools.”It was sometime before 7am on 21 May 2015 when Xiaoxing Xi, a physics professor at Temple University in Philadelphia, was woken by people pounding on his front door. Still not fully dressed, he opened the door to be confronted by about 12 armed FBI agents. The agents burst into Xi’s house, running about, shouting “FBI, FBI”. They pointed their guns at his wife and two daughters and ordered them to walk out of their bedrooms with their hands raised. Xi was handcuffed and arrested in front of his family. His alleged crime? Four counts of wire fraud for passing sensitive US technology to China, the country of his birth. “Overnight, I was painted as a Chinese spy all over the news and internet and faced the possibility of up to 80 years in prison and a $1m fine,” he wrote in a statement to the US House of Representatives last year. Four months after his arrest, the case collapsed before reaching trial. Xi, who came to the US from China in 1989 at the age of 32, was told through his lawyer that the US justice department (DoJ) had dismissed the case after “new information came to the attention of the government”. On Monday, nearly seven years after that raid, Xi, 64, asked a federal appeals court in Philadelphia to reinstate his claims for damages against the US government and the FBI. He and his family claim that they had been “wrongly” investigated and prosecuted in 2015. The Xi family also wants a declaration that the FBI violated their fourth and fifth amendment rights. They say they have “clear evidence” the FBI violated their constitutional rights, and that years later they are still dealing with the trauma of the ordeal. “If we can’t hold the government accountable now, there will be little to stop the government from profiling other Asian American scientists and ruining more innocent people’s lives in the future,” Xi said. “The government is not entitled to do what they have done to me and my family.” This is not Xi’s first attempt to take on the US government. Last April, a lower court dismissed nine of his 10 claims, which included allegations the FBI knowingly made false statement. The court also rejected his claim that the FBI’s action was “discriminatory”. But the lower court has yet to rule on Xi’s 10th claim, which challenges the US government’s surveillance of Xi and his family. The DOJ declined to comment on the lawsuit. The FBI has been contacted by the Guardian for comment on the Xi case. Xi’s ordeal occurred under the Obama administration, but his latest attempt to secure compensation comes amid a wide-ranging debate in Washington about how the US should compete with China. Stories like Xi’s have also been emerging as more American scientists – in particular those of Chinese origin – are being caught up in the geopolitical tensions. In 2018, the Trump administration launched a China Initiative to “[reflect] the strategic priority of countering Chinese national security threats and reinforce the president’s overall national security strategy”. The DoJ website boasts a series of examples – the latest, from 5 November, detailing an alleged attempt by a Chinese intelligence officer to steal trade secrets. Last week, the FBI’s director, Christopher Wray, alleged “there is just no country that presents a broader threat to our ideas, our innovation, and our economic security than China”. He claimed his bureau opens a counterintelligence case against China “about twice a day”. Opponents of the China Initiative argue it creates a pervasive atmosphere of fear among American academics who used to, or still have, links to China. Until recently, they were seen by many as a bridge between the two nations. Judy Chu, a California Democrat and the first Chinese American woman in US Congress, said the China Initiative is an instrument for “racial profiling”. “[The government] has turned it into a means to terrorise Chinese scientists and engineers. Something has gone dramatically wrong,” she told US media in December. Responding to concerns, the attorney general, Merrick Garland, said to Congress in October that the DoJ would review the programme. Opposition to the initiative has grown louder in recent months. In December one former DoJ official said it had “drifted and, in some significant ways, lost its focus”. In a statement to the Guardian, a DOJ spokesperson said: “Consistent with the Attorney General’s direction, the Department is reviewing our approach to countering threats posed by the PRC government. We anticipate completing the review and providing additional information in the coming weeks.” Zhigang Suo, a Chinese-born Harvard academic who, like Xi, is also a naturalised US citizen, said the heated atmosphere was having an adverse affect. “Of course people are upset about China, but I can see it takes two people to bicker. And I’m not a fan of the juvenile behaviour on either side,” he said. “In the past, very few fellow Chinese Americans would even think of leaving the US. But now, I can tell you some of the top Chinese American scientists have either left or are thinking about leaving.” For most of the three decades since settling in the US, Suo was not interested in politics. “My wife is a political junkie, but I wasn’t interested in it at all,” he said. But on 14 January 2021, the arrest of his best friend, Gang Chen, a fellow Chinese American scientist, changed that. Chen, a Chinese-born mechanical engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, was charged with hiding his links to China. The charges were later dismissed, but the incident turned Suo from an apolitical science nerd into a political activist. “Before [the China Initiative], you were innocent until proven guilty. Now, you are guilty until you prove you are innocent,” Suo said. “I fear this is the start of a slow process of brain drain for America. Historically, brain drain precedes the decline of great nations.” In a recent interview with the New York Times, Chen, who has now been released, said: “You work hard, you have good output, you build a reputation … The government gets what they want, right? But in the end, you’re treated like a spy. That just breaks your heart. It breaks your confidence.” Supporters of the China Initiative argue that this China-focused programme is not completely without merit. They point to the recent case of a Harvard chemistry professor, Charles Lieber, who, in December,was found guilty of six felony counts, including failure to disclose his associations and funding from a China-based university and the country’s controversial talent programme. But that same month, a Bloomberg analysis showed that among 50 indictments announced or unsealed since the programme’s inception, “only 20% of the cases allege economic espionage, and most of those are unresolved. Just three claim that secrets were handed over to Chinese agents.” Xi said the nightmare experience seven years ago interrupted his “American dream”. Although the charges were quickly dropped and his university position reinstated, his career has been damaged nevertheless, he said. “My research programme is now much smaller… I’m scared of applying for funding because as long as I do anything imperfectly, it could one day come back to haunt me.” Yet, despite the ordeal, Xi said he had also learned an important lesson. “If we – Americans of Chinese descent – want our environment improved, we need to speak out and fight for our rights. This is how democracy operates.”The Oscars will reportedly not require proof of Covid-19 vaccination in order to attend the in-person ceremony in Hollywood on 27 March. Instead, the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences will require guests to provide a negative PCR test or a negative rapid antigen test on the day of the event, the Hollywood Reporter and Variety reported on Wednesday. Attendees are encouraged to be vaccinated and those who are not will have to comply with stricter testing requirements in order to attend. This year’s ceremony will return to the Dolby Theater after a smaller, scaled-down event at Union Station in Los Angeles last year. This year will also mark the first time the event has had a host since 2018, though the Academy has not yet announced who that will be. While technically in line with guidelines from the Los Angeles department of health, the lack of a vaccination requirement stands in contrast to other major awards shows. The Screen Actors Guild awards and the Critics Choice awards have both mandated that those in attendance show proof of vaccination and negative tests. “We will be 100% vaccinated and require a negative PCR test within 48 hours of the event. I can’t invite people to a show where they’re not going to feel safe,” Joey Berlin, the chief operating officer of the Critics Choice Association, told the Hollywood Reporter. The Sag awards are requiring guests show proof of Covid-19 vaccination, as well as a booster, a negative PCR test within 48 hours of the event and a negative rapid test that day. The Hollywood Reporter spoke to a “highly connected industry insider” who called the decision “shocking”, referring to it as a move to accommodate anti-vaxxers in the industry, who would not be able to attend if there were such a requirement. Oscar nominations were released on Tuesday, which saw Jane Campion’s Power of the Dog sweep the list with a dozen nominations. Included among the nominees for best original song is Van Morrison, who has been outspoken about his thoughts on Covid, referring to “pseudoscience” and recording a song called No More Lockdown.American snowboarder Chloe Kim has become the first woman to successfully defend the Olympic halfpipe title, soaring to an untouchable lead with a gigantic opening run and cruising to a historic repeat gold. Kim, dropping in last among the 12 competitors to qualify for Thursday morning’s final, set the bar with a huge first run which included two 1080s and three spins down the course known as the Secret Garden Olympic Halfpipe, covering her mouth and dropping to her knees in jubilation upon seeing her score of 94.00 announced. She fell on her subsequent runs while trying to debut the 1260 – three and a half revolutions in the air – but the sheer amplitude for her opening foray was more than enough to secure the gold over Queralt Castellet of Spain, who earned the silver with a score of 90.25, and Sena Tomita of Japan, whose 88.25 was good for bronze. Kim’s resounding win played out before an audience that included her friend Eileen Gu, the freeskier from California who captured the freestyle big air gold on Tuesday competing for China. The two embraced at the bottom of the pipe before Kim headed back up for her final attempt. “I was so proud of myself,” an elated Kim said in the aftermath. “I had the worst practice, ever. I probably landed my run twice when I’m used to landing it eight times, normally, and so that puts you in a weird headspace. It felt so inconsistent. I didn’t want to feel all that pressure of having to land my first safety run (in competition). I overflowed with emotion when I was able to land it on the first go, and it opened up a lot of opportunity for me to go try something new (in her second and third runs).” She added: “I have been in this situation many times. I’ve been competing professionally since I was 13, so that’s almost 10 years now. I reset and reminded myself that it’s just another run. I have a brand new opportunity to go land it, and that calms me down a lot.” Kim, 21, first shot to global stardom four years ago in Pyeongchang, when she became the youngest female athlete to secure Winter Olympics gold on snow with a transcendent performance that included back-to-back 1080s. But she quickly found the trappings of fame – gracing the fronts of cereal boxes and magazine covers, getting name-checked in Frances McDormand’s Oscar speech – were dwarfed by her yearning for a normal life as a college student at Princeton. After nearly two years off the mountain Kim picked up right where she left off with a world title, crediting her decision to start therapy and focus on her mental health with helping rekindle her competitive fire. She’s won every halfpipe event she’s entered since Pyeongchang, which created a sense of suffocating pressure around her Olympic title defense at Zhangjiakou Genting Snow Park, the sparkling new venue nestled in the tree-lined southern foot of Xiaohaituo Mountain. But Kim’s imperious opening run quickly sucked any drama from the competition, turning the affair into a repeat coronation. Kim adds a second Olympic gold to an overflowing trophy case that includes a Youth Olympic title, two world titles, two Crystal Globes, six X Games titles and 10 wins from 14 World Cup starts. More importantly, she will depart Beijing better equipped to manage the resurgence of celebrity that awaits back home. “I am more prepared this time,” Kim said. “Luckily, it was a learning curve since the last time. Now that I’ve grown up a little more and I understand boundaries and I have an amazing therapist, so I think it will make the journey a lot more doable.”A valuable avant garde painting has been vandalised by a “bored” security guard who drew eyes on faceless figures in the artwork on his first day working in a Russian gallery. Anna Leporskaya’s Three Figures was painted between 1932 and 1934, and had been insured for 75m roubles (A$1.4m, £740,000). It was on display as part of an abstract art exhibition at the Boris Yeltsin Presidential Center in Ekaterinburg when the guard drew eyes on it using a ballpoint pen. Alexander Drozdov, the executive director of the Yeltsin Center, did not identify the security guard in a statement, but said he worked for a private security company and had been fired. The exhibition’s curator, Anna Reshetkina, said the painting was vandalised “with a Yeltsin Center-branded pen”. “His motives are still unknown but the administration believes it was some kind of a lapse in sanity,” she said. “The ink has slightly penetrated into the paint layer, since the titanium white used to paint the faces is not covered with author’s varnish, as is often the case in abstract painting of that time,” Ivan Petrov wrote in the Art Newspaper, which broke the story. “Fortunately, the vandal drew with a pen without strong pressure, and therefore the relief of the strokes as a whole was not disturbed. The left figure also had a small crumble of the paint layer up to the underlying layer on the face.” The vandalism was first noticed on 7 December by two visitors who raised the alarm with a gallery employee. The painting was removed from the exhibition and returned to the State Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow, which had loaned the painting. Restoration experts at the Tretyakov have estimated that the restoration work would cost 250,000 roubles (A$4,600). The Yeltsin Center reported the damage to police on 20 December, but Ekaterinburg’s ministry of internal affairs initially declined to press charges as the damage was deemed “insignificant”. Russian media reported that the ministry of culture later complained to the prosecutor general’s office about the lack of action, and last week police announced that they had opened an investigation. The suspect faces a fine and up to three months in prison. The Yeltsin Center has since installed protective screens over the remaining works in the exhibition. This is not the first time a painting has been vandalised in Russia: in 2019 a man was sentenced to two and half years in prison after attacking a painting of Ivan the Terrible in the Tretyakov, tearing it with a pole from the barrier protecting the work. The same work was also attacked in 1913 by a mentally ill man who slashed it with a knife three times.The former British spy chief Sir Richard Dearlove has described the Pine Gap surveillance base in central Australia as “hugely important” to western intelligence collection about China’s “rather alarming” activities. Intelligence officials are usually tight-lipped on exactly what the joint US-Australian facility is used for, but the former head of MI6 said Pine Gap was “a sophisticated listening post, all right, and a lot else besides”. “You’ve got the massive installation, which is partly NSA [US National Security Agency], at Pine Gap and that’s really important because, well, it’s an intercept intelligence site,” Dearlove said on the global affairs podcast One Decision. “And it’s hugely important strategically to the US and to the western alliance because of its position, its geographical location.” He explicitly confirmed the western interest in Beijing’s activities, saying Pine Gap – the installation near Alice Springs in the Northern Territory – was “crucial to, let’s say, western coverage of China”. “I don’t think I should go into detail about what it actually does, that would be indiscreet,” Dearlove added. More broadly, he said, Australia had “a very sophisticated intercept capability”. The former head of the British Secret Intelligence Service made the comments during a podcast conversation with the former Australian foreign affairs minister Julie Bishop, who said Australia’s relationship with China currently was “tense”. Australia is a member of the Five Eyes intelligence sharing alliance, which also includes the US, the UK, Canada and New Zealand. The presence of the Pine Gap facility in Australia has from time to time attracted controversy. A trove of NSA documents leaked by Edward Snowden indicated the site “plays a significant role in supporting both intelligence activities and military operations”. The ABC reported in 2017 that the facility – officially known as Joint Defence Facility Pine Gap - provided detailed geolocation intelligence to the US military. That prompted some legal observers to question the site’s potential role in supporting deadly US drone strikes in the Middle East. Bishop said China had been “much more assertive” and “indeed aggressive in some instances” since Xi Jinping became president. Some of China’s wolf warrior diplomacy had been “startling”, Bishop contended, and Beijing had “sought to make an example of us” since 2020 by introducing steep tariffs or trade actions against Australian export sectors such as wine, beef and barley. Bishop said Australia was in the “rather unusual situation that our major trading partner, China, is in serious competition with our major strategic defence and intelligence ally, the United States”. In the podcast interview, Dearlove asked Bishop whether it would be possible to “square this circle” in the long term. Dearlove cited not only the Pine Gap installation but also Australia’s strategic alliance with the US, the rotation of US marines through Darwin, and the Aukus deal for the US and the UK to help Australia acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “And all of this is, you could argue, [is] very provocative to the Chinese,” Dearlove said. “And at the same time, your economy or aspects of your economy, are absolutely totally tied to the Chinese market.” Bishop agreed that it was “a balancing act” and called for Australia and China to “reestablish a more constructive dialogue”. “It will be interesting to see how Xi Jinping is able to maintain this grip on power,” she said. “I’ve not yet seen evidence that he’s losing it, but China’s future is facing many hurdles, many challenges. Its inexorable rise is not inevitable. I think there are many bridges to cross before China could be seen as a superpower in the nature of the United States.” Bishop, who was foreign minister from 2013 to 2018, said Australia and other countries in the region were “looking for more US leadership, not less”. She contended that very few countries “would want to live in a region where the Chinese government was calling the shots”. Dearlove called on the west to “develop a new security regime which copes with China’s presence as a superpower”. But while saying he found China’s insistence on rewriting global rules as “rather alarming”, Dearlove also made an emphatic plea for Australia and other western countries to continue to seek dialogue with Beijing. “I do firmly believe in talking, not just to one’s competitors, but to one’s enemies as well, and engaging in dialogue, and having some sort of bilateral infrastructure which allows for the treatment and discussion of problems on an almost constant basis,” he said. The One Decision podcast, which is co-hosted by Dearlove and the journalist Julia Macfarlane, was recorded in December but released on Thursday. It is produced by the US-based communications firm Global Situation Room.The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, will meet her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, on Thursday with her plan to have put the UK’s “toughest sanctions regime against Russia” on the statute book in time for the trip having fallen through. Truss told MPs the laws would be in place by 10 February, but nothing has been put to parliament, raising suspicions among opposition MPs that government lawyers are struggling to frame the sweeping and unprecedented new laws. The Foreign Office confirmed the delay. “Our new sanctions legislation will be signed by an FCDO minister this week and will be laid in parliament shortly after,” a statement said. “This will be the UK’s toughest sanctions regime against Russia, and means we can act in concert with the US and other partners.” Parliament will be in recess for a fortnight. No reason for the delay has been given, but the Foreign Office can point out the measures once on the statute book were only due to come into force if a Russian invasion occurred. The EU is also still considering what sanctions it will be implement, including the five gas pipelines linking Russia and Germany. She will hold her talks with Lavrov as UK officials said there is no evidence of Russian military de-escalation. Speaking before her visit to Moscow, Truss said: “Russia should be in no doubt about the strength of our response. We have said many times that any further invasion would incur severe costs, including through a coordinated package of sanctions. Russia has a choice here. We strongly encourage them to engage, de-escalate and choose the path of diplomacy.” In a statement on Wednesday evening, the Russian foreign ministry warned that British officials should change their rhetoric. “The British side must be clearly aware that without a clear change in the tone of the speeches of representatives of the British leadership, productive interaction is impossible either in solving bilateral problems or in settling international problems,” the ministry said. “Relations between our countries should be based on the principles of equality and mutual respect, without artificial restrictions hindering business.” Moscow added that trade and economic ties remained a “stabilising” factor in bilateral ties. It came as Russia’s ambassador to the EU, Vladimir Chizhov, suggested Moscow was still ready to talk when he told the BBC that “we certainly believe there is still room for diplomacy”. Truss will be in Moscow while the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, will on Thursday be in Poland, one of the UK’s closest allies in Europe, before travelling to Brussels to meet the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg. Johnson is considering further deployments to eastern Europe. The legislation announced by Truss would “target any company that is linked to the Russian state, engages in business of economic significance to the Russian state, or operates in a sector of strategic significance to the Russian state”. The proposed laws would empower the UK Treasury to impose sanctions on individuals involved with these companies. Previously the UK had been able to impose sanctions only on businesses or individuals responsible for destabilising Ukraine. Truss told MPs on 31 January: “The package that we are putting forward in legislation will be in place by 10 February, which means that we are able to enact wide-ranging sanctions in broad categories that really target anybody who is providing strategic or economic support to the Russian regime. There will be nowhere to hide, and I am very clear that we will apply those sanctions without fear or favour.” Speaking at the Royal United Services Institute thinktank, Pat McFadden, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said: “I do not know where the promised legislation is.” He also urged the government to introduce its repeatedly delayed economic crime bill as a matter of national security. He said: “So much of the wealth associated with the people close to the Putin regime is tied up in property in the UK. There is a very well-developed group of law firms, consultancies, trusts, PR firms who are ready to help these people and issue lawsuits against people who might expose them.” Layla Moran, the Liberal Democrat spokesperson for foreign affairs, said: “Liz Truss should stop chasing headlines and finally crackdown on Putin’s cronies after years of broken promises. Yet again it is all words and no action. This might be the most embarrassing blunder yet when it comes to this government promising action on dirty money from Russia flowing into the UK.” British officials stress the French president, Emmanuel Macron, consulted Boris Johnson before his visit to Moscow, and further multilateral consultations occurred on Thursday. Britain is stressing the Nato open door policy and Ukraine’s right to join the security bloc of its choice are not subject to negotiation. Truss will stress the UK is willing to discuss renegotiating arms controls treaties with Russia. However, the UK’s influence is restricted since it is not a member of the Normandy format, the four-member group of Russia, France, Germany and Ukraine that is supposed to oversee the Minsk agreements on the future of the Russian-backed eastern region of Ukraine. Intelligence assessments about Russian military plans are being shared, and the differing reactions to those assessments between Europe and the US are acknowledged The visit is the first by a UK foreign secretary in more than four years. The Foreign Office said Truss would push for Russia to abide by the international agreements it has already signed up to – including the OSCE Helsinki Final Act, Minsk protocols, and the Budapest memorandum, which ensures the independence and sovereignty of Ukraine is respected.New Zealand police began evacuating anti-vaccine protesters from parliament grounds on the third day of their demonstration, with more than 120 arrested after clashes. Police brought in around 150 extra officers from around the country on Thursday to try to clear the protesters from parliament grounds, where they had pitched tents and parked cars, blocking traffic. The protesters, inspired by the “siege of Ottawa” where truckers paralysed the city and caused a state of emergency, led a convoy of several hundred vehicles to parliament on Tuesday. A number stayed overnight, pitching tents on the lawns. Tensions boiled over, as the wall of more than 100 police officers advanced their line a few metres every half hour, ripping out tents as they went. The police picked people off one-by-one at the front of the line, prompting scuffles to break out, and sparking shouts from the crowd of “shame on you, shame on you!” towards the officers. A drum beat persistently and occasionally the group of a few hundred protesters erupted into songs in Māori and English, including New Zealand’s national anthem. A man egged on the crowd through a loudspeaker: “thank you for standing up for New Zealand!” he shouted. Away from the frontline, the atmosphere was less volatile, with protesters sitting in deck-chairs, or filming on their phones. By Thursday afternoon, the police had arrested 120 people and used pepper spray on some members of the crowd, but made little headway in moving the protesters off parliament’s grounds. Two police staff were injured and some protesters suffered minor injuries. The police expect the protest will continue over some days, requiring a rolling door of officers to be brought in from other parts of the country, said Wellington district commander superintendent Corrie Parnell. Speaking to media in a location away from the protest, Parnell said the occupation, with its erected tents, was “unprecedented” on the grounds. “We continue to try and really encourage those persons present here to peacefully desist ... That has not come to fruition,” he said. There had been good lines of communication with some of the organisers, but Parnell said that had “eroded to a point where [the police are] beyond engaging, educating, encouraging”. He said protestors had been putting their children on the frontline of the protest, which presented a significant risk for those children and was “less than ideal” for officers trying to move people on. Over the coming days, the police will continue to slowly apply pressure on the crowd. Earlier in the day Parnell said: “While police acknowledges people’s right to protest, this needs to be conducted in a way that does not unfairly impact on the wider public.” Most New Zealanders have supported the vaccine: 94% of those aged 12 and over are vaccinated with two doses. New Zealand has vaccine mandates that cover many workers in jobs designated “high contact” – including in healthcare, teaching, and the police. There are also vaccine requirements for other businesses including hospitality, gyms and hairdressers while the country is at a “red” or “orange” alert level. It is currently at red. The government estimates the mandates affect about 40% of the workforce. This week’s protest was purportedly to denounce those mandates – but its members are voicing a sprawling mixture of concerns, including about vaccine safety, a “plandemic”, concerns over gene therapy manipulation, accusations of media corruption, and requests to save a Northland oil refinery from closure. Over the past year, New Zealand’s anti-vaccine and anti-mandate protest movement has been increasingly home to conspiracy theories, threats and violent rhetoric, particularly against reporters, the prime minister, and other members of parliament. Calls for “citizens’ arrests”, “Nuremberg”-style trials, and for the execution of reporters and politicians have become commonplace in the movement’s social media pages and chat apps. At the current protest, some demonstrators decorated their vans with nooses, and scrawled “hang them high” on the parliament paving stones. The threat of that rhetoric exploding into violence was acknowledged by parliament and the country’s counter-terror services in November last year. Parliamentary services boosted security after a spate of threats or harassment of MPs. In January, prime minister Jacinda Ardern’s van was forced off the road and on to a curb after being pursued by anti-vaccine protesters yelling abuse. Ardern said on Thursday that it was time for protesters to move on. “I’m reminded that relative to the people that are at parliament now, on the very day that they’re there, tens of thousands of people went out and got vaccinated. It [the protest] is not reflective of where the rest of New Zealand is at right now. All of us want to actually move on.” She said the eviction of protesters was a police matter. “Every New Zealander has the right to protest – but when it tips into affecting business, people’s ability to move, and the ability of kids to go to school or emergency services to move around then obviously the police need to manage that,” she said. Parnell asked the public to avoid the area if possible, and said there would be traffic delays.The Coalition has shelved its divisive religious discrimination laws after amendments aimed at protecting LGBTQ+ students sparked a backlash from religious schools and conservatives. Facing calls from the Christian lobby to dump the amended laws, the government said it had received legal advice from the attorney general’s department that showed lower house amendments passed in the early hours of Thursday morning may have unintended consequences. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has written to the independent MP Rebekha Sharkie and Labor over the amendments, saying she has “significant concerns” that the change could inadvertently worsen discrimination. But the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, blasted the backdown as “a desperate attempt by Mr Morrison to cover up his humiliating defeat on the floor of the House”. “It’s long past time Mr Morrison stopped trying to blame everyone else, stopped playing politics with the lives of children, and worked with the parliament to fix his bills,” Dreyfus said. The advice allegedly related to proposed changes to the Sex Discrimination Act (SDA) which were supported by the Liberal MPs Bridget Archer, Trent Zimmerman, Katie Allen, Fiona Martin and Dave Sharma – who crossed the floor to vote with Labor and crossbench MPs. The government was refusing to release the advice on the amendments, which would prevent religious schools from discriminating against students on gender and sexuality. Despite expectations the bill would be introduced into the Senate on Thursday, the government faced calls from the Australian Christian Lobby to withdraw it. The lobby argued the SDA changes would “remove protections for Christian schools”. The government faced the prospect of the amendments also passing the Senate after the Liberal senator Andrew Bragg put the government on notice of his intention to back the SDA changes along with Labor and a number of crossbench senators. In a statement, the Australian Christian Lobby’s Wendy Francis said the bill was intended to help faith-based schools “but they now do more harm than good”. “Taking away protections for Christian schools is a price too high to pay for the passage of the religious discrimination bill. The amendments voted on by Labor, independents and these Liberal MPs unnecessarily interfere with the operation of faith-based schools.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, said on Thursday morning that the government was consulting with stakeholder groups to make sure “we can fully appreciate the implications of that amendment before we have to deal with the Senate”. The government was “really intent on honouring the commitment we made to all of the multicultural groups, to all other religious groups, and also all of the LGBTI groups in the consultation process that we’ve undertaken”, Stoker said. The decision to delay the bill’s introduction into the Senate meant it was unlikely religious discrimination laws would pass parliament before the election, due by May. However, the government was understood to be still negotiating with crossbench MPs in both the lower house and the Senate, along with its own members who supported the changes to the Sex Discrimination Act, to try to break the impasse. In the letter sent to Sharkie and Dreyfus on Thursday, Cash said “concerns have been raised” with her about the SDA changes, suggesting the new drafting of section 37(4) “could allow religious schools to discriminate against students or prospective students on grounds which are currently prohibited”. “By expressly stating that it is unlawful for a religious education institution to discriminate on the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or relationship status or pregnancy, this drafting leaves open the possibility of religious schools to discriminate on other grounds, being a student or prospective student’s sex, intersex status or breastfeeding.” Sharkie said she had not yet received the legal advice underpinning the letter, but had requested it, “and, if released, will consider that advice carefully”. “However, I have deep concerns over the cited but unseen ‘legal advice’ and have a sense of deja vu after the government previously misrepresented legal advice on the medevac transfer bill.” Sharkie was referring to a controversial claim by the former attorney general Christian Porter that legal advice stated the medevac transfer bill would leave the government without power to return refugees and asylum seekers to offshore detention. The advice, later released under freedom of information, did not contain such a conclusion although the government denied it had misled about its content. Sharkie said that if the government was genuinely worried about unintended consequences, it could draft its amendments in the Senate. “I am disappointed the government has decided to play politics with an issue that’s so important to so many Australians.” The government’s original position had been to only ban expulsion on the grounds of sexuality – deferring other changes until a review was undertaken by the Australian Law Reform Commission. Jane Hume, the financial services minister, said the government wanted the bill restored to its original form with the ALRC process to investigate the proposed changes to the Sex Discrimination Act “so that we get that balance right”. “The government will inevitably move amendments to try and revert the bill back to the government’s position,” Hume said. “When you deal with competing rights, it’s always going to be a contentious issue ... the rights of children, sometimes very vulnerable children, with the rights of people of faith to have the choice to send their children to a same-sex school. “People of faith should be allowed to express their faith to send their children to a same-sex school but at the same time we want to make sure we protect all children, particularly Australia’s most vulnerable.” The Equality Australia chief executive, Anna Brown, said the changes to the Sex Discrimination Act were aimed at protecting students at religious schools who were vulnerable to discrimination, including LGBTQ+ students. “If the government considers that there is a problem, it can bring forward amendments that reflect the will of parliament to remove discrimination,” Brown said. “There are already exceptions in the Sex Discrimination Act dealing with single-sex schools that, for example, allow girls schools to exclude boys, including trans boys. There was nothing passed last night that impacts these exemptions. “These issues would never have arisen if the government had fulfilled its commitment to amend the Sex Discrimination Act to protect LGBTQ+ students.”The Duke of Sussex has urged people to “know your status” and get tested for HIV, saying he hopes to carry on his mother’s work to help eradicate stigma and misunderstanding surrounding the virus. He told former Welsh rugby captain Gareth Thomas, who lives with HIV, that there had been a huge change with people openly talking about the condition in the 35 years after his mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, opened the first Aids unit at Middlesex hospital in London. But more must be done to make progress towards the UK goal of ending new HIV cases by 2030, he added. In a video conversation released online to mark National HIV Testing Week, Harry said he had been influenced by the suffering caused by the virus during visits to Lesotho and Botswana. “Add in the fact that my mum’s work was unfinished, I feel obligated to try and continue that as much as possible. I can never fill her shoes, especially in this particular space, what she did, what she stood for and how vocal she was on this issue,” he said. When Harry took an HIV test in 2016, the live broadcast contributed to a 500% increase in the number of people requesting a test on the Terrence Higgins Trust website. He said: “Every single one of us has a duty, or at least an opportunity, to get tested ourselves to make it easier for everybody else to get tested.” Noting there had been a drop in HIV testing during Covid, he added that with people regularly testing for coronavirus, it should be “ingrained in us that that’s what we need to do, to know our status in order to be able to keep other people safe”. Thomas, who disclosed his HIV status in 2019, has since launched Tackle HIV alongside ViiV Healthcare in 2020 to educate people about the virus. He said, though people may be daunted taking a test for fear of a positive result, “it wouldn’t be scary if you understood what living with HIV in 2022 is”. His own diagnosis had given him “an appreciation of life”. “I take a moment at 6am … I take my HIV medication which is one tablet, and I feel that my day then begins. I’m very active, I go to the gym, I work as hard as I possibly can, and I think with that appreciation of life comes this sense of not being selfish,” he said. A condition he “thought would be a life ending condition, it’s actually turned into being a life affirming condition”, he said. Free HIV test kits to do at home can be ordered from www.startswithme.org.ukAnd so it ends as it began – in farce. On Thursday morning hundreds of police officers made their move against the “freedom convoy”, a tiny racket of anti-vaxxers, anti-mandaters, and proud fascists who were camping on parliament’s lawn to protest, well, something. Some were arguing for the efficacy of the immune system over the vaccine, as if the mRNA jab does something other than train said immune system. A good number were calling for citizens’ arrests against prime minister Jacinda Ardern and health minister Andrew Little for crimes unknown. And at least a handful were prosecuting their QAnon conspiracies. At the last major “freedom” protest Q’s supporters were on the ground to argue that the prime minister is already under arrest and wears an ankle bracelet to prove it. With this catalogue of complaints it was impossible for police to do anything other than remove the convoy-cum-campers. In normal circumstances protesters arrive in the capital with a concrete demand whether it’s ending student fees, repealing the Foreshore and Seabed Act, or opposing the ratification of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement. But the “freedom” convoy came to town as simple catharsis. There were the anti-vaxxers and anti-mandates types, who range from American-style conspiracists to misguided anarchists, but alongside those familiar archetypes were evangelical church leaders, Steve Bannon-backed Counterspin media “journalists”, and people calling for tino rangatiratanga (Māori sovereignty). Like the Occupy movement, the group was leaderless. But not out of principle or ideology. It’s just the convoy couldn’t agree on anything because most of them were in Wellington to pursue their personal fantasies and grievances. That meant negotiation was impossible. The government was in no position to meet their demands because they were endless and, frankly, psychotic. An end to paediatric vaccinations. The execution of journalists. An end to vaccine mandates. The execution of academics. An end to mask mandates. The execution of health workers. It felt vaguely Trumpian in that a good number of the convoy were clearly taking pleasure in the spectacle of it – the threat of violence, the collective thrill of causing a scene in the most temperamentally conservative of countries. The scholars would perhaps label it jouissance. This is, in Jacques Lacan’s words, “not purely and simply the satisfaction of a need but the satisfaction of a drive”. The drive to end vaccines, mandates, and the lives of people they don’t like, yes, but chiefly the drive to be heard. What unites “antis” of every type is a mistrust in government. The best research indicates that vaccine hesitancy – which is distinct from and softer than committed anti-vaxxer sentiment – often finds root in institutional mistrust among people who have often found themselves the victims of institutional racism, sexism, and other forms of official discrimination. This is why a good number of Māori turn out at each “freedom” protest despite being at the highest risk of contracting Covid-19. This makes opposing today’s protest and convoy uncomfortable for many radicals and liberals. Are we further oppressing the oppressed? We must answer no. No one owes solidarity to a group threatening violence against politicians, journalists, academics, and health workers. It’s obviously true that not every convoy participant and protester wishes to execute the prime minister (among many others). But it is true that the movement on parliament’s lawn is cohering around violence. At 3pm on Wednesday a significant number attempted to overrun police lines and infiltrate the parliamentary complex. That same day hundreds of protesters hissed and booed at media covering their protest with one journalist being told, by someone carrying a sign claiming “love is the cure” no less, that they would execute her. Against these threats police, parliamentary security, and the Wellington city council who sent their parking wardens in to dispense traffic violation notices were right to move against the convoy and the campers. And as soon as they did the “movement”, if we give it that much credit, collapsed upon its own uncertainties. Protest leaders quickly fled the scene to avoid arrest and grandstand from the safety of their online accounts. Misinformation spread soon after with posters claiming police couldn’t undertake arrests unless they were wearing their hats. What was left among this angry, confused, and stupid ruin were the protest diehards. The people who weren’t willing to take the one exit left to them – the parliamentary gate on to Molesworth St – and instead were so committed to their uncertain cause that they would stay to challenge police lines. But against this moderate display of State force – unarmed police and parking wardens – the “freedom” convoy was exposed for the tiny minority that it is. No major reinforcements arrived, as the protest leaders and posters had promised. One of the country’s principal conspiracists who was encouraging everyone to drive to Wellington in support of the convoy claimed that he couldn’t attend for unspecified medical reasons. There may be calls in the coming days that New Zealand is increasingly divided. Yet the opposite is true: on vaccinations and even mandates the country is united. More than 95% of us are vaccinated and even the harshest policies to control the virus – like the border closure – enjoy huge levels of support. The people on parliament’s step are the tiniest minority.A woman accused of laundering billions of dollars in stolen cryptocurrency alongside her husband may end up becoming better known for her excruciating music career as a self-styled “raunchy rapper” called Razzlekhan. Heather Morgan was arrested along with her husband, Ilya Lichtenstein, in Manhattan on Tuesday over their alleged involvement in laundering bitcoin stolen in a 2016 hack of the virtual currency exchange Bitfinex. They are not accused of involvement in the hack itself but face charges of conspiring to commit money laundering as well as to defraud the United States. However, the charges risk being overshadowed by Morgan’s portrayal of an apparently lavish lifestyle online as a “badass money maker” and performer. The 31-year-old has published an extensive catalogue of rap videos, DIY techniques and other lifestyle issues on social media platforms including Instagram and TikTok, calling herself the “Turkish Martha Stewart” or the “Waffle Queen of Korea”. On her website, Morgan calls herself Razzlekhan or the “Versace Bedouin … the raunchy rapper with more pizzazz than Genghis Khan”. “I’m a real risk taker/pirate riding the flood/I’m a badass money maker,” she raps in one video in which she refers to herself as the “Crocodile of Wall Street”. “Come real far but don’t know where I’m headed/Blindly following rules is for fools,” she says, gyrating on Wall Street wearing sunglasses, a leopard print scarf, and shiny gold jacket. Morgan, 31, was arrested along with her husband, Ilya Lichtenstein, 34, in Manhattan on Tuesday. The pair is accused of conspiring to launder 119,754 bitcoin stolen after a hacker broke into Bitfinex and initiated more than 2,000 unauthorised transactions. Justice department officials said the transactions at the time were valued at $71m in bitcoin, but with the rise in the currency’s value, it is now valued at over $4.5bn. Prosecutors claim the pair tried to launder money via a network of currency exchanges or claimed that the money represented payments to Morgan’s startup, the department said. Prosecutors said on Tuesday the illegal proceeds were spent on things ranging from gold and non-fungible tokens to “absolutely mundane things such as purchasing a Walmart gift card for $500”. At a bail hearing on Friday, a defence attorney called the charges “thin” and overblown. “I don’t think you’ll find that billions of dollars have been laundered,” he said. However, thanks to their ubiquitous social media presence, details about Morgan, from California, and Lichtenstein, a dual US-Russian national from Illinois also known as “Dutch”, have emerged since their arrest. “Her art often resembles something in between an acid trip and a delightful nightmare,” Morgan wrote about herself on her website, Razzlekhan.com. “Definitely not for the faint of heart or easily offended. “Razz likes to push the limits of what people are comfortable with,” she said. “Her style has often been described as ‘sexy horror comedy’.” The social media posts tout a lavish lifestyle. One video shows a glimpse of an upscale Manhattan apartment with a clear view of the sky and other buildings. In a Facebook post from October, Morgan hinted at wanting to buy a painting from Sotheby’s auction house. When not making rap videos or posting pictures of her artwork or a Bengal cat on Facebook, Morgan was a contributor to the financial publications Forbes and Inc. A June 2020 article she wrote for Forbes was titled: “Experts share tips to protect your business from cybercriminals.” More discreet online, Lichtenstein described himself on LinkedIn as a “technology entrepreneur, coder and investor” and the founder of several tech companies. In a Facebook post, he recalled how he proposed to Morgan – “my best friend and the woman of my dreams!” It involved what Lichtenstein called a “weird, creative multi-channel marketing campaign” that saw posters of Razzlekhan plastered across New York City and her face on a Times Square billboard. In one YouTube video, Morgan said: “I’ve also been totally broke and homeless multiple times … Money comes and goes. Sometimes you have it, sometimes you don’t. “It’s really nice when you have it but nothing in this life is certain,” she said. “Right now I’m basically living my ideal life.”There is a shadow-life to things. From the iron rail at the edge of the aqueduct, the abyss plunges through trees down to the river. Low winter sunlight casts shadows of the piers (pillars) like the ribcage of some great creature straddling the gorge. This massive shadow seems to move, to have a life, an animus free of the stone and iron that make this wonder of the industrial age. At 38 metres above the River Dee, Pontcysyllte is the highest navigable aqueduct in the world. Its 18 piers span 307 metres, carrying the “stream in the sky” – the Llangollen canal – across the Vale of Llangollen. Yes, it is an engineering feat worthy of its Unesco world heritage site status, but it is not just the genius of engineers such as Thomas Telford that should be recognised, but the lives of all the workers and their families who toiled for years after the first stone was laid in 1795, a dangerous place where many died. It also stands for those bargees and their horses and canal folk who plied the waterways around the country. Wood smoke rises from the narrowboats of those who inherit that nomadic life. There is a piddling sound as water leaks from a cast iron joint into the void below. The canal’s water level is maintained by Horseshoe Falls, a weir on the Dee beyond Llangollen. Water diverted into the canal, through nature’s shadow engineering, is returning to the river. The aqueduct’s shadow is the kind of spirit thing that in superstitions changes the destiny of what, or who, it touches. Local people say that the aqueduct has a strange kind of tranquillity for such a huge construction. To see the shadow of a narrowboat float softly through that impossible space across the treetops is a dreamlike experience. Only birds can fly through the same space. The light changes by the minute. The River Dee has a song of restless travel. The aqueduct is also not so fixed; it has a shadow-life, a thing that roams the valley – moody, ephemeral and transformative. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNew Zealand officialdom is wielding a new frontline force against the Ottawa-inspired anti-vaccine convoy occupying the capital’s inner city: parking wardens. Since Tuesday, Wellington has faced traffic delays and closed streets, as a collective of anti-vaccine-mandate protesters left cars, vans and buses parked in the capital city in their effort to occupy parliament’s lawn. By Thursday afternoon, the protesters’ time was up, and the wardens hit the streets, apparently with popular support from the city’s residents. Wellington city council said it had issued about 120 tickets, and was still dishing out fines. Each warden was accompanied by two police officers for their safety. Fines of NZ$40-$60 (£20-£30) apiece were issued for parking in bus stops, on yellow lines, and the broader charge of “inconsiderate parking”. Those who opted to remain and ignore their fines would be towed, a spokesperson said. The council said it had received demands from frustrated Wellingtonians that they start issuing tickets and an outpouring of support – a rare occurrence for parking wardens, who are not always viewed with universal affection by residents. The council had received “a heavy amount” of correspondence “from Wellingtonians about the fact that we need to get in there and sock it to these protesters basically,” a spokesperson said. “The amount of support we’ve had … is very, you know, very unusual for parking wardens – they don’t usually get support for enforcement.” On social media, some protesters and their affiliates took novel approaches to enforcement efforts – with some advising that if they refused to provide consent to be arrested or issued a ticket, it was not legally binding. Others believed they could issue their own counter-fine of $40,000 to the council for breaching their wishes by putting a ticket on the car. “Let’s see whether that works for them,” the council spokesperson said. “That’s not our concern. Regardless of whether we have their consent, they will be towed.” New Zealanders who object to the vaccine make up a small fragment of the overall population – 95% of those aged 12 and over are now vaccinated with two doses. Estimates of the convoy protesters’ numbers have fluctuated as the crowd wanes – from up to 3,000 down to about 200.The New South Wales auditor general has warned her unqualified audit of the state’s finances could be at risk after the secretary of transport told a public hearing he had not yet agreed to provide an extra $5.2bn to fund a controversial rail corporation. A day after her scathing report accused the NSW Treasury of being “unnecessarily obstructive” during her audit of the government’s finances, auditor general Margaret Crawford told a parliamentary inquiry on Thursday that her unqualified audit would need to be “reaffirmed” after earlier evidence from transport secretary Rob Sharp. At the centre of Crawford’s extraordinary report was the Transport Asset Holding Entity (Tahe), a corporation established by the NSW government to hold $40bn in NSW rail assets, in a move that had the effect of inflating the state’s budget by several billion dollars. Crawford’s signoff on the state’s overall finances was delayed by three months last year as a result of what she labelled “significant accounting issues” with the body. Her office eventually gave the government an unqualified audit on the state’s finances on Christmas Eve after the government agreed to inject a further $5.2bn into Tahe. However, during evidence to the inquiry earlier on Thursday, Sharp suggested negotiations on the access fees paid to Tahe remained ongoing and that his department had not signed off on the agreement. “The agreement was to agree to a framework [to] negotiate in February and March the actual agreement,” he said. “We know what the number [put forward by Tahe] is but as I indicated we do have a formal negotiation process we go through – all of these are up for discussion.” The evidence sent shock waves through the office of the auditor, who gave evidence to the public inquiry shortly after Sharp. In her opening statement, Crawford told the hearing she had been “quite alarmed” by Sharp’s evidence because she had been told that the $5.2bn payment had been agreed to before signing off on the audit. “We agreed in good faith to accept the heads of agreement undertakings [but] on the basis of what we’ve heard today we will now have to reaffirm those commitments,” she said. Crawford’s deputy, Ian Goodwin, told the inquiry that if the extra funding was not secured then “we’re back to where we were before December”. The Guardian previously revealed that on 18 December a heads of agreement deal was signed between Tahe and its “customers”, the state’s rail networks, to inject funds into the corporation. The extra funding was part of an “access fee” paid to Tahe by transport for use of the state’s rail network. But only $1.1bn of the extra funding had been agreed to up to 2024-25, meaning another $4.1bn would be required over the 10-year agreement. Asked at the inquiry by Labor’s shadow treasurer Daniel Mookhey whether the new information could impact her unqualified audit of the state’s finances, Crawford said it “does have consequences”. The funding agreement, she said, was “one of the key matters that meant that we could be satisfied [there would be] a reasonable return on the state’s equity investment into Tahe”. “We accepted in good faith that that would be followed through on quickly and [the] heads of agreement would be turned into a legal agreement. I think that now needs to be clarified,” she said. Crawford’s evidence comes just 24 hours after her scathing report accused Treasury of having “tested the constructive partnership” between the two offices by withholding key information about Tahe during her audit. Giving evidence, Goodwin said it was “not the first time we’ve heard evidence presented to this committee that is [the] first time we’ve heard a fact”. He said that Treasury had left the auditor’s office with him in no doubt that the heads of agreement would be executed as it was presented to them before the finances were signed off, revealing the document even had a table that included the $5.2bn. “The $5.2bn was never in question. The evidence presented that it might be in question is the first time this office has heard that and we need to clarify that because that’s important,” he said. “If the $5.2bn doesn’t have reality it undermines the projections Treasury put to the audit about the rate of return and we’re back to where we were before December.” He told the inquiry that during discussions with a senior Treasury official last year it had been made “quite clear to me that those amounts would follow through and if they didn’t everyone would be embarrassed”. Earlier on Thursday the new secretary of the treasury department, Paul Grimes, told the inquiry he would order an “independent assessment” of the processes that led to the “important, serious matters” raised in the auditor’s report. The premier, Dominic Perrottet, said on Thursday he had yet to read the auditor’s report but that if Treasury “needs to review its processes in relation to its engagement, whether the auditor general or any of the other integrity agencies, they should take that on board and adopt that process”. “What’s important is that the government considers it, the relevant minister focuses on it and ensures that within the public service changes that need to be made in relation to a whole range of areas are taken on board and adopted and that’s what my expectation would be,” he said.In 25 years of presenting documentaries, I’ve made it something of a specialty to go to places and listen to people whose views represent something troubling, even dangerous. The first segment I ever made on TV, for Michael Moore’s TV Nation, was about millennial cults and involved a trip to western Montana, where I spoke to two neo-Nazis in a trailer. For several hours, they explained how some time in the not-too-distant future there would be global racial conflict, leading to Jesus Christ returning and banishing the different races to separate planets in some cosmic version of old-school southern segregationist policies. Late in the evening, when it had grown dark outside, they made me a cup of tea, which I appreciated. They seemed a little warmer towards me and I asked whether, after the inevitable race war, I might be able to make occasional visits to the black people’s planets, but it was still a non-starter. In the years since, I’ve made many more hours of documentaries on a variety of subjects, some of them focused on more innocent kinds of cultural oddity, such as infomercial gurus or swingers’ parties; others on more serious social themes of crime and mental health. But there has always been a strand in my work of being curious about the side of life deemed – in that rather woolly pejorative buzzword – “problematic”. On Sunday, I have a new series going out on BBC Two. Louis Theroux’s Forbidden America is squarely in the sweet spot of problematic content. White nationalists, trigger-happy rappers and figures in the porn world accused of sexual misconduct – they all make appearances. In one sense, in the context of my output, it is business as usual – my latest stop-off in a journey that started all those years ago with neo-Nazis in Montana. But in another sense, in releasing this series now, I am aware that it is business as unusual. Times have changed. The world is different; the pandemic, social media, the killing of George Floyd and the ensuing conversations about institutional prejudice and Black Lives Matter. In the context of everything that’s happened in the last couple of years, the decision to put out a series chockful of troubling individuals giving expression to upsetting and extreme opinions might seem odd. The term is “platforming”: the idea that it is irresponsible to amplify hateful voices and that in doing so one is contributing to their power and their harm. We should instead ignore the toxic and the dangerously misinformed, the argument goes: exclude them from the conversation. At its simplest, this is a view so uncontroversial as to be almost banal. Quite clearly, we don’t want card-carrying neo-Nazis hosting daytime quiz formats or giving talks to children at our local schools. There is no obligation for us to hear paedophile apologists or Isis sympathisers on Radio 4’s A Point of View. Nor to give air time to flat-earthers or climate crisis deniers on current affairs shows. This has been the case for as long as the media have existed: broadcasters have always had an obligation to think about ways in which they reflect opinions that may be misinformed or hateful. Making it even more pressing nowadays is the demonstrable harm caused by the spread of false information online and the way this has empowered formerly marginal figures such as conspiracy theorists and nativists. The world we were delivered by Mark Zuckerberg, instead of the promised one in which we would connect with friends via Facebook and share pictures of banana bread, has curdled into a more troubling place where trolls, anti-vaxxers, ethnonationalists and conspiracy loons can pipe their nonsense directly on to our laptops and phones. Dodgy algorithms have weaponised our anger and fear, enticing us into liking and sharing content that is false and divisive. And in a manner reminiscent of the fast-food industry, and its reliance on high-fat, high-sugar content, we appear powerless to resist the spread of junk information about lizard overlords, Pizzagate, and what Phoebe Cates looks like now and how it will leave you speechless (answer: she looks fine). In this new landscape, every day seems to bring a new test case of whether some influencer or high-profile person should be deplatformed, or whether tech companies and media outlets are throttling free expression by deciding what we can and can’t see and hear. Donald Trump fomented unrest on Twitter and was kicked off. The comedian Dave Chappelle sparked boycotts and a campaign by trans rights activists for jokes on a comedy special on Netflix. As I write, the papers are reporting a growing groundswell against Spotify for its deal with the US podcast host Joe Rogan. Musical artists Neil Young and Joni Mitchell have taken their music off the streaming platform, saying they don’t wish to be part of a service that – in their view – contributes to vaccine misinformation. These aren’t always easy situations to figure out and each of them needs careful thought. The bigger point, though, is that I do understand how, viewed in this context, my decision to put some potentially dangerous and inflammatory figures on BBC Two primetime might appear flat-out weird and irresponsible. And to be clear, some of the people who feature in the documentaries are several orders of magnitude beyond Rogan and Chappelle on the “cancelometer”. Extreme and Online, the first episode of Forbidden America, is about a community of trolls and white nationalists whose mascot and leader, the diminutive streamer and broadcaster Nick Fuentes, tells me at one point it would be better if women didn’t have the vote. He says he views homosexuality as “disgusting”. He has also made Holocaust-denying remarks in his online broadcasts. He was outside the Capitol on 6 January and is on record as praising the events of the day, viewing them as a blow for freedom and justice. Other interviewees in the show are cut from similar cloth. A far-right hipster-influencer who calls himself Beardson Beardly, and has appeared online in images doing what many believe to be Nazi salutes (though he denies this), gets some airtime – before he throws me out of his house for asking him about the salutes. Another person I speak to is a troll and livestreamer who uses the pseudonym Baked Alaska (his real name is Anthime Gionet), who has posted inflammatory racist content online – getting himself kicked off Twitter– and was inside the US Capitol building on 6 January, livestreaming his own act of alleged trespass and soliciting several thousand dollars’ worth of donations as he did so. So no – they wouldn’t be your first choices to fill in for Sue Perkins and Gyles Brandreth on Just a Minute. And yet I believe I was right to make a programme about them. There are several reasons why. The most obvious one is the nature of the project. I make immersive documentaries, researching, shooting and editing over the course of months or even years. It is very far from the “here’s your mic, have at it” atmosphere of a conventional debate or TV appearance. Over the years I have made programmes in prisons, among confessed murderers and paedophiles, and in maximum security hospitals for paedophiles. These troubled, sometimes dangerous people are legitimate subjects of journalistic inquiry. You wouldn’t have them sitting in as pundits on The Moral Maze but in the right context, with the right approach, speaking to people who have done terrible things can be a totally valid exercise: revealing and ultimately life-affirming, shining a light on aspects of human psychology and society in a way that promotes understanding and cultivates empathy. You might argue that an inmate or convicted predator is a different case from someone actively promoting a divisive political position. And there’s something in that. But – without wishing to sound too much like Liam Neeson – I have a specific set of skills that means I believe I can be trusted to tell these stories in a responsible way. By being informed, by doing the research, by spending time in the field – for hours or days or weeks even – questioning, challenging and revealing the reality of the people we are reporting on, and doing responsible journalism. “But why do we need to hear from these people?” you may ask. Well, you might not need to. But the reason you might choose to is because of what their existence says about the world we are living in, and because of the very real power they represent. The truth is, in terms of his online following, Nick Fuentes and his ilk already have platforms from which they can and do reach audiences, in bedrooms and living rooms around the world, in the millions. And just as Trump has shown no sign of disappearing – notwithstanding his cancellation from virtually every social media outlet going – the reach of Fuentes and his supporters is not likely to end soon. So the choice we are faced with is whether to be curious about that phenomenon, try to figure out why it’s growing, what it’s feeding on, how it can be challenged, or whether to ignore it and hope it goes away. Incidentally, so far, I’ve only written about the first episode, Extreme and Online. In other episodes we meet rappers in Florida who appear to enjoy stoking beefs that have cost lives and getting tattoos on their eyelids that say “Fuck you”; and we interview the porn agent Derek Hay, who has been accused by some former models of sexual misconduct but who has denied any wrongdoing. Part of the job of telling these stories has been working hard to reveal the layers underneath. Over the more than two years we’ve spent making it, enormous effort has gone into giving the programme the necessary shape and context to ensure that questionable views are interrogated, conveying to viewers the whole story and not just those parts the interview subjects wish to show. One positive side-effect of the new media landscape is that it’s harder for people to hide their real views. In having their own platforms, the participants in these worlds have not only acquired new influence, they have also created vast digital catalogues freely available online and filled with candid expressions of their sincere opinions, for all of which they can be held accountable. This brought an enjoyable transparency to the filming and a sometimes edgy and even hostile energy: the sense of it being a showdown between a legacy media emissary and an insurgent force of disrupters. In several meetings with the far right, they had their own cameras trained on me. Baked Alaska implied he might be making a documentary about me. On several occasions, the far-right influencers did broadcasts about me when I wasn’t around, making clear their real feelings, including one in which Nick Fuentes described me as “pretentious” (moi!?) and ridiculed what he took to be my view of him as a hatemonger, characterising it as either dishonest or – in his word – “retarded”. But the bigger point is that, for all their intricacy and ironical pirouetting around the subject of their real beliefs, their digital footprints meant I had the advantage of being informed as to who I was really dealing with. I understand why some may question my decision to bring figures such as Fuentes to the attention of a wider mainstream public. Grappling with these subjects over the past two years hasn’t always been easy. We started researching in 2019 and were about to start filming in March 2020 when Covid hit. Now here we are, two years on in a culture whose increasing virtuality and virality shows no sign of ending. But for all the challenges we faced, and the difficulties of facing up to content that is upsetting at times, I’d also like to think the job is important and worthwhile, and that the difficulties involved are, among other things, a testament to the timeliness and weight of the subjects. They are powerful and troubling programmes. But I’m proud of how they turned out. Just like the new digital landscape the films reflect, their darkness also presented me with new possibilities for reaching people. The old world, with its heirloom newspapers and broadcasters monopolising debate, is gone. Now we face a chorus of maverick voices – some hateful, some benign, all of them disruptive, and no longer confined to trailers in Montana. Louis Theroux’s Forbidden America starts on Sunday 13 February at 9pm on BBC Two and iPlayer.Nacreous clouds, also known as “mother-of-pearl clouds” or “polar stratospheric clouds”, are a rare type of cloud best known for their vivid and sometimes luminous colours. Almost all clouds form in the troposphere, which typically extends 10-15km (6-9 miles) in altitude. However, nacreous clouds form higher up in the atmosphere, between 15 and 25km, in the lower part of the stratosphere, the layer of atmosphere above the troposphere in which we live. The stratosphere is very dry, so very cold conditions are needed to form the ice crystals that are needed to develop nacreous clouds. The clouds require temperatures lower than -78C. Temperatures as low as this are generally only found in the stratosphere during polar winter, and nacreous clouds can form only in lower-than-average stratospheric temperatures. As a result, nacreous clouds are generally visible only at high latitudes and rarely observed in the UK. However, if conditions are favourable, the best time to try to observe nacreous clouds is shortly after sunset or shortly before dawn in a period known as “nautical twilight”. When the sun is just a few degrees below the horizon, it can result in beautiful and colourful clouds as a result of interference of light waves through the Earth’s atmosphere.When Michelle Dornelly is hoisting heavy crates of food into and out of her van, she thinks about her building. When her shoulders ache at night and she spots new bruises on her legs, she thinks about her building. She thinks about her building when she contemplates her living room, which is so full of tins that her children long ago stopped using it to watch TV, instead sitting in their bedrooms. Her building. A place where Dornelly could run the Hackney Community Food Hub, in east London, seven days a week. Where she could store the supplies she keeps in her living room. Where they could run workshops for families and take deliveries from their supermarket partners. But they do not have a building. Instead, Dornelly and her team of 100 volunteers bounce around three different Hackney community centres, four days a week. On Mondays and Thursdays, the hub is in De Beauvoir Town; every other Tuesday it is in Homerton; and on Wednesdays it is at a different location in Homerton. Since it was launched in April 2020 in response to the pandemic, as part of the charity Children With Voices, the hub has supported more than 100,000 people, despite not having a permanent base. The building comes up in conversation almost every day at the hub, usually accompanied by sighs, as the volunteers help Dornelly pack up the van. They all worry about how much she takes on. Dornelly is strong, but she can feel her back starting to go. Her ribs are always bruised. Sometimes her fingers seize up into a claw-like shape. She can’t afford to pay private rent on a building: the organisation is a self‑funded food hub, not a large charity. She emailed a detailed proposal to Hackney council in October, asking for assistance in finding somewhere, but the council has not yet secured her a permanent location. She finds this infuriating, as the council refers people to Dornelly for emergency food. “There are so many empty buildings in Hackney,” Dornelly says. “Why can’t I get a building?” The council even gave Dornelly a civic award. Which was nice. But it is no building. Working at the hub is full-on at the best of times – and particularly hectic around Christmas. Dornelly became a community activist because she had to do something with all of her despair and frustration. It was consuming her. Her sons were getting attacked in the street. (She is a single parent to a daughter and three sons; all of her sons have additional needs.) The boys were continually harassed by the police. It all got so much that she had to get cognitive behavioural therapy. “I was the angry black mother,” she says. “Angry at the world.” She lives in London Fields, Hackney, an area with high rates of poverty and youth violence. According to a 2021 report from the thinktank Policy Exchange, Hackney has one of the highest rates of knife crime in London. Also, 12.1% of residents have no qualifications, compared with a London-wide average of 6.6%, according to the 2018 Office for National Statistics Annual Population Survey. A 2019 study from Loughborough University said 48.1% of children live in poverty, giving Hackney the third-highest level of child poverty of local authorities in the UK. So, in 2010, Dornelly founded the charity Children With Voices, which provides after-school and holiday clubs and mentors local children, with the aim of combating obesity, holiday hunger and gang violence. Initially, Dornelly funded it herself, using money from her benefits. She would walk around local shops, asking if they would donate food for the workshops. “I decided to be a proactive parent, because it was either that, or go mad,” she says. When the pandemic hit in March 2020, Dornelly pivoted to providing food to the “at-risk” families she had been supporting for years. She put out a call on social media for volunteers and more than 250 people responded. Some of them were middle-class professionals who had moved into the area – Hackney has rapidly gentrified in the past decade, causing house prices to rise to an average of £552,000, compared with a London-wide average of £467,000 – and were horrified by the hidden poverty in their community. “They lived around the corner and had no idea what was happening in London Fields and how bad it was,” says Dornelly. Many of the people the hub supports are on low incomes or benefits. “The support offered to someone who’s out of work has been falling as a share of earnings since 1960,” says Karl Handscomb, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation thinktank, which says that the value of the main rate of unemployment benefit that a single person today can expect to receive is only 13% of average earnings. “What this means is that the level of support being offered is only just above what is considered the destitution line, meaning the bare minimum needed to get by,” says Handscomb. “But people may also be struggling to pay back debts or universal credit advances. That can take them below the destitution line and leave people struggling to decide whether to pay their bills or have food.” Dornelly relies on a team of 100 volunteers, including (top, from left) Ziggy Noonan, Ruth George, Tasha Paul and (bottom right) Brian Parker. Research from the Family Resources Survey found that 43% of people on universal credit are food insecure, meaning that they struggle to reliably put food on the table. According to the Food Foundation, 9% of all UK households are food insecure. It is estimated that 2.3 million children live in households that have experienced food insecurity in the past six months. Food bank usage has exploded in the past decade. In 2012-13, the Trussell Trust, the national food bank charity, supplied emergency food parcels to 350,000 people; in 2020, this figure was 2.5 million. Dornelly doesn’t have many good things to say about professional food banks. She is always keen to stress that she runs a food hub, not a food bank, meaning that she doesn’t require people to have referrals when accessing support: anyone can walk up. “We have loads of clients coming to us with horror stories about food banks,” she says. “For some, you have to get a referral, and you can only go there a maximum of three times, and they only give you tins.” Dornelly and her team of volunteers collect surplus food from local supermarkets, almost all of which would otherwise go to waste. “We say smell it, sniff it, taste it,” she says. “No one’s come back to us in two years to say that anyone got sick or died.” Dornelly’s family eat the same food as her clients: she receives universal credit. She could not afford to work and pay for childcare – plus, one of her sons is often in and out of hospital, due to his medical condition. She receives no salary for her community work, only occasional expenses towards her fuel costs. She says: “I’m experiencing the same situation everyone else is experiencing. I am still struggling myself.” She is by no means clear of her own financial worries – she is in arrears on her rent – although she doesn’t like to talk about it, because, relative to the community she serves, she says she is doing OK. And she is worried for them. The government’s furlough scheme ended in September. The temporary universal credit uplift of £20 a week was revoked the month after, which has been devastating for Britain’s poorest households. Handscomb says: “When the chancellor announced the uplift, he said it was to mitigate the temporary costs of the pandemic. But I would argue those costs haven’t gone away. Rising energy and fuel prices are a result of the pandemic. “We know that people on low incomes spend the biggest share of their income on heating and fuel bills.” He says existing government initiatives are inadequate. “The cold weather payment and warm home discount scheme are likely to provide only a few hundred pounds of support.” When the energy price cap goes up by 54% in April, the 22m households on default or variable rate tariffs will see their energy bills rise by £693 a year on average. The new price cap will put more than 25% of households into fuel poverty, according to the Resolution Foundation, meaning that they spend more than 10% of their income on energy bills after paying for housing costs. Research from the Food Foundation found that 55% of households with children fear that not being able to afford their energy or food bills will directly affect their children’s health and wellbeing. A rare moment of peace. “I know people who have five or six children at home,” Dornelly says. “Furlough has finished and their benefits have gone down. Gas prices have gone up. They have to heat the house because they have children. They’re asking me: do I heat the home or fill the children’s bellies and we go cold?” Yet, says Dr Rebecca O’Connell, an expert in the sociology of food and families at University College London (UCL), there are even worse predicaments. “It’s a cliche, isn’t it?” she says (UCL). “Having to choose between heating and eating. But some people aren’t even in that situation. They have neither heating, nor anything to eat.” It is the first week of November. Dornelly is at the De Beauvoir hub on a Monday morning. It is a cramped room, full of crates of food. On two trestle tables, volunteers sort out donations of meat, ready meals and packaged salads. Dornelly is beavering away in a corner of the room, allocating half the donations to be packed up and taken to the Tuesday hub in Homerton. Tuesday. Lizzie, a regular, arrives at the hub. She is in her 80s and walks there every week, even though volunteers would be happy to deliver her food and it takes her an hour each way. Walking helps her arthritis, she insists. Lizzie’s family do not know she comes to the food hub: she is too proud to tell them. Were it not for the hub, Lizzie wouldn’t be able to afford fresh fruit and vegetables. “A common strategy for people on very low incomes is to buy food that is filling, rather than nutritious,” says O’Connell. Public Health England publishes an Eatwell Guide, which outlines the optimal diet to meet basic nutritional standards. According to the Food Foundation, 27% of households would need to spend more than a quarter of their disposable income after housing costs to meet these dietary requirements. Many simply do not have the money to do so. Lizzie also picks up food for one of her neighbours, a man in his 80s who lives across the road from her. She used to split her food parcel with him, until Dornelly got wind of it and instructed her volunteers to make up a second parcel. Dornelly has a soft spot for Lizzie. She always stops to chat to her, no matter how busy she is. But although Dornelly doesn’t let the clients see her exhaustion, everything is starting to get on top of her. It is just relentless. “It’s starting to wear me out,” Dornelly says. One client has travelled all the way from Romford, Essex, with their child: they were rejected by their local food bank because they used it too often. Today, a volunteer is in tears because a client has confided in her that she has been going to bed hungry to feed her daughter. “Parental sacrifice comes up a lot in our research,” says O’Connell. “Most commonly, it is mothers who are heading up lone parent households and have had cuts to their benefits. They go without food so the children have enough. We also see older children sacrifice their food intake to protect their siblings.” Research from the Living Wage Foundation found that 37% of parents working full-time and earning less than what it terms the “real living wage” regularly skip meals for financial reasons. This food will be used to feed those in need, but Dornelly has occasionally been forced to refuse donations due to a lack of storage space. According to the Office for National Statistics, the poorest 10% of households spend just £34.40 a week on food and non-alcoholic drinks. Any unexpected costs – new school uniforms, benefits sanctions – can wipe out a food budget. This is without the increasing cost of food, being driven by Brexit and Covid-related issues in the supply chain. In January, grocery prices were 2.7% higher than a year ago, while wages remain stagnant for many people. “You often hear this idea that low-income families need to be taught to budget and cook. But, usually, low-income families have a really good idea of the cost of things,” says O’Connell. “When you have less to spend on food, you’re much more sensitive to those price rises.” The Homerton hub always serves a hot meal on a Wednesday. One regular arrives and eats seven bowls of soup in a row, to Dornelly’s alarm. “He’s starving,” she says. “What’s going on? What’s happening?” Mid-November. At 7pm on Saturday, Dornelly gets a text message from a mother of three: “Sorry to message you so late, but I’m just wondering if you know of any food hubs that are open.” Dornelly meets her the morning after and hands over a bag of food. A few days later, Dornelly gets a phone call from Claude, one of her volunteers. He regularly picks up food from a Marks &amp; Spencer store in central London and drives it to the De Beauvoir hub. But he has just been given an £80 parking ticket. This is his third ticket. Dornelly decides that she can’t risk any more and informs M&amp;S that she is no longer able to collect their leftover food. If the hub had a building, they could store items for longer, meaning they wouldn’t have to run about all the time, parking where they shouldn’t and racking up fines. All week, Dornelly is so frustrated that she keeps breaking down in tears. All she can think about is her building. The volunteers keep asking her about it. “My life is not my own,” she says. “I eat, breathe and sleep this. I’m out in the daytime working on it all day and I’m doing emails at night until 2am. I’m not getting paid for any of it. It’s too much to handle. I just want them to let us have a building.” Outside the De Beauvoir hub. First week of December. Demand is increasing. Dornelly is working 80-hour weeks, even though her volunteers try to minimise her workload by never emailing her out of hours. A pensioner comes to the Monday morning hub. He tells Dornelly that he is trying to live within his means, but he just can’t manage it. The pensioners really get to her. “The elderly fought in the war,” she says. “They gave their life for our country. And they’re sitting in their chairs with the little they have from their pension, thinking: do I eat or do I heat the house?” Dornelly doesn’t like it. She doesn’t like it when she is pressing packets of food upon grateful but ashamed elderly people. She doesn’t like it when she drives past homeless people on the streets on her way home. She doesn’t like it when she sees expensive blocks of flats popping up all over the borough, developments that will push up rents and drive locals out of the community. She doesn’t like any of it. “There is no need for it,” Dornelly says. She is standing outside the hub, shivering in the cold. “The way the government is treating people.” She almost spits out the words. “One of the solutions to food poverty is to ensure that wages and benefits are adequate to allow families to buy food that meets their needs for health, but also for social participation,” says O’Connell at UCL. “Food is how we live and participate in society. Being excluded from that is very painful.” She has carried out research in other inner-London areas with similar demographics to Hackney. Children would talk to her about the experience of never being able to go to Costa for a hot drink and a slice of cake, like their friends, because that might be half of the family food budget. “When children are surrounded by expensive eateries and coffee shops that some of their peers can go to, but they cannot, that is really excluding,” she says. A woman calls Dornelly on Thursday evening, after the Homerton hub closes. Dornelly takes a bag of food and meets her in Dalston. When the woman arrives, she is faint with hunger. She is in her 60s, a pensioner. She asks if it is OK to give out some leaflets for the food hub to other people who are struggling. Dornelly presses them upon her. Mid-December. There are issues at the Wednesday hub in Homerton. The building is open to the public and people attending events keep helping themselves to food from the food hub’s fridge. Dornelly remonstrates with one of the people who manage the building, but the man is dismissive; he tells her that if someone ate her food, it must have been because they were hungry. The man pulls out some money and tries to thrust it upon her. Dornelly refuses to take the money, telling him that it is about the principle. She wants people to respect what she is doing. She says that the man throws the money into her fridge instead. Dornelly goes outside to get away from him. She is hyperventilating. A teenager walking past asks her if she is OK. “I felt so bad,” she says. “I felt so low.” She is sick of lugging the crates between community centres, getting bruised and wrecking her back, only for people to help themselves to the food she sets aside for people in need. “I’m just getting tired,” she says. “I don’t know how much I can continue to go on. Because it’s getting a lot.” Dornelly and her team will deliver to anyone unable to visit the hub. Christmas week. The man has texted Dornelly to apologise. She plans to avoid that hub this week all the same. She can’t face seeing him. On Monday, one of Dornelly’s volunteers, Ziggy Noonan, sends her a voice note. She has just had a phone call from a distressed mother with a daughter of 12, with no money for food. The headteacher of her daughter’s school gave her the food hub’s number. “Honestly, Michelle, she was sobbing,” says Noonan. “I said: ‘It’s OK, it’s going to be all right, we’re going to support you here.’ I got a bit emotional myself.” At the Tuesday hub, Christmas music plays. Noonan is dressed up as Santa. Dornelly’s 22-year-old daughter, Renisha, is wrapping presents on a trestle table in the open air. Every child arriving at the hub today will receive an age-appropriate gift. For some, it may be the only gift they receive. Dornelly is in a Santa dress, accessorised with her signature slash of purple lipstick. She is in frantic form, darting from volunteer to volunteer and coordinating drop-offs from local businesses and well-wishers. She stops to chat to a stressed-out mother whose benefits are about to be sanctioned because she doesn’t have the laptop she needs to complete her online learning. “It’s horrible,” Dornelly sighs. Barry, one of her regular volunteers, comes in to pick up a parcel for a woman in her 80s. Her husband died recently and she is struggling. “They call me black Jesus,” Barry chuckles to the volunteers as he bags up the food. The council dropped off a carrier bag earlier, containing a few toys and some biscuits. “There’s nothing to it,” says Dornelly, dismissively. The council has previously supplied the hub with bulk food orders, while Dornelly has received some funding and assistance with querying parking tickets. But relations between the council and the food hub are strained at best. To add insult to injury, last night she got another referral from a council worker, directing her towards someone who needed emergency food. In response, the mayor of Hackney, Philip Glanville, told the Guardian: “Children With Voices is part of the Hackney Food Network, a partnership of over 60 community organisations in the borough providing food solidarity to residents through community food hubs, co-ops and food banks, and I am very grateful to all the organisations in our network for the work they continue to do in supporting our residents. “The council seeks to work closely with all of the community partners in our network, and has specifically supported Children With Voices with bulk food orders and in connecting it with the commercial property team for a suitable vacant property. A number of sites have been discussed, but a suitable property has not been found yet.” Boxing Day. Dornelly drops off a food parcel to a homeless man in his 50s, whom the hub has been supporting on and off for two years. The council keeps moving him from hostel to hostel. “He was very grateful we hadn’t forgotten about him,” she says. First week of January. Dornelly gets an exciting email: someone is trying to convert a Clapton church into a community centre and asks if she would like to come and have a look. Dornelly heads down, but the space isn’t big enough for the food hub. She is about to close up the Thursday hub when a 94-year-old woman comes in, accompanied by a friend. The woman had a fall a few weeks ago and, because she lives on a quiet road, she was left out on the street, in freezing weather, for nearly three hours. Her friend, who looks out for her, heard about the food hub and brought her to it. Dornelly tells the woman her volunteers can drop off food to her front door and keep an eye on her. “I’m still coming to terms with it now,” she says. “Imagine that poor lady being left on the ground for three hours. It’s diabolical. People like that should be monitored.” The work is physically demanding, leaving Dornelly with bruises and back pain. Second week of January. After an unseasonably warm end to the year, a cold snap arrives. At the De Beauvoir hub on Monday, clients are complaining about the cost of gas. Inflation has reached 5.4%, its highest level in 30 years. “This is the steepest rise in the cost of living we’ve experienced since the 1990s,” says Handscomb. “If the government wants to protect the incomes of low- to middle-income households, it has to do something.” In response to the growing cost-of-living crisis, and the news that the energy price cap is to rise by more than 50% in April, the government last week announced a one-off energy bill rebate of £200 in October, although this amount will have to be repaid in £40 increments over the next five years. Council taxpayers in bands A to D in England will also receive a £150 rebate that will not have to be repaid. The government will also increase the number of homes eligible for the warm homes discount. Around Dornelly, her team is working conscientiously, bagging up individual portions of fruit and vegetables – someone has donated a gleaming box of pastel-pink rhubarb – and sorting through packets of meat. Salads and sandwiches are stacked on a trestle table; Dornelly presses her team to have some for lunch. She mothers all of them, constantly checking to see that they have had something to eat, calling everyone “darling” or “sweetheart”, regardless of their age. A volunteer makes Dornelly a cup of tea, but she gets distracted and it goes cold. (This is typical of her; Dornelly always has to reheat her hot drinks in the microwave.) Demand is intensifying. The team signs up three new clients for deliveries in one day: one young person who is vulnerable, two pensioners who live alone. But despite this increase in need, Dornelly is having to turn away food. M&amp;S emails to offer another collection, but Dornelly wouldn’t have anywhere to keep it. “Thank you for the opportunity,” she responds, “but until we can get a bigger building I will have to say no thank you this time.” It is painful, having to turn down food. Come Thursday, Dornelly is meant to be having a day off when she checks her Instagram. “I’m in dire need of help to get through until Wednesday for my two-year-old, partner, and me,” a woman writes. Dornelly invites her down to the Thursday hub, but she doesn’t have any money for the bus fare. “I don’t have any money to my name at all,” the woman writes. A volunteer drives to the woman’s house and drops off some food. Later the same day, another client messages Noonan. She forwards it to the hub’s WhatsApp group. “I tested positive for Covid and I have nothing, even my bread is green,” the client writes. “Is there anything you can help with by getting some food bits here? If not, no worries, thanks for the help always.” Another volunteer, another drop-off. Mid-January. More issues at the Homerton hub. Dornelly has been allocated a fridge, but it is overflowing with food – her volunteers have to tape it shut. There is a second fridge, but she says she has been told that she is not allowed to use it. Now, when Dornelly goes in there, she feels there is a horrible atmosphere. She feels as if she is being monitored by the people who manage the building. She says they find excuses to come into the hub and hover, watching her team. Dornelly has been feeling unwell all week. The stress of the situation causes her to break down in tears. “This is making me sick,” she says, choking back sobs. “I’m getting weak and emotional about it. It’s not making me better. It’s just getting really awkward and complicated. I don’t know what they want from me. I’m bringing in food to serve their community. If I bring in less food, less people will get fed.” Late January. Late Monday evening, she is at home when one of her volunteers knocks on her door and unexpectedly unloads a crate of M&amp;S food. Dornelly takes it, even though she doesn’t have anywhere to store it, because the hub isn’t open tomorrow. She drops most of it off at a local homeless hostel and makes up a bag to take to Lizzie. When she gets there, Lizzie is upset. She has been looking after a neighbour, a man in his 80s, who lives alone. He just got out of hospital. Lizzie always brings him food from the hub. When she got there earlier, she found him sitting in the dark. There was no gas or electricity. It was cold. He didn’t have a bed. Lizzie contacted the council and someone went around and switched his gas and electricity back on, but he is still in dire need. Tomorrow, Dornelly will arrange for a food parcel to be dropped off at his house. She will try to find him a bed, a mattress and a warm quilt. She will make sure that her volunteers go around there regularly, to provide him food. She will check on him herself. “I don’t like to see how he’s going to be living in that house on his own when it’s so cold,” says Dornelly. Sometimes it feels as if everything is disintegrating around her. There is so much need, everywhere she looks, in this city. The institutions that should be helping don’t seem to do anything. What would happen, Dornelly wonders, if she just stopped? Who would look after all these people – and all the other people they don’t even know about yet? But there is no time to think. There are crates to be stacked and loaded into the back of the van. Drop-offs to be coordinated. Street corners to wait on, to press food into the hands of hungry, desperate people. Pensioners to visit and donations to sift through. Dornelly’s body may be bruised and exhausted, but she plans to keep on going, for as long as she can. To make a donation to the food hub, visit gofundme.comWhen Boris Johnson wrongly accused Keir Starmer of having failed to prosecute Jimmy Savile, many people reacted with a slight sense of bemusement. However, for those of us who research and monitor the far right, it was instantly recognisable. It wasn’t surprising that these comments were soon followed by the Labour leader being heckled by an angry mob repeating the conspiracy theory. Despite having been around since 2018, the disinformation about Starmer had recirculated in January this year, with major far-right figures such as Stephen Yaxley-Lennon (AKA Tommy Robinson) sharing it with his 155,000 subscribers on the secure messaging service Telegram. The post whipped Lennon’s supporters into conniptions, with one simply posting the image of a noose in response. There has been an increasing creep of far-right rhetoric and conspiracy theories into mainstream politics and it is important to understand how this occurs. It is unlikely that Johnson was scrolling through Tommy Robinson’s Telegram channel and came across the Savile slander. Rather, conspiracy theories and talking points circulate within far-right spaces, and the ones that gain the largest traction are spread incrementally via mainstream hosts such as rightwing commentators, until they are picked up by people who often have no idea where they originate. The best recent example of this has been some of Priti Patel’s rhetoric around cross-Channel migration. In early 2020, the organisation I work for, Hope not Hate, began to closely monitor a small group of far-right activists who spent their days on the beaches and at lookout points around the port of Dover. Their videos, which occasionally showed them chasing and harassing migrants on the beaches and at their accommodation, quickly spread across far-right social media platforms and whipped anti-immigrant activists into a peak of anger. The daily drip of anti-migrant content into far-right online spaces forced the issue of cross-Channel migration up the agenda within the movement. Started by solo far-right activists – so-called “migrant hunters” – the issue was soon adopted by more formal far-right organisations such as Britain First which began to enthusiastically campaign around the issue. Nigel Farage then joined in and began to discuss it on his LBC radio show. This was the moment the specific rhetoric around cross-Channel migration by boats escaped the confines of the far right and entered the mainstream once again, having dropped down the news agenda. Dehumanising talk about “floods” of migrants and alarmism about an “invasion” were once again amplified and subsequently picked up widely by rightwing traditional media outlets. The result was dangerous, with Patel, the home secretary, then echoing the language of the far right when she spoke of “activist lawyers” who she said were frustrating the removal of migrants. Sadly, some far-right conspiracy theories gain such traction that they become widely believed, most notably the “Muslim no- go zones” conspiracy theory. Hope not Hate polling, carried out by YouGov, found that 58% of Tory party members say it is true that there are “no-go zones” in Britain where sharia law dominates and non-Muslims cannot enter. Here we see an unsubstantiated belief, pushed by the far right and subsequently widely believed. Too often people think of the far right as a tumour on the body politic, something to be cut off an otherwise healthy host. In reality, it is better understood as a gangrenous limb that, if left untreated, poisons the rest of the body. Words have power. The cordon sanitaire that kept the far right “beyond the pale” is crumbling and the results are extremely dangerous. Joe Mulhall is director of research at the anti-fascism organisation Hope not Hate. He is the author of numerous books on postwar fascism including Drums in the Distance: Journeys into the Global Far RightThe low point for Matt Gammell, co-founder of Pickering’s Gin, came last spring when he got down to his last pallet of glass bottles. A longstanding order with a European glass maker was cancelled at short notice, and the Edinburgh-based spirit maker feared it might have to stop production. After ringing around many different suppliers, Gammell managed to find enough bottles. He bought up the lot, exhausting most of the company’s dwindling cash reserves in the process. “It’s your brand DNA, it’s in a specific bottle, the label is designed to fit. You can’t just grab another bottle, it’s not how it works,” Gammell said. “It was exceptionally challenging.” Pickering’s Gin imports some of the glass bottles in which it sells some of its gins from China, and has suffered during Covid, paying elevated costs and dealing with unreliable shipments. Shipments from China that used to take on average 36 days have sometimes taken almost double that to arrive. The travails of Pickering’s Gin exemplify the difficulties faced by many smaller companies struggling to keep trading during Covid, buffeted by headwinds including product shortages, supply chain disruption, rising costs and lockdowns. And their struggles have shone a light on one critical link in supply chains that was at times stretched to breaking point: the shipping industry. Despite recent falls in cargo shipping prices, the world’s largest shipping companies have been reporting extraordinary rises in annual profits in recent months. Logistics analysts are forecasting that average shipping costs could reach levels never seen before, while disruption to international shipping will continue. For Pickering’s Gin, the price of bringing a shipping container from China soared from $2,500 – $3,000 (£1,845 – £2,213) prior to Covid, to hit a peak of about $18,000. The price has come down in recent weeks, but Gammell said it is hovering about $10,000, four times higher than the pre-pandemic cost. Businesses have been warning for some time of the impact of the surging cost of moving goods. MakeUK, which represents the manufacturing industry, and the British Chambers of Commerce, wrote last autumn to the UK’s competition watchdog, the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), asking it to look into the world’s biggest shipping companies and whether soaring costs could be justified. The CMA told the groups it would monitor the situation, but informed them it was not able to address the price rises unilaterally, because shipping costs were “the product of multiple factors, often international in nature”. The complaint from the business groups came as shipping industry analysts forecast that the biggest global shipping firms would make extraordinary profits in 2021. Danish firm AP Moller-Maersk, the world’s largest container shipping company, reported on Wednesday that its 2021 pre-tax profits trebled to $24bn compared with a year earlier. Søren Skou, Maersk’s chief executive, said it had enjoyed “record-high growth and profitability” as a result of “exceptional market conditions”. However, the company said it had “spent tremendous efforts in mitigating bottlenecks” by increasing its capacity, and working to improve productivity. Maersk’s rival Hapag-Lloyd, a German container shipping line, also reported a huge profits increase in its 2021 results, with pre-tax profits reaching $12.8bn, almost $10bn more than a year earlier. The average cost of shipping a 40-ft container from Asia to northern Europe has remained elevated since last summer, and currently stands at $14,483, according to Freightos, an online marketplace that tracks freight shipping prices, which is about 10 times higher than 2019 levels. Cargo shipping prices had retreated since late September, when companies rushed to move goods ahead of Black Friday and the Christmas trading period, but have been on the rise again in recent weeks. Smaller businesses believe they are often the hardest hit by higher freight costs and shipping disruption. MakeUK warned prices are becoming unmanageable for some manufacturers. “While the pot may not be at the boiling point it has been over the last year, logistics costs remain a big part of the high cost temperature that businesses face,” said Verity Davidge, director of policy at MakeUK, adding it was difficult to predict when the costs and disruption would be resolved. At the time of its complaint to the CMA, the UK Chamber of Shipping said higher prices were caused by higher demand for goods, and said container lines had been responding with more capacity. Hapag-Lloyd said that its costs – including fuel, chartering vessels and storage – have risen tremendously. The company added that the shipping industry has not been able to cover its capital costs over the past 10 to 15 years. Pickering’s Gin produces several hundred thousand bottles of gin each year, but Gammell said that unlike larger companies, it does not have fixed price agreements in its supply chain. “We are at the bottom of the pecking order,” said Gammell. “We can’t commit to enormous volumes; we don’t have that buying power.” Even as container shipping companies reap the rewards of higher prices, disruption is set to continue. Delays to cargo shipments are likely to run well into 2022, according to logistics and supply chain analysts project44, amid China’s “zero-Covid” strategy, which has led to repeated port closures. The Covid lockdown in the Chinese province of Zhejiang in December sparked restrictions on the number of trucks allowed to enter the port of Ningbo – the third busiest in China – slowing port operations. As a result, the average shipping delay for vessels travelling from China to Europe jumped to six days in December, project44 found, in the face of high demand. Shipping companies are still being forced to cancel sailings, and vessels are stuck at congested ports in Asia, Europe, the Middle East and the US, causing a ripple effect down supply chains, project44 said. Fluctuating costs and delivery schedules can make annual planning and forecasting extremely challenging for businesses. “We are making decisions on what to do this year. Having visibility on the future is really difficult,” said Laura Rudoe, the founder of an organic skincare company, Evolve Beauty. While the company tries to source its raw materials and packaging close to its Hertfordshire base, Rudoe said some parts – such as spray pump components for its bottles – are not produced in the UK or Europe. “We have to place the order now, and the shipping cost will happen in the summer,” Rudoe said, adding that packaging for Evolve’s Christmas range has be ordered months in advance. “It is really uncertain for us, we don’t know what to expect and it is hard to make a decision.”Juan Carlos Marrufo Capozzi, an electrician and former soldier from Valencia, Venezuela, and his wife María Auxiliadora Delgado Tabosky, were at home when agents from the South American country’s military intelligence unit barged in. Soldiers with rifles sifted through their paperwork and hard drives, before taking the couple away, leaving Marrufo’s distraught teenage daughter from a previous marriage behind. That was in March 2019, and they haven’t tasted freedom since. “They are completely innocent, they don’t even have any political affiliation,” said one of their family members on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. “Now they are trapped in an underground jail cell, and we don’t know when they will be free.” The couple were released in October and dropped off on a highway, only to be recaptured on the way home, and accused of terrorism and treason, amid a host of other offenses. News of their arrest appeared in the media, as often happens when people are detained on spurious charges in Venezuela. A report released on Thursday by Amnesty International found that politically motivated arrests were often preceded by stigmatization and smear campaigns launched by pro-government media in Venezuela. “Our research shows that there are instances where there is an extremely high correlation between public stigmatization and politically motivated arbitrary arrests,” said Erika Guevara-Rosas, Americas director at Amnesty International, in a statement. “This correlation is a new indicator of a systematic policy of repression and points to the crime against humanity of persecution, which must be investigated by the international justice system.” For Marrufo and Delgado – who respectively also hold Italian and Spanish citizenship – the media attention was only part of the ordeal. “Their detention makes no sense, and they are in a very bad way psychologically,” said the family member, who has been in contact with the couple. “Juan Carlos is having suicidal thoughts because he’s been falsely accused of the worst crimes that there are. He needs help.” Hundreds of other people remain detained without trial in Venezuela, a country mired in social, political and economic ruin, and run by the authoritarian and isolated government of Nicolás Maduro. Venezuela boasts the world’s largest proven oil reserves, but runaway hyperinflation has rendered the local currency practically worthless, leading to the tacit dollarization of a so-called socialist country. Shortages in food, medicines and fuel are a daily reality. The UN working group on arbitrary detentions said in January that the couple’s detention was part of a “systemic practice of depriving people of their liberty without respect for the rights enshrined by international law”, and that such a practice “could constitute crimes against humanity”. Delgado’s brother, Osman Delgado Tabosky, was accused of financing an assault on the Fort Paramacay military base in August 2017, which was raided by soldiers loyal to the opposition for weapons. The Miami-based businessman was later accused of plotting a brazen assassination attempt on Maduro with explosive-laden drones in 2018 and labelled a terrorist by the government. Lawyers working on the couple’s case say their ordeal is the result of petty retribution from the regime. “It’s clear that there’s no guilt there, it’s just vengeance against María’s brother,” said Alfredo Romero, a lawyer with Foro Penal, a Venezuelan rights watchdog that is working on the couple’s case. “They are political prisoners, and of the 240 political prisoners currently in Venezuela, 91 have been detained for more than three years without even a trial.” In the face of growing discontent, the Maduro government has clamped down on enemies perceived and real, as he continues to resist a challenge to his legitimacy from the US-backed opposition leader Juan Guaidó. Mass protests in 2017 were met with brutal repression, with thousands of demonstrators injured and hundreds arrested. Arbitrary detentions and cases of torture abound, leading the international criminal court to announce an investigation into the government for possible crimes against humanity in November last year. “We can only hope that the investigation follows through to the end,” said Melania Leal Rosales, whose sister, Emirlendris Benítez Rosales, has been jailed since August 2018, also accused, without evidence, of being part of the plot to assassinate Maduro. “My sister is innocent and she can’t take much more.” Benítez, who was three weeks pregnant when arrested, lost her unborn child while jailed. She has also been beaten and tortured behind bars, according to the UN’s working group on arbitrary detention. She now struggles to walk and uses a wheelchair. “The papers said they found drugs in her car and some parts of the drones that were supposedly used to kill Maduro, and that she was trying to flee the country, but that’s all a lie,” her sister said. “They were looking for blame where there is none.” Meanwhile, the Maduro government’s tightening vice on society is causing some to lose faith in the ability of international mechanisms, such as the ICC investigation, to bring about justice. “People have been and gone before and the regime is still in power,” the family member of Marrufo and Delgado said. “It’s hard to keep the faith when reports get written but nothing ever changes.”Several US states, many of them governed by Democrats, began rolling back mask mandates this week, a move public health experts warn could set back progress battling Covid. On Wednesday, Massachusetts, Illinois, New York and Rhode Island joined California, Connecticut, Delaware, New Jersey and Oregon in lifting mask mandates for some public places. The wave of relaxations comes after months of private meetings among state leaders and political focus groups after the November elections, according to reports. “Now, it’s time to give people their lives back,” Sean Maloney, chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, tweeted in support of New York suspending its indoor mask-or-vaccine mandate. Yet the lifting of rules has not been universally applauded and is coming at a time when the vast majority of the country (99%) is still seeing high transmission of the virus, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Public polls show consistent support for mask mandates and other precautions, and experts say the time to relax precautions is not here yet – and acting prematurely could prolong this wave. “In my view, it’s too soon. I feel like we’re anticipating too much,” said Justin Lessler, a professor of epidemiology at the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health. “We’re being too confident that things are going to keep going the direction that they have been going.” The CDC’s director, Rochelle Walensky, also recently said that “now is not the moment” to drop masks in public, although the agency is reportedly weighing changes to its guidance on masks. While Covid cases have dropped from Omicron’s record-shattering peak, the US still has an average of more than 230,000 cases each day – similar to the height of last winter’s wave – and more than 2,300 people are dying from Covid each day, according to the CDC. While hospitalizations are beginning to fall, 80% of hospitals are still under “high or extreme stress”. Treatments, including antivirals and monoclonal antibodies, that keep Covid from progressing to serious illness and death are still in short supply throughout the country. Children under the age of five are not yet eligible for vaccines, while less than a quarter of kids ages five to 11 are fully vaccinated. “We have hundreds of thousands of people dying, we have millions who’ve been hospitalized and we have an unknown number who have long Covid and who will get long Covid as we roll back what little mitigation we have,” said Julia Raifman, assistant professor at Boston University School of Public Health and creator of the Covid-19 US state policy database. “Saying things are normal undercuts us in getting more people vaccinated and in helping people wear masks, because transmission actually remains quite high,” Raifman said. “The best way to help people think things are more normal is to reduce the amount of virus with the mitigation measures that we have.” The failure to set measures on when to drop or reinstate precautions “starts from the top”, including the CDC and the White House, Raifman said. “The whole of the pandemic response is being mismanaged, and only better leadership can help us come together to better address it.” Anthony Fauci, the president’s chief medical adviser, says the US is leaving the “full-blown” phase of the pandemic. In September, he said controlling the pandemic meant having fewer than 10,000 cases a day. “This is not a declaration of victory as much as an acknowledgment that we can responsibly live with this thing,” said the New Jersey governor, Phil Murphy, who is also a key leader of the National Governors Association. Governors have reportedly urged Biden to “move away from the pandemic”. Many states – including Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, Oregon, New Jersey and Rhode Island – are also set to lift school mask mandates. California is considering changes to the rules on school masks, while Illinois and New York will keep theirs for now. The governor of Pennsylvania lifted the school mask rule last month. Teachers’ unions have joined health experts in calling for science-based recommendations in order to keep educators and students safe, and to keep the virus from forcing further school closures caused by worker shortages. “I worry about taking off measures just because cases are trending down,” Lessler said. “At least some of the rate of decrease has to do with what little we’re doing to try to control transmission, and by stopping these measures – both directly and in the message it sends about the risk of the virus – you slow that down-trend.” A new variant could also emerge and change the situation yet again, he said. “We’ve time and time again been surprised by new variants.” Lifting measures too early and slowing the decrease in cases can result in “a lot of unnecessary cases and deaths that you might have avoided simply by waiting a few weeks”, Lessler said. “And if we change what we’re doing substantially, we may not get there, or it may take us longer to get there than anticipated.”More than 400 sq miles (1,000 sq km) of Amazon rainforest has been felled to expand farms growing soya in the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso in a 10-year period, despite an agreement to protect it, according to a new investigation. In 2006, the landmark Amazon soy moratorium was introduced banning the sale of soya grown on land deforested after 2008. From 2004 to 2012, the clearing of trees in the Amazon fell by 84%. But in recent years deforestation has climbed steeply, reaching a 15-year high last year – encouraged, campaigners say, by President Jair Bolsonaro’s anti-conservationist rhetoric and policies. With the moratorium applying only to soya, farmers have been able to sell the crop as deforestation-free, while still clearing land for cattle, maize or other commodities. To map the deforestation, researchers from the Brazilian NGO Instituto Centro de Vida, along with Greenpeace’s Unearthed and the Bureau of Investigative Journalism, looked at satellite data of land where soya was being grown in Mato Grosso state, which stretches across the southern part of the Amazon. The state grows more soya than anywhere else in Brazil. They found that while studies show the moratorium had successfully stopped rainforest being directly converted into soya fields, deforestation had continued. Farmers were clearing land to grow commodities other than soya, with 450 sq miles of rainforest – equivalent in size to Greater Manchester – felled in Mato Grosso between 2009 and 2019, according to the research. Holly Gibbs, professor of geography and environmental studies at the University of Wisconsin-Madison in the US, said: “At the same time that soy farmers comply with the moratorium, they continue to deforest illegally for other purposes.” The revelations undermine claims by supermarkets that soya is no longer linked to the loss of Amazon rainforest. Soya is a key commodity used by dairy, cattle, pig and poultry farmers in Europe and the rest of the world to feed their livestock. The Brazilian Association of Vegetable Oil Industries (Abiove), the main association for soya traders in Brazil, said the moratorium had resulted in significant reductions in deforestation in municipalities that produce soya. “If soy beans are planted in polygons [an area between a specified set of coordinates] with deforestation after 2008, the entire farm is considered noncompliant with the soy moratorium,” Abiove said a statement. Previous analysis has suggested more than 1m tonnes of soya used by UK livestock farmers to produce chicken and other food in 2019 could have been linked to deforestation. Gibbs said pressure from soya buyers in Europe and the US was needed to stop the deforestation. “Legislation in the EU, UK and the US raises the stakes of this ongoing deforestation on soy properties. The soy industry could consider broadening the Amazon soy moratorium to close the door to all deforestation connected to soy.” Prof Raoni Rajão, an agricultural specialist at the Federal University of Minas Gerais, said the current regulations were insufficient. “Only the specific areas where soy is grown are monitored, not the entire property. Farmers have already noticed this loophole.” The Retail Soy Group, which represents leading retailers including Sainsbury’s, Tesco, Lidl and Waitrose, acknowledged there were limitations to the moratorium and said the new allegations “further highlight the need to have strengthened legal protections of these vital ecosystems”. Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comNathan Chen left no doubt, making good on his long-held promise to finally take hold of figure skating’s ultimate prize. The world’s most dominant skater over the past 47 months roared to the Olympic men’s title on Thursday, winning by more than 22 points over a talent-stacked field of established champions and polished newcomers with a mesmerizing long program that included five quadruple jumps and a pair of triples. Chen, skating last after Tuesday’s record-breaking short programme, earned a standing ovation after completing a near-flawless routine to an Elton John medley to finish with an overall score of 332.60, three points off his world record and more than enough to hold off Japanese rivals Yuma Kagiyama, who won silver with a score of 310.05, and Shoma Uno, whose 293.00 was good for a bronze to go with his silver from four years ago. Moving across the ice with athleticism and pace in a Vera Wang-designed galaxy-print costume befitting of his ascent into the cosmos of the sport’s all-time greats, the 22-year-old from southern California by way of Salt Lake City captured the lone title missing from his trophy cabinet and put to rest the demons of his catastrophic Olympic debut back in 2018. Chen drilled his opening quad flip-triple toeloop combination and quad flip before stumbling on his quad salchow but hanging on. “I had a little struggle on the [salchow],” he said. “Throughout the past two weeks but also two minutes before I skated, the triple sal felt really off, so I was a little worried about that. But I was happy to make that happen, and the rest felt great.” After landing a textbook quadruple lutz, Chen’s only substantial miscue came on the fifth quad of the program when he popped the closing triple of a planned quad toeloop-single euler-triple flip combination. But the American immediately roared back with a triple axel followed with a triple lutz-triple toeloop combo to pile on the points and leave the trio of Japanese opponents in hot pursuit as specks in the rear-view mirror. “Of course, there are certainly many things I could have done better, but overall I was very happy I was able to do the program that I put down,” Chen said. “It means the world. I’m just so happy.” Four years ago, Chen arrived in Pyeongchang on a tailwind of hype as the joint-favorite with Japanese superstar Yuzuru Hanyu, but immediately fell out of medal contention after a dismal short programme where he tumbled to the ice on his opening quadruple lutz, failed to complete his required combination and was unable to land a single jump cleanly. He settled for fifth overall while Hanyu became the first men’s skater to defend an Olympic gold in 66 years. Since then, Chen has dominated the circuit like few skaters in recent memory – topping the podium in three straight world championships, three head-to-head meetings with Hanyu and all but one of the 17 competitions he’s entered overall – while expanding his repertoire to push the sport’s outer technical limits. It all came to a head on Thursday, in the Chinese capital where his mother was born, as the typically reserved American motored through his program with unrestrained joy and brio, even flashing a knowing smile halfway through with the long-sought gold already in his grasp. Chen has gently pushed back on the redemption storyline throughout the run-up to Beijing, preferring to frame his journey in terms of personal fulfillment. But the outcome stands regardless of the specific narrative thread: Chen becomes the seventh American man to win Olympic gold in men’s figure skating and the first since Evan Lysacek in 2010. One of the prestige fixtures of any Winter Olympics was billed for months as the climax of figure skating’s most compelling rivalry in a generation despite only nine previous head-to-head meetings in six years. In one corner: Chen, unbeaten in the biggest competitions since the 2018 Olympics. In the other: Hanyu, the two-time defending Olympic gold medallist who inspires a near-religious fervour both in his native Japan and beyond. But the 26-year-old Hanyu, who came into these Beijing Games under a cloud of uncertainty after missing the entire Grand Prix season due to an injury suffered in a November training fall, entered Thursday’s free skate in eighth place after his lowest short programme score in three years and needed something extraordinary to even get within touching distance of the podium. He didn’t wait long to unveil it on Thursday, attempting the quadruple axel on his opening pass, the four-and-a-half-revolution jump that has never been landed in competition. But he under-rotated it and fell to the ice, then fell again moments later on his quad salchow. From there he showed impressive fight through a skate packed with difficulty to finish with an overall score of 283.21 that remained in gold medal position until the final three skaters knocked him down to fourth. “It was a hard time for me on the ice,” said Hanyu, who fell short in his bid to become the first man to win three straight Olympic figure skating titles since 1928. “If I’m not doing the quad axel, I could have done a better combo. But that [quadruple axel] was my pride. It’s going to make me more complete. That’s why I did it.” He added: “I think I am pushing the boundary today. No matter how hard no matter how unimaginable, I want to push a little bit more for those who have expectations in me.” Chen’s closest rival was the 18-year-old Kagiyama, who trailed by 5.85 points after the short and skated gorgeously to Hans Zimmer’s score from Gladiator but couldn’t mount scoreboard pressure after popping his triple toe loop and triple salchow in combination jumps. By winning silver, the teenager will return to Yokohama as the youngest men’s figure skater to finish in the top two in 62 years. Uno also scattered a few too many errors across his performance to a remix of Bolero, failing to make up ground on Chen and Kagiyama thanks to negative grades of execution on his quad salchow and quad flip. A socially distanced crowd of several thousand spectators took in Thursday’s competition in the 54-year-old indoor arena that hosted the famous ping-pong diplomacy matches credited with helping thaw US-China relations in the early 1970s. Chen, a junior at Yale studying data science who took a leave of absence to focus on the Olympics, was non-committal about what’s next, saying only that he planned to return to New Haven in the fall. “At this point I have no idea,” he said when pressed on his future plans. “I do know that I’m going to go back to school in August. As for skating, I’m going to take some time to think.”Josh Frydenberg’s attempts to cripple the proxy advisers who advise superannuation funds on how to vote on issues including executive pay have been described as a “cluster fiasco” after the Senate killed off the regulations introduced by the treasurer. The regulations were introduced in December and had been in force for just three days when the Senate disallowed them on Thursday. The move was another blow for the government on a messy day in parliament where it also shelved its contentious religious discrimination bills. The superannuation regulations required proxy advisers to hand reports to the companies they had researched on the same day as they went to paying clients. They also prohibited clients from owning proxy advisers. Critics said the rules robbed proxy advisers of their intellectual property and would have cost retirement savers money by forcing industry super funds, which have been a frequent target of the Morrison government, to set up their own research teams rather than use the services of the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors, where many are shareholders. The disallowance motion, which was proposed by independent Rex Patrick and Greens senator Nick McKim and was supported by Labor, One Nation and Jacqui Lambie, formed part of a day of defeat for Frydenberg on financial services that also included the prudential regulator rejecting the government’s efforts to ban super funds paying fines from members’ funds. The regulations were introduced after Frydenberg failed to get similar legislation through – a process Labor frontbencher Andrew Leigh told parliament was an “underhanded attempt to undermine the proxy advisers”. Dean Paatsch, a co-founder of proxy adviser business Ownership Matters who has embarrassed the Morrison government through his work on jobkeeper payments, said the entire process had been a “cluster fiasco”. “It was profoundly disappointing that the government indulged crony capitalists and the major business lobbies at the expense of respect for property rights, the freedom to contract and the right to confidential advice”. Patrick said the regulations were “bad law, crafted to please Josh Frydenberg’s big business mates and political donors, and the senate rightly rejected it”. “This has got to be a world record start-up then shut down of a regulatory regime. It lasted three days. It was one big thought bubble from the treasurer that just wasted taxpayers’ money and the parliament’s time.” Leigh told parliament the defeat of the regulations, which included fines of up to $11m and jail terms of up to five years for operating without a licence, was “a victory for shareholder capitalism, for transparency, and for small business in Australia”. He told parliament it was also a “defeat for Arnold Bloch Leibler, the firm that pays the treasurer’s pro bono legal bills and has campaigned against the transparency that proxy advisers bring.” ABL partner Jeremy Leibler declined to comment. Acsi welcomed the senate’s decision to put the regulations to the sword. “The regulations were rushed through without parliamentary scrutiny and with no justification, rationale or harm identified,” a spokesperson said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Australian Institute of Company Directors, whose members regularly face scrutiny by proxy advisers over their pay and performance, said it was disappointed that the senate disallowed the regulation. Frydenberg said that “the Labor party has sided with the Greens again to roll back reforms designed to improve the accountability and transparency of the proxy advice and superannuation sectors”. Meanwhile, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority pushed back against efforts by Liberal backbenchers Andrew Bragg and Jason Falinski to stop industry super funds from paying fines out of members’ funds. A general ban on the practice was introduced in legislation passed in 2020 as part of the Morrison government’s response to the banking royal commission, but last year the courts said it was permissible for industry funds to levy members to build up a war chest to pay fines levied against trustees because their trustees have no reserves of their own. The backbenchers had promised to explore all possible methods of stopping funds using members’ money to pay fines, with Falinski calling the court decisions “a direct attack on parliament’s role in setting law in this nation”. However on Thursday Margaret Cole, an Apra executive board member told the House of Representatives economics committee that it was vital super funds be allowed to build up reserves. “To be clear as to the significance of this issue, without the ability to build and maintain a risk reserve an otherwise well run and well performing trustee could be rendered insolvent by a minor operational administrative error, such as submitting data one day late, resulting in a maximum penalty of $11,100,” she said. She said this “would be likely to be severely detrimental to members as it would probably impose material costs and create significant operational risks” and urged parliamentarians to move on from the issue.The UN’s food agency has warned that the “overexploitation” of fish in west Africa by the growing global fishmeal and fish oil industry is having a “considerably negative impact” on food security, undermining the ability of local communities to feed themselves. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) report said that in Senegal, where three more huge fishmeal factories opened between 2015 and 2019, the industry was “likely increasing the risk” of overexploitation of sardinella and bonga, two pelagic fish on which communities depend. In Uganda, where the factories rely mainly on fish species eaten by poorer communities, the industry competes directly with the “poorest consumers”, it said, making the price of fish unaffordable. The FAO has previously called for catches of sardinella species to be halved as a matter of urgency. Dr Aliou Ba, senior oceans campaigner at Greenpeace Africa, said: “We are heading for disaster and here is the proof. People here are facing rocketing food prices and devastating unemployment. “West African governments have created an economic model that benefits the wealthy in developing economies rather than our own people,” he said. “West African states should get rid of these destructive industries and take their responsibilities in order to preserve food security, jobs and the wellbeing of populations.” Last October, Greenpeace activists intercepted a 96-metre tanker in the Channel carrying fish oil from west Africa to Europe, to highlight the threat the industry poses to food security and to livelihoods in the region. The FAO report focused on nine countries, concluding that while the sector offered some economic opportunities, its “social benefits remain limited”. In Senegal, the gap between supply and demand for fish is forecast to hit 150,000 tonnes a year this decade, sending prices rocketing . The industry creates employment in the factories and mills. However, many of the jobs are insecure, temporary and do not always employ local people – in Mauritania, for example, employees in the industry were mostly from China and Senegal. In Senegal, fish oil and fish meal factories employed 129 permanent and 264 temporary staff in 2018 – compared with 600,000 workers in the artisanal fishing sector. Almost all the fish-derived ingredient (FDI) produced in Congo, the Gambia, Mauritania and Senegal is exported to China and Turkey, where the owners and investors in the west African factories and industrial fishing fleets mainly come from, the report found. Globally, 69% of fishmeal and 75% of fish oil is used to feed farmed fish such as salmon and trout.The Fear Index 9pm, Sky Atlantic This new four-part thriller, based on the Robert Harris novel, rolls groggily out of bed with an opener that could have conveyed the necessary plot information in a quarter of the time. Josh Hartnett, always careful not to overact, is scientist-turned-hedge-fund-genius Dr Alex Hoffman, whose new algorithm might be a step too far. Cue a plot to destroy the world’s financial markets. Jack Seale The Apprentice 9pm, BBC One The undersung joy of this reality TV classic is the moment when Alan Sugar pays an early-morning surprise call to the contestants and catches them scruffing about in their PJs. Expect to delight in the panic of sleep-crusted business goofs, before they try to profit off the rise in staycations. Alexi Duggins Mary Beard’s Forbidden Art 9pm, BBC Two Controversial profiled art tonight ranges from Otto Dix’s work (banned by the Nazis) and Derek Jarman’s paintings to Tyler Shields and Kathy Griffin’s “decapitated Trump” (it earned Griffin an FBI investigation). Beard explores a range of contested culture that has spoken truth to power, or conversely, been weaponised to serve political ends. Ali Catterall Kate Garraway’s Life Stories 9pm, ITV In the second episode of this short but successful run with Kate Garraway in the driver’s seat, she welcomes Bake Off star, cook extraordinaire and the woman we all want round for tea, Nadiya Hussain. Ever the open book, she talks with candour about her mental health. Hollie Richardson Who Killed Billie-Jo? 9pm, Channel 5 The 1997 murder of 13-year-old Billie-Jo Jenkins at her home in Hastings was a high-profile tragedy that became a national sensation when her foster father was charged, convicted, but then ultimately acquitted. This film re-examines the still unsolved case 25 years on, with contributions from police, lawyers and forensic scientists. Graeme Virtue First Dates: Valentines 10pm, Channel 4 What fresh romance will be in the restaurant’s air tonight? Most notably, there’s a genuine hard luck story in the shape of 35-year-old Chris, who recently experienced the triple-whammy of redundancy, divorce and a heart attack. Surely a change of luck is overdue? PH Live sport Premier League Football: Liverpool v Leicester 7pm, BT Sport 1. From Anfield. Wolves also play Arsenal at Molineux at 7.15pm over on BT Sport 2.Top story: People might think pandemic ‘all over’ Good morning, Warren Murray pleased to present your Thursday news briefing. All Covid regulations including isolation after testing positive are due to be abolished in England from Thursday 24 February, Boris Johnson has announced, moving the plan forward by a month. Downing Street confirmed people would be advised to avoid going to work if they tested positive for Covid – though without the current legal obligation and possible fines. Some scientists have warned it risks signalling the pandemic is “all over” while unions said the PM is “going too far, way too soon” and charities warned it could leave clinically vulnerable people exposed. Here is what the changes will mean for work, travel, isolation, testing, financial support and other issues where the pandemic has a bearing. Hannah Devlin, Guardian science correspondent, looks at the risks for controlling the impact of Omicron and other possible variants. As well, Guardian readers have shared their reactions to the decision, from calling it “laughably shortsighted” to “fully justified”. * * * ‘Firm and united’ – Boris Johnson will be in Poland today before travelling to Brussels to meet the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, about the Ukraine crisis. Johnson is considering further deployments to eastern Europe. Keir Starmer will also visit Nato headquarters. Labour said he would send a “firm and united” message to allies – and to the Kremlin – in support of the UK government’s policy on Ukraine. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is in Moscow to meet her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, though her plan to have put the UK’s “toughest sanctions regime against Russia” on the statute book in time for the trip has fallen through. * * * Labour contacts Met over reno-gate – Scotland Yard is considering whether to investigate Boris Johnson over the funding of his Downing Street flat renovation. Solicitors on behalf of Labour have written to the Met commissioner, Dame Cressida Dick, suggesting the force is “duty-bound” to begin a formal investigation because of a “reasonable suspicion” Johnson broke anti-bribery laws. They said the prime minister may have acted improperly by having “linked” a request for funds to cover the refurbishment works – which eventually cost at least £112,000 – with a promise to “promote a project” backed by the benefactor. A No 10 spokesperson called the allegations “categorically untrue” and a clear misrepresentation of the facts. It comes on top of the investigation into Downing Street lockdown parties, in which more than 50 people, possibly including the PM, are to face questions. * * * Harry: as with Covid, get HIV test – Prince Harry has urged people to get tested for HIV, saying he hopes to carry on his mother’s work to tackle the virus. More must be done, said the Duke of Sussex, to make progress towards the UK goal of ending new HIV cases by 2030. Noting there had been a drop in HIV testing during Covid, he said that with people regularly testing for coronavirus, it should be “ingrained in us that that’s what we need to do, to know our status in order to be able to keep other people safe”. The former Welsh rugby captain Gareth Thomas, who lives with HIV, said that taking a test “wouldn’t be scary if you understood what living with HIV in 2022 is”. Of his own diagnosis, he said: “I take a moment at 6am … I take my HIV medication, which is one tablet, and I feel that my day then begins. I’m very active, I go to the gym, I work as hard as I possibly can.” Free HIV test kits to do at home can be ordered from www.startswithme.org.uk * * * Longer lives ‘have to be paid for’ – Wealth taxes will be needed to fund a £76bn a year increase in government spending by the end of the decade, caused by an ageing population and more expensive healthcare, the Resolution Foundation says. The thinktank argues previous ways of raising money – such as reducing defence spending and raising national insurance contributions – will no longer be feasible. Dan Tomlinson, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “We’ll all benefit from people living longer, healthier lives – as well as reducing our carbon footprint – but it will have to be paid for.” * * * Hawking blackboard on show – Stephen Hawking’s blackboard goes on display today as part of a collection of office items acquired by the Science Museum in London. The Cambridge cosmologist, who died in 2018 at the age of 76, treasured a blackboard that became smothered with cartoons, doodles and equations at a conference on superspace and supergravity that he arranged in 1980. What all the graffiti and in-jokes mean is taking some time to unravel, so curators are hoping surviving attendees of that conference will drop by to explain. The temporary display called Stephen Hawking at Work includes his 1966 PhD thesis, his wheelchair, and a host of memorabilia including a jacket from the Simpsons, which he appeared on many times. Today in Focus podcast: When things unravel at No 10 Gavin Barwell was in No 10 when Tory MPs were plotting the downfall of his boss, Theresa May. Now, as Boris Johnson’s premiership hangs in the balance, he tells Nosheen Iqbal what it’s like on the inside when things start falling apart. Lunchtime read: Death of the department store The closure of John Lewis’s store in Sheffield after almost 60 years was a bitter blow. As debate rages over what to do with the huge empty site, the city is becoming a test case for where Britain’s urban centres may be heading. Sport At the Winter Olympics, the Team GB’s women’s curling team have played their first game of the day, which Switzerland won 6-5. The men will play Italy before the women return against Sweden. Matt Weston sat tied for 13th after today’s skeleton, and Huw Nightingale is competing in the snowboardcross. The American snowboarder Chloe Kim has become the first woman to successfully defend the Olympic halfpipe title, while compatriot Nathan Chen has won gold in men’s figure skating. Keep up with all the action at our live blog. Tottenham fluffed their lines against Southampton. They would get nothing in the 3-2 loss, which was what they deserved, in the first serious misstep of Conte’s Premier League tenure. Rather like Aston Villa, swashbuckling their way into a 3-1 lead before dipping away to allow Leeds to battle back for a draw, Steven Gerrard built up Jacob Ramsey’s candidature for an England call-up before asking us all to stay calm and let him develop. Manchester City seem intent on making their title defence a procession. After a 2-0 defeat of Brentford their lead is now 12 points and though Liverpool can cut it back to nine by beating Leicester on Thursday, Pep Guardiola’s team have a relentlessness that may soon propel them far into the distance. Joe Marler has revealed “in-house bitching” is becoming a thing of the past within the England squad after holding his hands up for how he choked during his costly lineout clanger in the defeat by Scotland. Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad are insisting their omission from England’s squad to tour West Indies next month is “not the end of the road” and are focused on forcing their way back into the Test side, according to Andrew Strauss. Simone Biles and Lindsey Vonn are among the US sports stars who have thrown their support behind Mikaela Shiffrin as the American Alpine skiing star’s nightmarish start to the Winter Games continues. Business Shipping costs are soaring for British businesses as the supply chain problems convulsing the world economy continue to bear down on consumers. Pickering’s Gin saw the cost of shipping glass bottles from China rise sixfold last year and although it has come down a bit, it’s still four times more expensive than pre-pandemic. The FTSE100 is looking flat this morning, as is the pound at $1.353 and €1.184 ahead of US inflation data later. The papers The Guardian’s front page today has “Covid rules to be abolished in England in a fortnight”. Also the story of the man who murdered two partners – after Ian Stewart was arrested for killing his fiancee in 2016, it was discovered his first wife had also died at his hands six years earlier. Stewart, 61, has been jailed on a whole-life order. The Times says “PM among 50 set to be questioned by police” about partygate. A picture of the PM with an “open bottle of bubbly” is on the front of the Metro and the headline is “Cops’ quiz question”, referring to a “Downing Street Christmas quiz” that took place. The i’s wording is “Police quiz Johnson and 50 staff for partying in lockdown”. The Mirror has the quiz picture on the front though its main story is about Coleen and Wayne Rooney’s marriage. The Telegraph says “Police to contact fifty No10 partygoers”. As on some other fronts, Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, is shown taking a photo-op in front of colourful scenery in Moscow where she is to meet her Russian counterpart about the Ukraine crisis. It’s a happy day for the Daily Mail: “England tears up Covid rules – and leads the world”. The Express is also gleeful and cries “Freedom!” And the top story in the Financial Times is “US regulator moves to strengthen disclosure rules for private equity funds”; while a big moment in fusion power research is summed up as having produced enough power to “boil 60 kettles”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendIn June last year, the staff of Sheffield’s John Lewis department store began the sad task known as “de-rigging”: clearing shelves and boxing up goods to be sent for sale elsewhere. The city-centre store had been shut since the start of the year, and in March 2021, the John Lewis Partnership had announced that it intended to close the store for good. Some employees said they were too distraught to take part in all the packing-up. But others volunteered to participate, wanting to bid farewell to their colleagues and the building some of them had worked in for decades. There was a lot of reminiscing, as well as an undercurrent of anger: “tears and laughter in equal measure,” one former employee told me. Some people took away souvenirs, including the store directories that had sat next to escalators and staircases. In the store’s restaurant, a signwriter had painted: “We no longer have our store but we will always have the memories.” The surrounding wall was soon full of photographs arranged in the shape of a heart, and expressions of gratitude and sadness: “I walked in these doors on my first day, turned round, had been here 23 years”; “For 19 years I’ve been here looking after you and you looked after me – that’s what families do”. T-shirts were handed out, reading: “John Lewis Sheffield: Sept 1963-June 2021”. By September, after three months of work, the store’s five floors were empty, and a story that had run for 58 years apparently reached its end. When I visited two months later, the building was shuttered and silent. Every ground-floor window was covered by pastel-coloured posters advertising John Lewis’s “virtual events” and click-and-collect services. No one needed any persuasion to talk about the closure. “It’s as bad as a death in the family,” one passerby told me. Then she checked herself. “Well, that’s a bit over the top maybe. But it really upsets me. It’s just always been there.” Other people mentioned the excellent customer service, fondly loved rituals like Christmas shopping and the January sales, and the modest pleasures of visiting an old-fashioned retailer, where “you could see what stuff was, and find out what was what”. The closure in Sheffield is part of a story playing out across the world: the extinction of the archetypal department store, and a wider crisis for town and city centres. British Home Stores closed all 167 of its UK branches in 2016; two years later, House of Fraser, founded in 1849, went into administration. After Covid triggered the temporary closure of most shops and a mass move to online shopping, one of the biggest casualties was Debenhams, the middle-market high-street staple, which announced that it would close its remaining 118 stores, including in Sheffield, in January 2021. John Lewis announced its first closures – eight in total, including department stores and a few smaller outlets – in July 2020, and another eight six months later, including Sheffield. In total, since 2016, according to a study published last summer, 83% of the UK’s big department stores have closed. Because of their size, purpose-built department stores are hard to put to new uses. A few have been successfully reinvented – as arts centres, indoor trampoline parks and education settings. But the rapid spread of vacant stores raises a huge question: if urban centres are not going to be dominated by shopping, what do we want them to be? In most cases, the fate of empty stores is decided by the commercial property market. But in Sheffield, thanks to a deal struck just before John Lewis closed, the building, which occupies one side of a prized central square, is now owned by the city council, and is at the heart of plans for the city’s next wave of regeneration. Sheffield’s two newspapers are alive with debate about what should be done with it. A loose community of activists, architects and locals passionate about their city have pitched in. “In Sheffield, we’re not waiting for a remote landlord to come forward with their ideas. We can shape this,” one of the leading figures in the debate, political economist Tom Hunt, told a meeting of councillors and citizens recently. The point, he insisted, was “to be bold, and show the world what a new city centre can be”. The old John Lewis building might be transformed, or demolished; it could be sold, or kept for public use. As the debate intensifies, Sheffield is becoming a test case for where our urban centres could be heading, and who gets to decide. * * * As you walk from Sheffield’s railway station into the city centre, the first thing that hits you are the hoardings, crammed with boosterish slogans evoking a vibrant future: “There’s a new momentum to our city”; “Remixing the heart of Sheffield”. Behind them lies a series of construction projects, split between the expansion of Hallam University and a regeneration drive called Heart of the City, which promises “spaces to entertain, relax, experience, play, work, gather, shop and drink” (the lowly placing of shopping is no accident). Faced with hard times, the city has seemingly decided that the best course of action is simply to press on with building work. This is a very Sheffield thing to do. The city’s modern history is bound up with the ruptures it went through 40 or so years ago, when its steel and coal jobs disappeared. Thanks to its Labour city council and the Sheffield HQ of the National Union of Mineworkers, the city and its surrounding area were rebranded as The People’s Republic of South Yorkshire, where the red flag flew from the town hall on May Day, and equality and solidarity were deeply ingrained. There was another aspect of Sheffield’s postwar experience: a futuristic sensibility embodied by many of its buildings, and the music that began to emerge from the city in the late 1970s, made by such groups as Cabaret Voltaire, Heaven 17 and the Human League. The 1980s was a time of strife and resistance, but it also saw the city associated with glamour and global success – not least in the winter of 1981-82, when the Human League’s timeless single Don’t You Want Me reached No 1 in Britain and the US. The John Lewis building seemed to embody all these aspects of Sheffield and its culture. After its conversion into a mutualised company in the 1920s, John Lewis’s employees became “partners”, entitled to share its profits. Their workplace combined the monolithic vastness of the industrial age with the forward-looking aesthetics of its cutting-edge architecture. The Sheffield store looked like the acme of what the department store was meant to be: simultaneously aspirational and democratic; a place anyone could come into and share the dream of plenty and endless choice. Such was a vision rooted in the 19th and 20th centuries – of huge, palatial stores, stocked with everything anyone would want. Department stores sat at the heart of people’s shared experience, and popular visions of the future. They were also a cultural commonplace. In The Floorwalker (1916), Charlie Chaplin was let loose among munificent displays of goods and that thrilling invention of the previous century, the escalator. The Marx Brothers’ The Big Store (1941) featured a musical number titled Sing While You Sell, and a chase sequence involving chandeliers and mail chutes. Between 1972 until 1985, the British sitcom Are You Being Served? presented the fictional Grace Brothers as a microcosm of a befuddled country, riddled with sexual repression and class distinctions, and hilariously short of business sense. Before John Lewis bought it, the Sheffield store was called Cole Brothers, a family business launched in 1847 by two drapers who styled themselves as “Silk Mercers, Shawl, Mantle and Carpet Warehousemen, Bonnet Makers and Sewing Machine Agents”. Cole Brothers became a byword for Sheffield, partly because of its location, at the intersection of two city-centre thoroughfares, Fargate and Church Street. Coles Corner, as the site was known locally, was a place where friends and lovers would meet. Long since demolished but marked by a plaque, it is now the site of premises recently vacated by Pret a Manger. But if you want a sense of the memories that once swirled around this small patch of the city, there is a beautiful, self-consciously nostalgic song called Coles Corner, by the Sheffield singer-songwriter Richard Hawley. The cover of his album of the same name featured a painting of Hawley at the old Cole Brothers entrance, awaiting his date with a bunch of flowers. The music was full of swelling strings, and a sense of the glimmer of cities at night-time, the enticing pleasures they offer, and the loneliness of someone yearning for a way into it all: Cold city lights glowing, The traffic of life is flowing, Out over the rivers and on into dark I’m going downtown where there’s music, I’m going where voices fill the air, Maybe there’s someone waiting for me With a smile and a flower in her hair Cole Brothers was bought by the Selfridges Provincial Stores Group in 1927, which in turn was acquired by John Lewis in 1940. But despite these changes of ownership, Cole Brothers retained its name, and in 1963 the store relocated to its gleaming new premises. The new store occupied one side of a city-centre square, Barker’s Pool, facing the City Hall – a venue that has hosted everyone from Bob Dylan to Winston Churchill – and Sheffield’s cenotaph. It was designed by architects Yorke Rosenberg Mardall, whose founders came from the UK, Slovakia and Finland respectively. The building’s white exterior tiles came from Belgium, and its entrances were lined with Spanish granite. Because it was conceived at a time when the automobile was the embodiment of aspiration, it included a multistorey car park with 400 spaces. Inside were 60 departments, spread over five floors. “Gay colour is the keynote throughout”, declared the John Lewis Gazette in September 1963. An eight-page feature included a picture of the huge crowd that had swarmed through the doors on opening day, and detailed descriptions of its interior. “In the restaurant,” it noted, “the carpet can be removed in sections for dancing.” For the next 40 years, in homage to local tradition, the Cole Brothers name remained on the building. It wasn’t until 2002 that the store was rebranded as John Lewis. In the meantime, the story of the city centre and its businesses had entered a new and difficult phase. * * * In 1990, Sheffield’s commercial life was radically reshaped by the opening of a vast out-of-town shopping centre. Meadowhall, on the site of a former steelworks, is so big it has its own railway station. When it opened, Meadowhall offered 180 shops and 12,000 free parking spaces. Within five years, it was attracting many millions of visits per year. Meadowhall inevitably had serious effects on Sheffield’s city centre. One recent architectural history of Sheffield said Meadowhall had “sucked the lifeblood” from the streets at the city’s heart. The city centre needed to lure people back. In March 1999, the idea that its future might be built on something other than shopping was tested by the opening of the National Centre for Popular Music. Comprising four huge steel “drums”, the £15m Lottery-funded building failed to translate Sheffield’s musical heritage into a visitor experience, and the public found it underwhelming. It closed in June 2000. Ambitious plans for a city-centre retail development to rival Meadowhall were scuppered by the crash of 2008. Eventually, the council launched a new regeneration project for a chunk of the city centre including Barker’s Pool, with less emphasis on shopping and a new focus on housing, offices, eating and drinking, and more. But John Lewis remained central to its vision. There was talk of moving the store, but what mattered was keeping it in Sheffield, as a magnet for “footfall”, and a symbol of the city centre’s economic vitality. When accounts of Boris and Carrie Johnson’s refurbishment of their Downing Street flat quoted a visitor scoffing at the previous incumbents’ “John Lewis nightmare”, it located the stores within the subtle gradations and snobberies of the English class system. John Lewis may be sneered at by the more moneyed, but it is still seen by many as solid and accessible, and reassuringly upmarket. These were the qualities the council wanted Sheffield to hang on to. * * * As Sheffield council was working on its regeneration plans through the 2010s, the man who found himself at the centre of negotiations was Nalin Seneviratne. Born in London and raised in Liverpool, he came to Sheffield 13 years ago, and when we first met in November last year, he was Sheffield city council’s head of city-centre development. Well versed in urban planning’s technocratic vernacular, Seneviratne is also full of passionate, optimistic ideas about cities and their future. “Everything flows into the city centre,” he told me. “All our main roads flow into the city, all the rivers flow into the city and out again, the main railway station is here. Our two universities are in the city centre. So we’ve got great things to build on.” Seneviratne began dealing with John Lewis in 2013. At that time, the company was offered potential new premises nearby. “They said, ‘We don’t really like that location – it’s too far from Marks &amp; Spencer.’ We spent ages discussing where they would like to be,” he recalled. “They didn’t like any of the plans we produced. We said: ‘Well, what do you like?’” One council insider told me John Lewis proposed relocating within the city centre, in a plan that involved digging a tunnel for a new underground car park and demolishing Victorian buildings. “It was bonkers,” they said. “Completely undeliverable.” At one stage, I was told, John Lewis raised the prospect of moving to Meadowhall. In 2017, John Lewis told the council the store was going to stay put. But three years later, the pandemic triggered a crisis for the company. “In 2020, they said: ‘Unless you can help us with refurbishment costs, we’re going,’” said Seneviratne. Desperate to avoid such a major closure in the centre, the council bought John Lewis out of its lease for £3.4m and agreed a new rent based on turnover. The cost to the company of being in the building would increase, but in return, the council agreed to contribute “a considerable amount”, according to Seneviratne, to the cost of the store’s first refurbishment since 1980. Suddenly, all seemed well: John Lewis would stay. The decision to buy the lease, Seneviratne told me, was based on an acknowledgment that nothing in the city centre was certain. “Understanding that retail was changing, you couldn’t just sit there thinking, ‘Oh, department stores are the future,’” he said. “It was important to get control of the building.” The money would be used to fix up the basics: electrics, lifts and escalators. “So if they [John Lewis] did disappear, the council had a building that was fit for purpose.” Eight months later, in March 2021, John Lewis made another unexpected announcement. Lockdown had kept the Sheffield store shut since January. The company said that, notwithstanding the obligatory consultation with staff, it now planned to permanently close it. “I almost fell off my chair,” said Seneviratne. “The speed and the timing of the decision, not even a year since doing the new deal – that was a shock. John Lewis had said: ‘We’re going unless you help us.’ So we helped them, and they still decided to go.” Sheffield’s city council leader is a former miner named Terry Fox. He had been deputy leader when the bad news came in from John Lewis. “It was them that broke up this relationship with the city,” he told me. “Not us.” He went on: “I was absolutely gutted. And furious. On the back of Debenhams closing, it was knee in the stomach time, you know what I mean?” When I contacted John Lewis and presented the city council’s side of the story, a spokesperson declined to give a detailed response. The company said it “had continued discussions for a number of years with the council to explore ways to help us remain in the city” but “it would not be appropriate to discuss these conversations further”. “After serving Sheffield for 80 years it was an incredibly difficult decision to leave,” said John Lewis in a prepared statement. “Although financially challenged before the pandemic, we agreed a new lease for the store in the belief that through investment in the shop we could play a key role in the city’s regeneration. However, the effects of the pandemic – including three national lockdowns and the acceleration of the switch to online shopping – meant the impact on the store’s viability was too great.” After news of the closure got out, an online petition demanding John Lewis reverse its decision quickly amassed 20,000 signatures. People posted messages and photos on the building’s windows. “I remember when my mum passed away, I came here to buy candles for her funeral,” one note read. “I was so upset and a lovely member of staff found a chair for me, sat me down and went off to find my candles. She was so helpful and patient, she couldn’t do enough for me. Yes, I can order online but I will never get that level of service so doubt I will shop with you again.” Lana Barker worked at the store for 20 years, starting in the lingerie department, followed by seven years in children’s clothing. Last November, using some of her redundancy money, she opened a new lingerie shop called The Woman In Me, just outside the city centre. We had a long conversation, in between her serving customers. One was being treated for breast cancer. In the calm, sympathetic way Barker attended to her, you could see the years she had spent on the John Lewis shopfloor, and the kind of customer service people had so fondly talked about. “I loved working there,” Barker said. After the closure announcement came the staff consultations, and the packing up. “Some people wanted to do it because of their attachment to the building, and I was one of them,” Barker told me. “I went through being frustrated, angry, upset, disappointed – the whole thing. And I was worried: what the hell was I going to do? I like to be organised. So for someone to suddenly say, ‘At the end of August, I can’t tell you what the rest of your life looks like’ – that’s panicking to someone like me. I’m only 43. It hit hard.” * * * Until January this year, Kate Josephs, the city council’s new chief executive, was set to be a key player in the next phase of this story. Raised in Doncaster, 23 miles away, she built a career as a high-ranking civil servant. For a time she worked in Barack Obama’s White House. From July to December 2020, she led the government’s Covid-19 taskforce, which drafted rules and restrictions, as well as overseeing other areas of policy on the pandemic. Last month, she got caught up in the “partygate” scandal over allegations of a leaving party in the Cabinet Office. The gathering is being investigated by the Metropolitan police, and Josephs is also the subject of an investigation by the city council. The details remain unclear, but at the time of writing, she was on paid leave. Around a month before all this broke, I met her in an upmarket cafe facing the old John Lewis building. She seemed full of enthusiasm for her new job, and the work she was involved in on the John Lewis building. “It was definitely a bold move by the council to appoint me,” she said. “I’m not a local government lifer, but I’ve been very supported. And I’m loving it.” The announcement of the store’s closure, she explained, happened very soon after she arrived in Sheffield, whereupon it was her turn to make a bold move: asking people in the city to come up with radical ideas about what to do with the building. “I felt, I think in common with many people in Sheffield, a sense of personal disappointment,” she told me. “Growing up in the area, Cole Brothers was a place I used to go to. But I guess I pulled my socks up pretty quickly and thought, ‘Well, how are we going to think about this differently?’” She said she was excited by the ideas that had come in. “We’ve had people suggesting climbing walls, or turning the inside into a kind of independent retail space, or knocking it down and creating a great public square.” The council’s appeal to the public highlights the unique element of this story. After a department store closes, most local authorities have to wait for a private interest to buy and develop the space. Many stay empty for months, even years. In Sheffield, the future of the former Debenhams, just five minutes’ walk from Barker’s Pool, will be decided this way. But the council’s control of the John Lewis building opens up an array of possibilities. The conversation about what should happen has been loud and passionate. Sheffield has two vibrant news outlets, the Star and the Telegraph, which have constantly covered the story. Of late, the latter has been energetically publicising one proposal in particular, for a football centre, building on the fact that the first rules of the game were drawn up in the city. Dreamed up by a consortium that includes a so-far unnamed “global sports brand” and fronted by a Sheffield-based company called Urbana Town Planning, the centre would host “have-a-go football experiences with celebrities, community pitches on the roof, and bars and restaurants on the ground floor opening on to Barker’s Pool”. Initial sketches also show what the people involved say will be a “residential tower”. Two leading voices in the debate about the building’s future are both graduates of Sheffield University: Tom Hunt, deputy director of the university’s Political Economy Research Institute, and Adam Park, a local architect. In April 2021, they were given space in the Telegraph to call on the city council to convene “a big public conversation about how to reuse and reimagine the building”. To spark people’s ideas, they had come up with their own proposal: the John Lewis building reinvented as “Sheffield’s Covent Garden”. A design by Park showed cafes and bars on the ground floor, with “culture” and “retail” space above, and vertical extensions containing apartments. When we met, they talked enthusiastically about Eindhoven in the Netherlands, where there are plans to turn an old shopping centre into a “green cultural quarter” with a new music venue and climbable “glass mountain”, and La Samaritaine, a revived department store in the middle of Paris, swathed in a new undulating glass shell, and now home to shops, offices, a nursery and 96 social housing units. “It’s still a department store downstairs, but they added three new storeys on top,” said Hunt. A similar extension could be possible here, he thinks. “Not a massive tower, maybe three storeys. You could do some really interesting stuff to create space for family housing, or for older people.” What did they make of the football centre? “It looks like something out of the 1990s,” said Park. Hunt said: “The problem I’ve got is that it’s a big, single-purpose building – which, if it fails, is suddenly a major issue. You’re putting all your eggs in one basket, like the pop music museum, but on an even bigger scale.” Both were wary of the kind of residential development – often poky student flats – that they said dominates the city centre. They also rejected the idea of pulling the building down and starting again. “We shouldn’t be demolishing buildings any more,” said Park. “Especially buildings that have a civic presence and a history like this one. But just from a sustainability point of view, the construction industry needs to think beyond demolition as a first option. There’s massive embodied energy in that building. Yes, it’s probably got asbestos in it. But you can take a building back to its concrete frame and build it back again, in quite a radical way.” * * * Just before Christmas, the John Lewis logos on the building’s exterior were dismantled. The entrance to the car park once again said “Cole Brothers”. At night, some lights stayed on. “There are people in there,” said Seneviratne, “but we don’t know what they’re doing.” Along with Hunt and Park, the Sheffield Telegraph had organised a discussion about the building’s future at the City Hall. The muted, hesitant mood seemed to be partly down to the newly arrived Omicron variant, but also a sense of uncertainty about how any final decisions about the building would be made. The most energised contributions came from a couple of the paper’s readers. One insisted she wanted another John Lewis, or something like it: a place “where you can go in look around and choose things – gifts, perfume, makeup”. Another was enthused by the idea of something “experiential”, perhaps a “social issues museum” centred on the struggles of women, people of colour and the LGBT community, or a sport museum. Others suggested a library, a creche and a reimagined shopping arcade. When Hunt spoke, he managed to frame his suggestions in big questions about democracy, participation and the future of the lived environment. “We can show the world what is possible,” he said. The next day, the city council announced that John Lewis had agreed to pay £5m “to surrender their current lease and obligations”. The money would be put “towards the future redevelopment of the site”. Three consultancy firms had been employed to flesh out the council’s options. All highlighted the challenges in redeveloping the building, not least its extensive asbestos. One paper, by the urban planning agency Fourth Street, recommended knocking it down, opening up the surrounding space to the public, and putting up a new, smaller structure, with potential uses including a “library, archive and storytelling centre”, art gallery, music venue or sports facility, with an opportunity to “stack more private or commercial uses” on top. The empty store is soon to be covered by a vast “wrap”, at a cost of £100,000, and a five-week public consultation by the city council about the future of the city centre is nearing its end. It sets out three broad options for the John Lewis building. Two involve demolition, then either the creation of a huge new public space, or Fourth Street’s mixed scheme. The third choice is to reuse the existing structure. Later this year, the plans will become clear, but one person will not be involved: Nalin Seneviratne, who is about to step down as director of city centre development after 13 tumultuous years. “This is the longest I’ve ever worked for an organisation,” he told me. “Someone else needs to do the next chapter.” As we walked around the city on my first visit, Seneviratne had talked about resisting private interests buying up public space, and the importance to cities of people’s memories. Street layouts ought to be left alone, he said, and the history of buildings has to be considered. The key to the future of the John Lewis building, he told me, lay in reflecting people’s longstanding relationship with what went on inside. “Staff and customers knew each other on first-name terms,” he said. “It was where people went for their first school uniform, their first pair of school shoes.” “The trick will be to generate the same sort of love for whatever happens there next,” he told me. “Is it a space people can go and enjoy? Is it free to use? You could go into John Lewis and wander around, you needn’t have bought anything. People would meet in the restaurant, or go and have a coffee. All those things, to do with meeting people – how can that be recreated?” What he said highlighted something that is often overlooked: the fact that what many dismiss as mere consumerism can be woven through with much deeper human needs and capacities, to do with interaction, self-expression and the way we mark the stages of our lives. Like so many other places, as big stores lose their dominance, Sheffield is trying to find new outlets for those aspects of life. Around the corner from the old site of Cole Brothers, the council has bought a former Clinton Cards, and has begun turning it into a facility it calls Event Central, which will also enable outdoor gatherings on the street. Last year, it launched Summer in the Outdoor City, a series of events reckoned to have drawn more than 1.5 million people into the city centre. It may be some token of the thinking at work that, more than any other place I have recently visited, the centre of Sheffield has a striking number of places to simply sit down and do as you please. The music, lights and voices Richard Hawley sang about may eventually be just as relevant to what happens here as old-fashioned commerce. “People will always want to come together,” Seneviratne insisted. “Mixing and meeting in places like this, being able to exchange ideas – that’s who we are as humans, isn’t it?” • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.“I think,” said my friend Dai, “there should be a tie amnesty.” In the course of a clearout, he was dismayed to find he had 30 ties in his collection, a count not much greater than the number of years since he’d last had cause to wear one. I remember my dad telling me, donkey’s years ago, that you knew were getting old when you bought yourself a black tie for funerals, instead of borrowing one from your old man. I passed that milestone a while ago. You know you’re really cracking on when you have 60 ties, but the black one is the only one you have any use for. I thought I only had half as many, but I found more in a bag at the back of the wardrobe, waiting to be taken somewhere. But where? Who would want them? Charity shops must be sick of the sight of them. What is going to become of them all? The average length of a tie is, I read, 58 inches or just short of 1.5 metres. My collection alone, laid end to end, would stretch for 90 metres. Let’s say there are 30 million males in the UK – including all the tie-wearing schoolboys – and they have, on average, five ties each: that comes to well over 200,000km of ties. A use must be found for them. One reason that I have so many is that, being of Croatian heritage, I have always felt the need to boast about my country’s gift to the world. Natty neckties are first thought to have been sported by Croatian mercenaries serving for the French during the thirty years’ war of the 17th century. I love the idea of big Croatian brutes larging it around Paris in their small, traditional, knotted neckerchiefs, arousing the interest of Parisian fashionistas. “Très chic!” they must have cried. The Croats call themselves Hrváti; the French call them Croates. Conflate the two and you get cravat. C’est bon! Soon, Louis XIV was wearing one, and that was that. So I can’t possibly ditch my many Croatian ties. That would surely be treasonable and I’ve not long had my passport. As for the others in my collection, my television presenting career came at the end of the era in which tie-wearing was compulsory. I started out on a programme called Working Lunch on BBC Two in 1994, where the editor took the radical decision that we shouldn’t wear jackets. Traditionalists in the main newsroom were sniffy. Some took to calling the programme Naked Lunch rather than Working Lunch. Miseries. Heaven forfend if we’d also chosen to dispense with ties. Tellingly, this was never considered; there’s radical and then there’s radical. I have many ties from this era, none of which could be worn today without causing consternation. They are loud, they’re wide, they’re garish. They will never come back into fashion, if they ever were. Very few of the programmes I went on to present required me to wear a tie. The exception, oddly, was football. For some reason, televised football clung on to the tie longer than any part of the business, other than straight news bulletins. For a long while, absurdly, the only time I ever wore a tie was at football matches. And funerals, obviously. Now, it’s just the latter. Powerful forces seem determined to stop the rot. In January 2020, GQ declared: “It’s official – everyone is wearing ties again.” But then the pandemic happened and just about the only tie-wearers left in the land were Chris Whitty, Patrick Vallance and whichever government bod stood at the lectern between them. GQ hasn’t given up yet, though. Just last September, it asserted: “Men’s ties are bold, brash, and better than ever.” Like Croatian mercenaries, the tie-lovers fight on. • Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistThe number of in-person visits to public libraries plummeted by 159m last year, as the pandemic forced branches to close around the country. Annual figures from the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (Cipfa) show physical library visits fell from 214.6m to 59.7m in the year to March 2021, a drop of 72%, as Covid-19 restrictions shut branches for much of the 12-month period. The closures also led to a major decline in the number of books borrowed by readers, with 72.9m books issued by libraries last year, down 56% from 165.9m in 2020. Unsurprisingly, the number of web visits grew – up by 18% to 154.7m over the period – as visitors unable to borrow physical books from their local branch turned to ebook borrowing instead. “Clearly, physical visits have dropped due to Covid-19 restrictions and the closure of library facilities. But, while this decline may be steep, the increase in digital visits shows that communities still want to use library services. Libraries continue to be of significant cultural value for our communities,” said Cipfa chief executive Rob Whiteman. “Only time will tell if this recent shift to digital will prove to be a long-term model for our use of libraries.” The Cipfa figures also reveal that the total income of libraries decreased by nearly £20m to £56.6m over the last financial year, a reduction of 25%. Librarian numbers remained relatively static, falling by 85 over the period, but volunteers – who have been instrumental in keeping some library services running in the face of government cuts – declined “sharply”, said Cipfa, down by almost 50% on the previous year to 25,709. ‘‘Given how stretched public services were during the pandemic, it’s not surprising to see such a sharp decline in libraries’ income, visitors and volunteer staff,” said Whiteman. “It’s worth noting that the reduced levels of income we’ve seen have occurred despite increases in specific grant funding. Without this additional grant funding, we would have expected to see lines of income even lower. The fiscal reality that libraries are facing is bleak.” At Cilip, the UK’s library and information association, chief executive Nick Poole called the latest figures “sobering”, pointing to new research by the University of Strathclyde showing that digital services cannot replace the benefits of physical library services. “Libraries have done life-changing work for their communities throughout the pandemic,” said Poole. “Local people continue to need and want quality local library services, and this continues to be a statutory duty for councils. The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport has made it clear that councils cannot use Covid disruption as a pretext for cuts to services, and that volunteers should not be used to replace paid professional staff.” Poole said Cilip would be working with the Local Government Association and others “to encourage them to return investment to pre-pandemic levels”. “But most importantly of all, instead of putting services at risk through successive cuts, as a society we ought to be far more ambitious on behalf of future generations,” he said. “As we look to recover from the pandemic and embrace new ways of working, we ought to be building more libraries as a vital part of levelling up.” Isobel Hunter, chief executive of the charity Libraries Connected noted that “libraries were not allowed by the government to fully reopen until April 2021, which is after this survey period, but since then the picture has changed dramatically.” The charity’s own surveys suggest that borrowing of physical books had returned to around 84% of pre-Covid levels by December 2021, although digital and audio borrowing have remained high, which “brings its own challenges to library budgets.” Hunter added “The pandemic also clearly demonstrated that the diverse needs of local people cannot be met by digital services alone. The current squeeze on local authority and household incomes mean that libraries will need even more support to continue to innovate for their communities online and in person.” One unexpected spark of good news in the Cipfa figures was the report that the number of library branches in the UK increased to 3,842 in 2021. The growth, from 3,662 branches recorded in the year to March 2020, follows years of decline, but Cipfa admitted it was based on “provisional” data, from authorities that have submitted their returns, and that “some figures may change once final data is released”. There has been a “slightly lower response rate” to the survey this year compared with previous years, because of the continued impact of the pandemic, said the organisation, but it is confident the figures “give an accurate snapshot of the library landscape in the UK at present”.There is “compelling evidence” that British women and children currently detained in camps in north-east Syria were trafficked to the country against their will, according to a new parliamentary report. After a six-month inquiry by the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on trafficked Britons in Syria, the report published on Thursday highlights how systemic failures by UK public bodies enabled Islamic State (IS) trafficking of vulnerable women and children as young as 12. About 20 British families remain detained in north-east Syria in camps controlled mainly by Kurdish-dominated groups. Investigations by the NGO Reprieve suggest that most of the British women detained are victims of trafficking based on evidence that they were subjected to sexual and other forms of exploitation and were either transported to Syria as children, coerced into travelling to Syria, or kept and moved within Syria against their will. “The government’s approach to British nationals detained in Syria is morally reprehensible, legally dubious and utterly negligent from a security perspective,” said Conservative MP Andrew Mitchell, co-chair of the APPG. “It is also unsustainable, as recent IS attacks on Kurdish detention facilities have shown. The US has told us to bring British families home and our European allies have shown us how. Any ministers still clinging to the current failed policy would do well to read this report, which sets out the potentially catastrophic consequences of continued inaction.” During its inquiry, the APPG received evidence from a range of experts, including legal and anti-trafficking experts, current and former government officials from the UK and its allies, former police and prosecutors, and global security advisers. The APPG heard evidence of a “siloed approach to counter-terrorism and anti-trafficking by UK police and other authorities”. As a result, “key decision-makers failed to recognise signs of grooming and that vulnerable young girls were at risk of being lured out of the country by traffickers”. The report highlighted multiple missed opportunities to protect vulnerable women and children from being groomed by IS. In one instance, UK authorities initially prevented a child from leaving the country with an adult who was not a relative. Despite being sufficiently concerned to prevent their travel, the authorities did not inform the family of the incident. The child left the UK by a different route the day after. The family of the child believe that had the authorities contacted them at the time, they may have been able to prevent her from being transported to Syria. In another case, the police, school, health professionals and local authority were aware of evidence of domestic violence and knew that the girls in question had been taken out of school by their father unexpectedly. Yet investigations revealed that it was only a month after the girls had been taken to Syria that the local authority raised “safeguarding concerns” with the family’s GP and proceeded to complete a child missing education form. The UK’s refusal to repatriate the British families exacerbates the risk of re-trafficking, by forcing women to consider other means of escaping the camps, such as placing their lives and their children’s lives in the hands of unscrupulous smugglers and traffickers who may subject them to further exploitation. Despite these risks, the report found the UK government has refused to provide essential consular assistance and made no effort to establish whether British women and children in north-east Syria detention camps were victims of trafficking. Instead, it has implemented a policy of blanket stripping of citizenship on the grounds that women travelled to Syria of their own volition, when in fact many of the women were groomed, coerced or deceived into travelling. The APPG “heard first-hand from the families of those now detained in Syria about the devastating and discriminatory effects of these policies on their own sense of security and belonging within the UK. Many family members of those detained in Syria report feeling like second-class citizens as a result of the government’s response”, the report said. The APPG report concluded the UK government has failed to fulfil its obligations to identify, investigate, and protect potential victims of trafficking. A government spokesperson said: “Our priority is to ensure the safety and security of the UK. Those who remain in the conflict zone include some of the most dangerous individuals, choosing to stay to fight or otherwise support Daesh. Daesh still remains our most significant terrorist threat at home and abroad. “The situation in North East Syria is clearly very complex with significant humanitarian and security concerns. We continue to work with international partners to support camps in Syria, funding the provision of life-saving supplies including food, water, healthcare and shelter.”Northern Ireland’s first legally binding climate act faces a race against time to get passed before the devolved institutions at Stormont are dissolved in the coming weeks. The second of two climate change bills – introduced by the agriculture minister, Edwin Poots – has moved through consideration stage, with a batch of new amendments prompting more than 25 hours of assembly debate. But its passage into law is threatened by a congested legislative timetable in the time before Stormont’s dissolution next month to allow for elections. After Paul Givan’s resignation as first minister last week, deputy first minister Michelle O’Neill said the climate bill was among high-priority pieces of legislation that parties would hope to fast-track before the approaching deadline. New features to the bill will see the legislation introduce a 2050 net zero target for Northern Ireland, along with an independent Climate Change Commissioner’s office. Other amendments added to the bill will include a “just transition” fund aimed at supporting agriculture, statutory carbon budgets, targets for biodiversity and soil quality. There will also be a commitment that 10% of future transport budgets will go towards active travel. Northern Ireland is the only jurisdiction in the UK and Ireland at present without dedicated climate legislation. The country’s low public transport spend (27% per head compared with the UK average) and declining biodiversity levels, among other considerations, have emboldened calls for a promised climate act. The Green party NI leader, Clare Bailey, who tabled a first climate bill in 2020, told assembly members this week: “A majority of MLAs have made it clear that they support robust and ambitious climate legislation for Northern Ireland. We will have a net zero Climate Change Act for Northern Ireland, in whatever form it takes, because people want it, and the climate emergency demands it. “It was not so long ago that climate denial was rife in Stormont. I never thought we would see the day where we had such consensus across the political spectrum that action on climate change was urgent and necessary. “The voice of the people has been heard. The will of the assembly has been recorded. I hope that the minister will respect democracy. It’s time for a Climate Change Act for Northern Ireland.” An amendment proposing greater monitoring of Northern Ireland’s nitrogen levels was voted down last week and another proposed amendment seeking an outright ban on fracking was excluded from the consideration stage debate. A separate fracking bill, which follows a 2020 moratorium on petroleum licensing and drilling, is making its way through the assembly. About two weeks are expected for any final amendments to be made to the climate change legislation, before the bill progresses to a final-stage vote and can then become law. Civil society groups and campaigners who had previously criticised the bill’s lack of ambition have welcomed the new additions to the legislation. Daithí McKay, from the Climate Coalition Northern Ireland group, said the bill in its amended form “represents a progressive way forward to net zero”. He added: “The public expects the assembly to deliver and we now need a clear timetable from the minister setting out when he plans to complete the passing of the climate change act.” Friends of the Earth NI director James Orr said: “If the amended bill passes, Northern Ireland will be in a position to hold its head high with the right climate action alongside the rest of the UK and the ROI and will no longer be the only place on these islands without climate legislation. “We must ensure that these amendments are refined and developed to form a collective climate change act that is greater than the sum of its parts – one which truly reflects the gravity of the climate crisis and what needs to be done.” Poots, a strong advocate for Northern Ireland’s agrifood industry, said that implementing a 2050 net zero target would have “profound and irreversible consequences” for the sector. He has also suggested he would seek to “exempt” farmers from some of the bill’s requirements. He said: “I am disappointed that the assembly have agreed an amendment to my climate change bill to set a 2050 net zero target. “To push to net zero within that timeframe will have profound and irreversible consequences for our agri-food sector and our economy. “I will now consider my next steps and aim to find a way forward that minimises the impacts on our agri-food sector and maximises the benefits for the climate change agenda. The approach and actions have to balance climate change, the economy and the wider environment.”In the church we catch sight of a 17th-century cavalier, ringlets cascading over his shoulder armour, rising on to his elbow as if disturbed from a long nap. Under the bell tower we discover stones incised with the shapes of broadswords, medieval faces and a Celtic whale. Then, emerging into the sunlight, we investigate the strange circular graveyard, wondering if this must have been a pagan site. From the shadows of ancient yew trees, a green bird bursts out, showing us the way down into a field full of furrows where a crystal stream burbles. Ahead of us on a turfed mound is a peculiar shrine. “This is exactly what I want,” says my companion for the day, Carol Watson. “A good fort should be about exploration and discovery.” We are actually inside an ancient military encampment, an enormous one, with earthworks and ramparts covering about 300 hectares of fields and woodland near the North Yorkshire village of Stanwick St John, about six miles from Scotch Corner on the A1. When Sir Mortimer Wheeler first excavated the site in 1951, he concluded that it was a massive fort built around the time of the Roman invasion of Britain by a tribal queen called Cartimandua. She famously sided with the Romans and, when the chance came, handed the rebel leader Caractacus over to them. Digs have turned up all sorts of objects: Italian glass, wine amphorae, chariot wheels, swords and, famously, the Meyrick helmet, one of only four iron age helmets to have been discovered in Britain (it’s now in the British Museum). More recently, a Durham University team uncovered a burial site in which a horse’s head had been placed on the body of an adult male. Carol and I walk up through some impressive ramparts, then across empty fields to a line of trees. Here we pick up the line of the rampart again and find a section of wall that Wheeler had rebuilt to give an idea of the original wall. It is an impressive four and a half metres tall. We push on through undergrowth, following a faint trail that eventually ends at a faded wooden sign hand-painted with the word “Private”. Stanwick St John has many footpaths, but the site requires a bit of detective work and exploration, which is exactly what Carol wanted when she started the website Fort for the Day. “Ever since I explored the Roman ruins at Bainbridge as a child, I’ve been fascinated by forts. Then during the first lockdown, while I was working for English Heritage at Richmond Castle, I started to realise that there were hundreds of forts marked on Ordnance Survey maps of Great Britain – sites that probably attract very few visitors, but are great to explore.” The website she devised gives location details for a new fort every day of the year, plus links to OS maps to help users work out a walking route. Other links give an understanding of what’s there. After that, the exploration and discovery is up to you. There are few parts of the country where a fort cannot be found. Carol has many favourites: “Spitbank in the Solent and Inch Garvie in the Firth of Forth are wonderful. Cramond and Bo’ness near Edinburgh. Many places don’t even have names and you might not think there’s much to see, until you start exploring.” Our own walk curls back round to the church of Saint John the Baptist, where we started, and the alabaster figure of Sir Hugh Smithson (d.1670), but we have barely scratched the surface. I can see there is a possible longer route around the outer perimeter. Stanwick itself remains slightly enigmatic, no doubt still hiding many secrets. What we do know is that around AD70, the fort was either abandoned or taken by the Romans. Then came layer upon layer of history, notably the Anglo-Saxon stones and the church’s handsome grave effigies. It’s been a fascinating day and I’m now determined to investigate a location I spotted years ago: a large earth mound near my house that is marked on the OS map simply as “Fort”. It’s about time I explored it. Five more fascinating forts Roman fort, Wimbledon Common Caesar’s Camp fort on Wimbledon Common is a 300-metre-diameter hill fort that actually dates back to the third century BC. These days it serves as a feature on a golf course, but there are some plaques to denote the boundaries. A footpath skirts the northern edge and another bisects the site from east to west. The common is a good place for urban wildlife watching, with badgers, foxes and muntjac deer spotted. Unfortunately, the common’s most secretive creature, the Womble, is rarely seen these days. OS Landranger map LR 176 West London. Grid ref: TQ 224711 St Ann’s Hill, Chertsey It’s no surprise that forts were built at important crossroads, but this one turns up at the intersection of the M3 and M25. It’s a fine lookout point that has been used since prehistoric times, and over the years archaeological digs have produced flints and spearheads. In medieval times monks grew vines here. Later it was owned by the courtesan Mrs Armistead, who started her career working in brothels and later married Whig politician and dandy Charles James Fox. The site offers a nice woodland walk with views to the Chilterns – and Heathrow airport. OS Landranger map LR 176 West London. Grid ref: TQ 02656745 Bainbridge, North Yorkshire Watson’s early inspiration boasts an impressive location: on top of an ice age drumlin. Around AD100, the Romans built a defensive position overlooking the confluence of the rivers Bain and Ure, with good views up and down Wensleydale. Stonework was added around AD190, but only the evocative ramparts survive. Carol’s favourite view of the fort is from the north bank of the Ure. OS Landranger map 98, Wensleydale &amp; Upper Wharfedale. Grid ref: SD 93659015 Oswestry Iron Age Hill Fort One of Britain’s best-preserved iron age military installations, Old Oswestry Hillfort is a stunning spot with multiple ramparts on a 13-acre site north of the town. Human settlement here started around 1000BC, with a simple palisade fence that was added to over the centuries. After Roman times it was abandoned but seems to have become part of what is called Wat’s Dyke, a precursor to Offa’s Dyke, and now part of the 61-mile-long Wat’s Dyke Way long-distance footpath. OS Explorer 240 map. Grid ref: SJ 29545 30978 Garn Fawr, Pembrokeshire In 1921 surveyors looking at this site declared it “one of the most striking stone forts in the United Kingdom”, and it’s a declaration that stills rings true today. Garn Fawr is on a 213-metre rugged hill that dominates the Irish Sea below. But there is much more to enjoy: a short walk east brings you to Garn Fechan, a second fort, then westwards there is the magnificent Dinas Mawr, a fort on a sheer-sided promontory, accessible from the coastal path. The whole of Strumble Head peninsula is dotted with other standing stones, burial chambers and iron age forts. Pwll Deri youth hostel is next to the fort. OS Explorer OL35 map. Grid ref: SM 89573 38869Surprise is not much of a factor in Death on the Nile, Kenneth Branagh’s second gaudy, glossy all-star adaptation of an Agatha Christie chestnut. As with its predecessor, 2017’s marginally worse Murder on the Orient Express, this old-school mystery pulls from a source text so well-known that its twists have practically become embedded genre tropes; even if you don’t know the oft-told story, you can guess your way through it on cliches and character types alone. Decked out with chintzy CGI, stiff performances and enough processed cheese to fill the Nile, it’s not exactly a good film – even “proficient” feels like a stretch – but it is an oddly comforting one. Watching Branagh’s absurdly moustachioed Hercule Poirot waddle through the motions of supposedly expert crime-solving – as bloodied, satin-clad corpses pile up around him – offers equivalent satisfaction to piecing together a jigsaw puzzle on a rainy Sunday: you know what the outcome is going to be, but there’s something soothing in putting it all together. If it’s a murder-mystery you aren’t already familiar with, so much the better, but the genre’s process-based pleasures are consistent either way. A good whodunnit, or even an attractively bad one, is the fictional equivalent of Marie Kondo organising your sock drawer. Evidently, I’m not the only person to feel this way, since a full century after Hercule Poirot first appeared in print, the good old-fashioned whodunnit is suddenly hot property again. Branagh hasn’t been the only major film-maker to usher it back into popular culture. Neither of his Christie films can claim the hip currency of Rian Johnson’s nifty 2019 potboiler Knives Out, which blended wink-wink Christie homage – a rambling house full of oddball murder suspects, one eccentrically accented gentleman detective to figure it all out – with decidedly less retro class politics pulled straight out of Donald Trump’s America. The cocktail worked more successfully than even Johnson surely imagined. After grossing over $300m worldwide and landing him an Oscar nomination, the film wasn’t just approved for a sequel but a whole megabucks franchise: Netflix paid a whopping $469m to secure the next two adventures of Detective Benoit Blanc, plunging the improbably cast Daniel Craig, newly escaped from his 007 stint, right back into franchise-lead duty. Pitting Craig’s neo-Poirot against a fresh batch of big-name subjects including Janelle Monáe, Kathryn Hahn and Ethan Hawke, Knives Out 2 (a cleverer title is doubtless to be confirmed) completed shooting in Greece last summer and will be out later this year, with its plot (naturally) kept strictly under wraps. Whether it matches the popular impact of its predecessor remains to be seen, but Netflix is counting on the accessibility of their release model to keep the series hot. It’s not the streaming giant’s only whodunnit sequel of the year either. The generically titled Murder Mystery may not have made much of an impression on cinephiles in 2019, but like so many of the disposable comedies made under Adam Sandler’s ongoing Netflix contract, it was a stealth phenomenon with subscribers, and remains one of the streamer’s most-viewed originals. Nearly three years on, I couldn’t tell you a thing that happens in it – Sandler, Jennifer Aniston, murdery hijinks on a luxury yacht – but Murder Mystery 2 is inevitably in production just the same, the Lidl adjunct to Johnson’s Waitrose caper. Expect both franchises to run in parallel for some time. Somewhat more enticing is See How They Run, a debut feature from the British TV director Tom George that appears to be all plummy throwback charm: Sam Rockwell in a fedora and walrus ’tache as a jaded inspector, Saoirse Ronan as his naive police-constable sidekick, a case involving multiple murders in London’s theatre scene. You can practically hear the warm creak of the floorboards; the classy supporting cast includes Ruth Wilson, David Oyelowo and Harris Dickinson. (Well, there’s no sense in a rogue’s gallery of faces you don’t recognise.) Meanwhile, just as the Lego Movie co-creator Chris Miller’s murder-mystery comedy series The Afterparty is taking off on Apple TV – with Tiffany Haddish as a detective investigating a murder at a high-school reunion – the 2022 release slate also offers Reunion, a low-profile film with an identical-sounding premise and a cast including Lil Rel Howery and Billy Magnussen. One suspects The Afterparty will dwarf it in publicity stakes, though Miller’s series has yet to match the noise generated by TV’s biggest new whodunnit hit: sparked by the unlikely combination of Selena Gomez with Steve Martin and Martin Short, Only Murders in the Building built enough of a devoted word-of-mouth following last year to be renewed for a second series. Co-created by Martin himself, the arch, playful Only Murders in the Building boasts a postmodern premise that may in itself partly explain the genre’s grand resurgence. Forgoing a detective figure, the film instead focuses on three neighbours in an Upper West Side apartment block attempting to unravel a suspicious death in the building on their own, driven by their own shared fascination with true-crime podcasts. The rise of true-crime storytelling over the last decade – whether in podcast or Netflix docuseries form – seems an obvious cue for fiction’s re-embrace of the procedural mystery. Such true-crime works may often be cloaked in solemn journalistic trappings and an air of social import, but they often lure in their audience on the same basis as any Agatha Christie potboiler – appealing to our collective lurid fascination with human evil, and our rational urge to piece together some manner of explanation or corrective to it all. At a time when public trust in official law and order is at an understandable low, it’s perhaps no surprise that escapist stories allowing the audience to solve crime for themselves are back in vogue. That private detectives like Poirot and Benoit Blanc exert authority without being cops seems key to their renewed appeal, though they’re also mere proxies for the viewer’s own mental sleuthing.Kyi kneels on the ground, pleading for her son to wake up. Crouched beside a riverbank, she rocks back and forth, shaken with grief. Her son’s body, which has washed ashore, is motionless in the shallow water. One of his wrists is tied with rope. “My boy, I know it would be nice if you respond to me,” she cries. It’s a video that has been seen widely within Myanmar – one Facebook video has been viewed more than a million times – but is also a scene that is tragically common. Videos and evidence of military killings are continually shared online – adding to the vast files of evidence being collected by rights groups, but also to the daily trauma that people are faced with. Kyi’s son, Sin Pauk, was 28, a farmer and a caring son. “He was the only child and a very clever son to me,” Kyi tells the Guardian. He didn’t drink, smoke, or do drugs, she says, and was very religious. His death occurred after the army entered Kinsanpya village in Kanni, in the Sagaing region of western Myanmar on 30 January, forcing the villagers to flee. He had gone to feed his ducks and was one of seven people unable to get away in time, all of whom were arrested. Locals told Kyi that detainees were being kept on a boat by soldiers stationed inside the village that night. Kyi knew her son was among those being held. Despite the risk to her safety, she went back to the village to plead for his release. It is not possible for the Guardian to independently verify the accounts given. Kyi says she begged the soldiers, but they refused to let Sin Pauk go. She was not allowed to enter the boat to see him. The body of Sin Pauk was eventually found, about 5km (three miles) away, in the river near Ta On village. Two other villagers, including 60-year-old San Aung, were found separately at a riverbank near Kinsanpya village on 3 February. The rest remain missing. When her son’s body was found, he was wearing different clothes, Kyi said. His throat had been cut. “I wish they had the same karma as my son.” “I waited for him since he always comes home to me, whatever it takes,” says Kyi. “I know he won’t leave me.” Sin Pauk is one of more than 1,500 killed by the military since the coup last year. Last week, as the country marked the one-year anniversary of the military’s seizure of power, the violence continued unabated. In the Sagaing region alone, the military launched an airstrike on a graduation ceremony for recruits to an anti-junta armed group, killing civilians, according to a report by Radio Free Asia. Hundreds of homes have also reportedly been burned. The pace of atrocities perpetrated by the military, the dire security situation and unreliable communications pose major challenges for rights groups and journalists who try to document such events. Often, little is known about those who have been killed.Lan Samantha Chang’s third novel begins by bringing history to the table: “For thirty-five years, everyone supported Leo Chao’s restaurant.” The Wisconsin eatery is a family affair. Everyone assumes it will eventually be peacefully handed down to one of Leo’s three sons – but they overlook just how fraught and bloody inheritance can be. “In dark times,” Chang writes, with a characteristically cunning sense of slow-boiled foreboding, “there is really nothing like a good, steaming soup, and dumplings made from scratch.” The Family Chao was not quite made from scratch. Some of the dough that forms its schemes and themes comes from The Brothers Karamazov. In fact, Chang’s story at first brings to mind another Dostoevsky-influenced state-of-America novel: Jonathan Franzen’s The Corrections. In both books, the reader meets three adult siblings coming home for a family Christmas as the patriarch loses his grip on power. But where The Corrections sprawled and swelled, The Family Chao has a laser focus: one restaurant, one town, and one crime that will transform the family’s fortunes. As with Zadie Smith’s On Beauty, a novel that took its blueprint from Howards End, you get the sense that borrowing the bones of a classic has freed up the author to focus on making every interior detail as perfect as it can be. One of the many pleasures of The Family Chao is the way the novel dramatises the gap between how a family wants to be seen, and its messier inner realities. The neon sign that greets new arrivals at the restaurant is “FINE CHAO”. (If the head of the family would only relax his grip on singularity, the place might be rebranded more appropriately as “FINE CHAOS”.) Inside, beyond the “small, shabby dining room”, we find a bulletin board covered with chaotic scraps of paper. The increasingly absent matriarch of the family, Winnie, has pinned up a list of foods that American customers prefer to be served. One is chop suey. “What is this?” her husband has written in the margin. “I don’t know,” Winnie replies. Amid a drama of family betrayal, Chang has created a wonderful comedy of American consumption. To quote a heading from one of the many short sections that make up the book, like small plates slowly filling our table: “The Fortune You Seek Is in Another Cookie.” Chang’s prose moves with the unfussy ease of a shark through water – for the longest time you are just enjoying your swim, soaking up the story. Only midway through the book does it occur to you that a master hunter is at work: a writer cutting through the darker depths of what it means to be treated as an outsider in America. At the novel’s halfway point we are confronted with the words “THREE MONTHS LATER”. The central events on which the plot turns have taken place off stage, in an unlit space. Chang is more interested in consequences, and she has great fun unpicking the slightly breathless trial that occupies the final third of the book. One late chapter on the fate of the family is written as a student blog for a course on Writing for New Media. Chang, who is the programme director at the Iowa Writer’s Workshop, starts out with the student’s bullet-pointed “personal goals”. These include “Use bullet points when possible”. If the writer’s greatest fear is being misunderstood, the restaurateur’s true terror may be getting locked in the freezer room. That is just one culinary nightmare (I won’t spoil your meal) that creates this book’s atmosphere of laughter in the dark. Meat is everywhere in the novel: fresh, rotting, chopped, fried – and thrown, in one memorable scene, to a pack of dogs. Like crazed siblings, the animals fight over the scraps, unaware that the next meal might be them. In the background, a group of nuns protest. But the soul is no match for the stomach. “Do you think I want this dog’s life?” Leo Chao asks one of his sons in a key moment. A man of presence, impatience and profanity, he believes in doing whatever American appetites require. Like a small-town version of Logan Roy, the patriarch in another drama about siblings squabbling over succession, Leo has “the authority of a man larger than he actually is”. He tells his most innocent son, a soulful virgin pre-med named James, that “we came to America to colonise the place for ourselves. That means spreading seed. Equal opportunity for fucking.” But however appalled the sons might be by their father’s perspectives, they continue to absorb elements of his character. You are what you eat, the novel seems to suggest. And you eat what your family, or your country, puts on the table. “As far as parties are concerned,” Chang’s omniscient narrator tell us, “there are many ways to greatness. There’s greatness of style, of setting, of occasion, and of company.” The Family Chao has a little of all these ingredients – but even better, it arrives with something to say. • Jonathan Lee’s latest book is The Great Mistake (Granta). The Family Chao by Lan Samantha Chang is published by One (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.With that, we’ll wrap up the live news blog for today. Here’s a summary of the day’s main news developments. The Morrison government has shelved its divisive religious discrimination laws after amendments aimed at protecting LGBTQ+ students sparked a backlash from religious schools and conservatives. A top Australian intelligence chief has vowed to counter any attempts by other countries to interfere in the upcoming federal election after revealing a “recent” meddling plot had been disrupted. Josh Frydenberg’s attempts to cripple the proxy advisers who advise superannuation funds on how to vote on issues including executive pay have been described as a “cluster fiasco” after the Senate killed off the regulations introduced by the treasurer. The New South Wales auditor general has warned her unqualified audit of the state’s finances could be at risk after the secretary of transport told a public hearing he had not yet agreed to provide an extra $5.2bn to fund a controversial rail corporation. The former British spy chief Sir Richard Dearlove has described the Pine Gap surveillance base in central Australia as “hugely important” to western intelligence collection about China’s “rather alarming” activities. Barnaby Joyce has backed Narrabri’s mayor and general manager after they overturned the council’s opposition to the inland rail route on the grounds of flood risk, without consulting their own councillors. Tasmania has launched an audacious bid to host or co-host the 2026 Commonwealth Games, but some have labelled the move pointless. Thanks for tuning in. We’ll be back to do it all again tomorrow. Tasmania has launched an audacious bid to host or co-host the 2026 Commonwealth Games, but some have labelled the move pointless, reports AAP. The Liberal premier, Peter Gutwein, has written to Commonwealth Games Australia chief executive, Craig Phillips, and formally requested the island state be considered as a host for the sporting event. Tasmania recently hosted the fifth men’s Ashes cricket Test and was given two elimination AFL finals last season due to mainland Covid-19 restrictions. Jane Howlett, Tasmanian sport minister, said: Our government is committed to delivering more elite sporting content for Tasmanians to enjoy and, importantly, provide pathways for local sports men, women and children. We are confident that we can work collaboratively with Commonwealth Games Australia on the opportunities Tasmania presents as either a host or co-host of the 2026 Commonwealth Games.” The 2022 games will be held in Birmingham. The English city was originally scheduled to host the event in 2026 but it was brought forward when Durban in South Africa was stripped of hosting rights. Howlett said Tasmania has “clearly demonstrated” an ability to deliver elite sporting content. The Labor opposition, however, is not on board. Labor MP Shane Broad said: This is a pointless plan with absolutely no ability to deliver, and any money spent on a bid would be money wasted. Peter Gutwein, in writing to the Commonwealth Games CEO, has not even thought through the most basic details like: where would we accommodate thousands of athletes and spectators? Where could he possibly hold an opening and closing ceremony of any size?” Gutwein has pushed hard in recent years for Tasmania’s inclusion in the AFL but concerns have been raised about the state’s smaller facilities. Blundstone Arena in Hobart has a capacity of 19,500, while University of Tasmania Stadium in Launceston in the state’s north can hold up to roughly 20,000 people. The New South Wales auditor general has warned her unqualified audit of the state’s finances could be at risk after the secretary of transport told a public hearing he had not yet agreed to provide an extra $5.2bn to fund a controversial rail corporation. A day after her scathing report accused the NSW Treasury of being “unnecessarily obstructive” during her audit of the government’s finances, auditor general Margaret Crawford told a parliamentary inquiry on Thursday that her unqualified audit would need to be “reaffirmed” after earlier evidence from the transport secretary, Rob Sharp. At the centre of Crawford’s extraordinary report was the Transport Asset Holding Entity (Tahe), a corporation established by the NSW government to hold $40bn in NSW rail assets, in a move that had the effect of inflating the state’s budget by several billion dollars. Crawford’s signoff on the state’s overall finances was delayed by three months last year as a result of what she labelled “significant accounting issues” with the body. Her office eventually gave the government an unqualified audit on the state’s finances on Christmas Eve after the government agreed to inject a further $5.2bn into Tahe. However, during evidence to the inquiry earlier on Thursday, Sharp suggested negotiations on the access fees paid to Tahe remained ongoing and that his department had not signed off on the agreement. Read more: Josh Frydenberg’s attempts to cripple the proxy advisers who advise superannuation funds on how to vote on issues including executive pay have been described as a “cluster fiasco” after the senate killed off the regulations introduced by the treasurer. The regulations, which were introduced in December, had been in force for just three days when the senate disallowed them on Thursday. The move was another blow for the government on a messy day in parliament where the government also shelved its contentious religious discrimination bills. The superannuation regulations required proxy advisers to hand the companies they have researched their reports on the same day as they have gone to paying clients. They also prohibited clients from owning proxy advisers. Critics said the rules robbed proxy advisers of their intellectual property and would have cost retirement savers money by forcing industry super funds, which have been a frequent target of Morrison government attacks, to set up their own individual research teams rather than use the services of the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors, where many are shareholders. Read more: A traditional Chinese herbalist warned a diabetic woman off “western medication” and allayed her family’s concerns about her decline before she collapsed and died, a New South Wales judge has been told. Prosecutors accuse Sydney practitioner Yun Sen Luo of unlawfully killing a 56-year-old woman who’d approached him about a skin condition in 2018. After allegedly learning she was diabetic, Luo is accused of advising her western doctors had an incorrect perception of diabetes, that she could eat whatever fruits she liked and that prior use of western medications had caused toxins to form inside her body. “[His] final direction, that she stop taking western medication and start taking herbal medications prescribed by him, set in train a series of events that led to her death,” crown prosecutor Emma Blizard told the Sydney district court on Thursday. Less than a fortnight after her first appointment with Luo – and after days of her daughter reporting increasingly worsening symptoms – the woman died on 8 June 2018. Luo, who turns 56 this month and is from Baulkham Hills, has pleaded not guilty to manslaughter by gross criminal negligence. Tasmania will bid to host the 2026 Commonwealth Games, ABC reports: Obviously Peter Van Onselen’s story has caused a ruckus in Canberra this afternoon. We are still making calls, but I’m confident the discussion recounted in the story happened. I’m not sure all the details are correct (as in who said what, to whom), but the broad thrust is right. Fair to say someone is making trouble of the capital T variety. Channel 10 and the Australian are reporting that Scott Morrison was rolled by his own cabinet, after presenting them with a plan to save his religious discrimination bill by also putting a national integrity commission bill back on the agenda. Liberal senator Eric Abetz has denied that his government’s inability to pass its religious discrimination bill amounts to “capitulation”. Abetz, appearing on ABC TV’s Afternoon Briefing, went on to blame the Labor Party and the amendments it sought for halting the bill: Abetz said: When same-sex marriage went through, one of the quid pro quo statements made by both parties was that religious freedom would be guaranteed by legislation. Indeed the then prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, said he believed in same-sex marriage just as much as religious freedom. And yesterday the Labor Party were put to the test to deliver on that and unfortunately they failed. Sure, there were some of my colleagues that crossed the floor but if Labor would have stuck to their basic policy in this regard, it would have flown through the House of Representatives without the amendments that have now made it untenable. Asked if he thought that voters would interpret the lack of progress on the bill as weakness in the Coalition and Scott Morrison’s leadership, Abetz said: What people will see is the weakness of the Labor Party in having promised religious freedom legislation, that on block they voted for amendments [for] knowing that it would be untenable. So this was a wonderful screen for them to try to say, ‘we support it’, but then deliberately vote for amendments knowing that will then derail the legislation. Abetz concedes “it would be highly unlikely, in fairness” for the religious discrimination bill to progress before the next election. Thanks to Tory Shepherd for steering us through not just today but the entirety of an eventful sitting week. I’ll be bringing you news developments for the rest of the day. Buckle up. That’s this Stobie pole done for today. (I learned today from Mike Bowers that this is a term of endearment for South Australians). I’ll hand you over to Elias Visontay, and I hope the rest of your day is way more gazpacho than Gestapo. Until next week! There have been seven Covid deaths in South Australia, and 1,639 new cases. SA premier Steven Marshall has announced the relaxing of some restrictions, including density caps at hospitality venues and home gatherings. Western Australia has recorded 37 community cases, its highest daily number of local cases to date. Another 102 cases were travel-related. Still in the house, independent MP Zali Steggall has raised concerns about the long sitting hours. Greens leader Adam Bandt is rejecting the earlier comments that Labor’s climate policies are identical to his party’s, and outlining the differences. And that’s Question Time done for today, and the week. Prime minister Scott Morrison and Labor leader Anthony Albanese have thanked all the staff who had to stick around for that all-night sitting. Albanese has gone on to talk to the speaker about those Dutton comments, and the report on his comments three decades ago. Defence minister Peter Dutton has just made an extraordinary accusation in the parliament: “that the Chinese Communist Party, the Chinese government has also made a decision about who they will back in the next federal election, Mr Speaker, and that is open and obvious”. The implication is that Labor is soft on China – something for which there is no basis. Here’s what Labor leader Anthony Albanese told 3AW recently: I’ve visited Taiwan and I’ve met with their democratically-elected leadership. And that democracy should be respected. And there is a bipartisan position on Taiwan, on the South China Sea, on the Uyghurs, on all of the human rights positions, because China has changed its posture in recent years … there will remain a difficult position with China, regardless of who is in government, because it’s China’s position that has changed, not Australia’s. What we’ve seen from a desperate government is a rather embarrassing article, frankly, published on Saturday, from a government looking for difference where there isn’t any. Dutton also tried to draw the head of Asio, Mike Burgess, into the matter when challenged about the serious accusation he was making: Mine was a reflection on what has been publicly reported and commented on by the director-general of Asio, and Mr Speaker, there are media reports today in relation to this serious matter. In his threat assessment speech last night, Burgess said Asio had recently disrupted a foreign intelligence plot. Burgess did not give particulars about the country or the target, but said: Attempts at political interference are not confined to one side of politics, and you’d be surprised by the range of countries involved. There have been all sorts of accusations from Dutton, I’ll bring you some context for those in a second. Meanwhile, Labor’s Jim Chalmers brings Question Time back to aged care. He’s asking about an outbreak at Jeta Gardens in Brisbane, and a death that has been attributed to neglect. Health minister Greg Hunt says there’s an inquiry into the death, and he’ll provide details once that’s done: We recognise there has been a significant outbreak ... we have had additional security put in place, and in particular, the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission has mandated a nurse and advisor support for training and ... pathology has been in place, periodically, since 7 January. Extra PPE and tests have also been provided, he says. Harsh burn from defence minister Peter Dutton. He says the only person less prepared than Anthony Albanese to be prime minister might have been (former Labor leader, now One Nation MP) Mark Latham. Then he comes up with the following, which is both unfounded and outrageous: We now see evidence that the Chinese Communist Party, the Chinese government has also made a decision about who they will back in the next federal election. More from Sharkie: Labor’s Ged Kearney asks: “Would Australia’s education system have been better equipped to cope with the deadly Covid outbreaks if the prime minister had not made a $1.7b cut when he was treasurer?” Health minister Greg Hunt responds: That is false. Funding has gone up each year every year under this government. Each year it has been a record. Last year we had a $17.7b addition investment. He’s using the Oakden scandal in South Australia to point out Labor’s past failings in aged care. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg is called to the dispatch box to withdraw his attack on Labor leader Anthony Albanese. The speaker warns Frydenberg not to use the opportunity to repeat the attacks. Frydenberg withdraws. Labor is now asking about the aged care workforce crisis. Health minister Greg Hunt is reeling off a bunch of budget spending items, then points to the announcement of one-off payments to aged care workers. He says: Those workers have helped [get] an outcome which has saved countless lives by comparison with countries around the world. One of the lowest rates of loss of life in aged care. [Lives lost have] been an immense sadness to the families affected. But because of the work of our aged care workers, we have saved thousands of lives and we thank them and we honour them. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg is trying to get some mileage out of a report in today’s Australian newspaper about things opposition leader Anthony Albanese said 30 years ago. Frydenberg says: I refer the leader of the opposition to a very good article on the front page of the Australian today titled Anthony Albanese’s historic battle cry in war on family wealth, where it says he insisted people earning incomes of more than $100,000 do not actually earn them, and that accumulated income in the form of capital is – for all socialists at least – part of the source of many social injustices. Albanese quips that Frydenberg may want to ask about his year 6 history essays. It’s now really common for government backbenchers to finish their dorothy dixer questions with “is the minister aware of any alternative policies”. It’s a sneaky way to invite an attack on the opposition – a direct invitation isn’t allowed. So the dixer-asker can’t say, for example: “Would the minister care to assassinate the opposition leader’s character?”, but can ask about alternative policies. Although some speakers have ruled even that out of order in the past. Labor’s Julie Collins asks about an inquiry into the the “threatening” phone call made to former Australian of the Year Grace Tame – she talked about it at the National Press Club yesterday. Collins asked: Can the prime minister guarantee the results of this so-called investigation into this threatening call will be released, or will he sweep it under the carpet, hide from the truth as he has done before and failed to take any real action? Peter Dutton says the question is against standing orders. “It was an unsubstantiated flourish,” he says, but the speaker allows it. Prime minister Scott Morrison says he only became aware of the claim yesterday, and that he wants more information so the “matter can be properly addressed”. He says: We would be pleased to pursue the matter if we had some knowledge of [which agency] has been referred to. [The comments] were not made on my behalf nor would they ever would be and they were not made with my knowledge in any way, shape or form, or by my office, by my government, and I consider the actions and the statements of the individual as absolutely unacceptable, and inquiries can only be made where we can be directed, and those inquiries should be seeking to get answers to the matters that have been raised and if anyone has any information on that, then I would encourage them to bring it forward so the matter can be properly addressed. Mayo MP Rebekha Sharkie has responded to government accusations her religious discrimination changes would have “unintended consequences”: Labor’s Chris Bowen asks about the government’s climate change policy. Morrison accuses Labor of forcing up electricity prices, and of being in bed with the Greens. He said: If the leader of the Labor Party were to become prime minister of this country, he would be answering to the leader of the Greens when it comes to climate policy. If you are in the Hunter, if you are living out in Latrobe ... if you’re in the Territory or in WA, if the Labor Party is seeking to form a government after the selection, they will be doing it for the Greens and they will be putting up electricity prices and selling out the blue-collar jobs of this country. There are echoes here of the way the Coalition attacked Labor when it partnered with the Greens in 2010. The Coalition has a history of attacking coalitions. Another point of order has been raised, after Morrison used a dorothy dixer to accuse Albanese of being in cahoots with China. The PM is “making a serious allegation across the chamber, and he should not be permitted to use Question Time to just make things up,” Albanese responds. Morrison is says there are many qualities a prime minister needs, but being “a sook and a snarler” are not among them. (Earlier this week he accused Albanese of “snarling”). There is a conduct that is “creeping into practice”, the Speaker says, of bringing up invalid points of order. “I’m trying my best to err on the side of caution,” he says. (It has felt this week as though we have heard more from the Speaker than from anyone else). The Speaker (Andrew Wallace) said he spent some time reading Hansard over the Christmas break (“it is terribly sad,” he agrees). He says he doesn’t think his interventions are any different to his predecessor’s. Labor’s Tony Burke had suggested they were. Labor leader Anthony Albanese is up first, asking prime minister Scott Morrison why he has “betrayed” his colleagues and the Australian people by failing to legislate for a federal anti-corruption commission. Morrison is straight into a bit of whatabouttery, shouting about Labor state government corruption scandals. “They had so many ex-Labor ministers in prison, they could start a branch of the Labor party in the Silverwater prison,” he said. Speaker Andrew Wallace said he could barely hear what was being said over the opposition’s protests, and now there’s yet another debate about relevance. Wallace is also warning members about unparliamentary remarks, including accusations of corruption or fraud. Question Time is just about to kick off. First, prime minister Scott Morrison is expressing his “deep regret” at the January death of the WA Liberal MP Ransley Victor Garland. Garland held a range of portfolios, and was appointed high commissioner to the United Kingdom in 1981. “May this dedicated servant of Australia and our great party rest in peace,” Morrison said. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, is also offering his condolences. The Liberal senator Andrew Bragg had put the government on notice that he had concerns with the religious discrimination bill, using additional comments in his committee inquiry report on Friday to call for the statements of belief clause to be removed and to add protections for LGBTQ+ teachers and students. We can confirm that Bragg informed the government he intended to cross the floor on the bill when it came to the Senate. Politician resigns after overseas holiday during crisis (no, it’s not prime minister Scott Morrison): Good advice from the prof: The Senate has just decided not to debate the religious discrimination bills today. That means the package is likely to NOT be considered for a final vote this side of the election. Next week the Senate is holding budget estimates hearings, meaning no votes on legislation. The only other normal Senate sitting days this side of the election are 29 March (budget day) and the day after. There’s no impetus for the government now to pass the package, after five of its own members added amendments protecting LGBTQ+ students. The Australian Christian Lobby, religious school groups and conservative MPs and senators won’t cop it. The Greens senator Larissa Waters has just raised an important issue in the Senate about this week’s statement of acknowledgement in the parliament. She has said Australians know the faces of Rachelle Miller, Chelsey Potter, Brittany Higgins, Josie Coles, Saxon Mullins and Grace Tame “not because they are the only ones who have come forward, but because they look most like people we know, that we can identify with”. She notes some survivors have been missing from the conversation, and that needs to change. Waters has read a message from Dhanya Mani, who was one of the first people to speak out about the implications of toxic culture. She was not invited to attend this week’s apology. The message is as follows: Earlier this week, there was an “apology” delivered by Scott Morrison to survivors of sexual abuse in politics. He spoke about the power of apologies to create reform and change. That statement is true. It just does not apply to his offensive and whitewashed excuse for an apology. Scott Morrison not only failed to genuinely consult, or consider survivors in the wording of his apology - he rewrote and whitewashed Australian feminist history in the process. Tessa Sullivan - a woman of colour who was the first to tell her story of sexual violence in politics when the #MeToo movement began to gain ground in Australia in early 2018 inspired me to speak out, yet many Australians fail to recognise we would not be here without her. I continued Tessa’s work, launching my campaign Kate’s List when I told my story. My campaign was - and remains - designed to support survivors and end sexual violence in Australian politics and workplaces. Yet women like myself and Tessa are largely erased from media commentary, culture and history. Even now in 2022, after the lessons of #MeToo, politicians and the mainstream media almost solely centre the stories of cis-gender, able-bodied and conventionally attractive white women at the expense of all other voices. But this cultural moment of reckoning in Australian politics and feminism is built on the sacrifice, advocacy and unpaid labour of women of colour like me. Like Tessa. We came first. Failing to acknowledge the labour of CALD women sends a message: sexual violence and other forms of abuse only impact white women. But we know that these crimes disproportionately impact CALD and First Nations women. In a country in which colonisation is ongoing, we cannot allow this distorted and incomplete picture to form the sole foundation for the Australian public’s understanding of male violence against women. If this parliament fails to act, it is tacitly endorsing and aggravating impenetrable barriers to equality for diverse, minority-identifying Australians. This country cannot achieve inclusive, healthy progress for women in political life until and unless we can start recognising and validating the vital work of women of colour and First Nations women in making opportunities for feminist cultural reckoning and reform possible. This speech is for all minority women, and women of colour, who do not feel seen in political life. I’ll keep fighting for us. I deserve to be seen. Tessa deserves to be seen. You deserve to be seen. This historic moment belongs to us, too. I will not stop until skin colour and minority status do not determine whether we are acknowledged, whether we are recognised by politicians and the media, and whether cultural and historic milestones built on our advocacy and labour belong to us. Waters’ contribution came in the debate about legislative changes flowing from the Jenkins report. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 500 new Covid cases. 51 people are in hospital, three in intensive care. The package of religious discrimination bills, including the human rights amendment bill that contained protections for LGBTQ+ students, will not be considered by the Senate today. Liberal Jonathon Duniam moved a Senate motion to exempt a list of bills from the cutoff, which at first included the religious bills, but it was amended to remove them. There was a brief confusion in the chamber, as even government senators including Matt Canavan seemed confused about what they’d just voted for - Senate president, Slade Brockman, confirmed that the motion exempting the religious bills from the cutoff was negatived. Labor and the Greens have confirmed this means the bills won’t be considered today. My colleague Sarah Martin has established from the government that this was deliberate, because of concerns of religious schools and conservative MPs and senators, who want legal advice about the effect of the amendments made to the House bills. The Senate has torpedoed regulations aimed at crippling proxy advisers, dealing a heavy blow to treasurer Josh Frydenberg. Former submariner turned crossbencher Rex Patrick and the Greens’ Nick McKim moved a motion denying the regulations shortly before midday and senators voted 29 for, and 25 against. There was no debate – Patrick feared allowing one would allow Coalition senators to run down the clock and stop the motion being voted on – and moves to get one up were also rejected by the Senate. The regulations forced proxy advisers to give their reports to the companies they were writing about at the same time as clients who paid for the research, and also aimed to shut down the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors, which gives proxy advice and is mostly owned by industry super funds, by making it illegal for clients to own advisers. A government regulation covering financial services was last disallowed by the Senate in 2014, when it knocked out one that removed a requirement that financial planners act in the best interests of clients. The LGBTI legal service – which represents Citipointe parents and children – is “deeply concerned” that the religious discrimination bill that passed the house will still allow “the damaging content” of statements of belief. The service’s Matilda Alexander said: There is nothing but detriment in these changes and a wind back of existing state protections in all areas of public life, especially schools. Some more details from Queensland: Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 56 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 500 In hospital: 51 (with threepeople in ICU) NSW Deaths: 24 Cases: 10,130 In hospital: 1,795 (with 121 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 8 Cases: 5,854 In hospital: 633 (with 48 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 7 Cases: 1,639 In hospital: 206 (with 16 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 1 Cases: 637 In hospital: 17 (with one person in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 16 Cases: 9,391 In hospital: 543 (with 75 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 139 (37 local, 102 ‘other’) In hospital: 1 Last night the bills in the religious discrimination package passed the lower house: one with only government amendments (the religious discrimination bill), and one with the Rebekha Sharkie amendments protecting LGBTQ+ students (the human rights amendment bill), supported by Labor, Adam Bandt, five Liberal moderates, Andrew Wilkie, Zali Steggall and Helen Haines. Will these bills even be debated in the Senate? In general, it would be up to the government to deal with its own bills, but crossbench senators say there appears to be no appetite from the Coalition to bring these on. Labor has also detected a go-slow in the Senate, with government senators taking the full 10-minute statements to explain matters like why they haven’t responded to inquiry reports and why Richard Colbeck is still aged care services minister. We’ve checked the rules - and since the religious discrimination bills have passed the lower house, a message has come across to the Senate, and a non-government majority can insist that they be reported immediately and dealt with. So, if Labor, the Greens, crossbench and Liberal moderates in the Senate wanted to, they could try to force the issue and deal with the human rights amendment bill to protect LGBTQ+ students. At the moment the bills are just in limbo, and it’s not at all clear they’ll be debated today in the Senate. Eight people have died in Queensland, and the state has recorded 5,854 new Covid cases. Financial counsellors have welcomed a record fine of $2.5m levied on online bookie Sportsbet for spamming customers, saying it strengthens their push for a total ban on gambling advertising. Sportsbet will also pay $1.2m in refunds to punters after sending 150,000 marketing emails and texts to customers who had tried to opt out and 3000 messages that did not contain a method of opting-out. The company has apologised. Lauren Levin, the director of policy and campaigns at Financial Counselling Australia, said: This sort of marketing causes real harm to people who are already suffering. One former gambler told me it’s like dropping a crate of beer at the front door of a reforming alcoholic. It’s just not right. This is why Australia needs a proper roadmap for change across the gambling sector and this must include a total ban on all gambling advertising and marketing of this sort. You can read more about the fine and the push for a gambling ban here: The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, has introduced a critical infrastructure bill to the lower house to secure critical infrastructure. Last year the government split its own bill in two because of concerns from industry that some of the obligations may be too onerous. The first parts – including requiring the mandatory reporting of cyber incidents and allowing the government to provide assistance to critical infrastructure sector assets in response to significant cyber-attacks – passed before Christmas. This new bill is to deal with the outstanding elements. Andrews told parliament: It is a regrettable fact that malicious threat actors continue to target the infrastructure that underpins the provision of essential services that all Australians rely on. The consequences of a prolonged and widespread failure in the energy sector, for example, could be catastrophic not just to our economy, security and sovereignty, but the Australian way of life. Andrews said the new bill would require critical infrastructure owners to identify “material risks that could have an impact on the critical infrastructure asset and as far as reasonably practicable minimise, eliminate or mitigate the risk from occurring”. She argued this risk management obligation was meant to have the “lightest regulatory impact”. Andrews went out of her way to play down the red tape impact: Importantly, none of the risk management program requirements will come into force without additional consultation with industry and careful consideration of any issues they raise, including the timing on when the requirements will come into force. Indeed, if passed by the parliament my intention is to delay the obligation for critical assets impacted by recent supply chain issues including the freight services and infrastructure as well as food assets until 1 January 2023 at the earliest. Additionally, there are a number of assets that already have existing obligations in place and I don’t intend to apply the risk management program to every critical infrastructure asset. Andrews said there were “some critical infrastructure systems and networks that are so vital, interconnected and of national significance to the functioning of Australian society, defence or security that if they were subject to a cyber-attack, would cause disproportionate consequences”. She said the bill also set out criteria for the declaration of a “system of national significance”, and these would face extra cybersecurity obligations. One person has died and seventeen people are in hospital in Tasmania with Covid. One person is in intensive care. The state recorded 637 new cases.Tasmania has recorded an additional coronavirus death, with the state’s daily case figure rising to 637. China’s foreign ministry has accused Australia of turning “a blind eye to its own problems”, in the latest example of Beijing attempting to deflect attention from its own human rights record. At the daily foreign ministry press briefing in Beijing overnight, Chinese state media outlet the Global Times mentioned two reports were recently published by Australia’s Productivity Commission regarding prisons and the justice sector and asked: “What is your comment?” Zhao Lijian, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, replied that he had “noted the reports” and “the comparison speaks volumes”: According to the reports released by the research body of the Australian government, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people comprise 3.3% of the Australian population but 29% of prisoners in 2020. In the Northern Territory, they make up 84% of the prison population. And their rate of imprisonment is 13 times that of the non-Indigenous group. At least 474 Indigenous people died during incarceration over the past 30 years. These figures fully expose the grave human rights problems in Australia. Zhao is the official who triggered a diplomatic storm in November 2020 by tweeting an image that appeared to depict an Australian soldier cutting the throat of an Afghan child holding a sheep, together with the words: “Don’t be afraid, we are coming to bring you peace!” Zhao went on to say that Australia “adopted genocide and assimilation policies against the Indigenous people” in the past, and “even till this day, the Indigenous people are still subject to grave unfair treatment when it comes to living conditions and law enforcement”. He called on “some in Australia” to “carefully read the reports” and “earnestly do some soul-searching”. The Chinese government has long attempted to deflect attention from its own rights record by accusing the west of hypocrisy. Australia has joined the US, the UK and others in staging a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics, with Scott Morrison citing the diplomatic tensions and also “the human rights abuses in Xinjiang and the many other issues that Australia has consistently raised”. The Australian government has not joined with the US in adopting the terminology “genocide” in describing human rights abuses in the Xinjiang region, but has said it is concerned about “repressive measures enforced against Uyghurs and other ethnic minorities in Xinjiang”. Prime minister Scott Morrison said in his Closing the Gap statement last year that he was committed to “a genuine partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders and organisations – a partnership generations overdue, built on mutual respect, dignity, and above all, trust” – with a goal of reducing the rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults incarcerated by at least 15% by 2031. Christian schools are not happy with the protections added to protect LGBTQ+ students as part of the passage of the religious discrimination legislation in the house. The Australian Association of Christian Schools, which represents more than 100 Christian schools, wants all the amendments rejected. Chief executive officer Vanessa Cheng said they went too far and are a “complete betrayal of trust”. Christian Schools Australia, which is “committed to advancing the Kingdom of God” in schools, also called on the Senate to reject the amendments. Public policy director Mark Spencer said they removed “the ability to teach in accordance with our faith”. Families and friends will be able to visit dying or labouring loved ones in hospitals under a relaxation to visitation rules across New South Wales. The updated guidelines, to be distributed to hospitals across the state today, will make it easier for people to visit patients with a terminal or life-threatening prognosis and for partners to be present during birth. Access will be granted if the visit is seen to benefit the patient’s physical or emotional wellbeing and hospitals will still be able to limit numbers to reduce the risk of Covid transmission. Visitors will need to be fully vaccinated or have a valid medical exemption. The shift comes after a number of families came forward over the past week with harrowing stories of being denied the chance to be with loved ones as they die due to restrictions brought during the Omicron wave. After apologising to those affected publicly on Wednesday, premier Dominic Perrottet said the change was made as soon as it was safe to do so. Perrottet said: There have been many heartbreaking stories. It has always been a fine balance. We have to be cautious given the high-risk setting of our hospitals but ultimately we want to make sure that compassion is the major focus. The [changes] will make a real difference to provide support for those people who are coming to the end of the end of life and ensuring that they have their friends, their carers and a family around them. Here is Graham Readfearn’s latest Temperature Check: John Alexander, the retiring Liberal MP for the seat of Bennelong, is giving his valedictory speech and is using the moment to talk about how he believes parliament can be a better place. He says if he could change one thing in parliament it would be to address the “segregation” between MPs and ministers, saying too often the work of MPs in parliament is dismissed: Too often parliament’s work is dismissed by government, and committees are seen as ways to occupy backbenchers. I’m immensely proud of the work that my colleagues and I have done on backbench committees, our backbench committees utilise the knowledge and expertise of their members and engage with world-leading experts from across the country. We find the facts that then build the solid foundation of reasoned recommendations to form evidence-based policies for our leaders to absorb and use. But once tabled, they sit in ministerial drawers to gather dust and eventually receive a token response that does not engage with the scholarship within. Alexander talks about the lack of long-term vision and planning, pointing to the failure of the country to have high-speed rail as an example: Unfortunately, vision that plans for decades into the future is at odds with a political system that resets every three years and is obsessed with a narrative of the day. In this house, where the main game is all too often to denigrate and name-call, the contest of ideas is the first casualty. If I could change one thing about our system, it is the way it segregates ministers from the parliament and the opportunities that are lost through this. He also says that, on the eve of an election, he is hoping to elevate the political debate in a way that earns the trust and respect of Australians. “Make this a contest of ideas, plans and vision that will uplift our people and give them hope for the future,” he says. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese then stands up to congratulate Alexander, and also thanks him for teaching him a “kick second serve” (which, according to my tennis-playing colleague Paul Karp, is a slower, spinnier, wide serve.) The new head of the New South Wales Treasury has announced an independent investigation following a scathing report from the state’s auditor general which found the department provided “late, unsophisticated, and inaccurate forecasts” over a controversial $40bn rail corporation. Released on Wednesday, the report by auditor general Margaret Crawford accused treasury of being “unnecessarily obstructive and difficult” in a bid to withhold key information about the Transport Asset Holding Entity while the auditor was attempting to review the state’s finances. The extraordinary report revealed Treasury’s attempts to withhold information from the auditor extended to sending 1,000 pages of documents to her office in the early hours of Christmas Eve, on the same day she was due to sign off on the government’s finances. The newly appointed Treasury secretary, Paul Grimes, is fronting a parliamentary inquiry about the TAHE on Thursday, and opened by announcing he would order an “independent assessment” of the processes which led to the “important, serious matters” raised in the auditor’s report. Brace for a pictorial journey of valedictories, press conferences and chamber huddles, brought to you by Mike Bowers: New Covid treatments will go to unvaccinated and other vulnerable patients. Donna Lu reports they will not be generally available for “many, many week”. Here’s the Senate order of business ... The valedictory speeches have begun – we’ll bring you the highlights. The Christian lobby is now saying the government should withdraw its religious discrimination bill as it has been “completely undermined” by the simultaneous changes to the Sex Discrimination Act. In a statement, the Australian Christian Lobby’s Wendy Francis said the bill was intended to help faith-based schools, “but [changes to the act] now do more harm than good”: The Australian Christian Lobby withdraws its support for the Religious Discrimination Bill package and calls on the Morrison Government to now withdraw the Bills from the Senate. Taking away protections for Christian schools is a price too high to pay for the passage of the Religious Discrimination Bill. The amendments voted on by Labor, independents and these Liberal MPs unnecessarily interfere with the operation of faith-based schools. With the amendments so damaging to religious freedom, the Government should immediately withdraw the bills. Given the earlier remarks from senator Amanda Stoker, it would appear that this is a live option. All eyes are on what the government will do (or try to do) in the Senate – either strip out the Labor/crossbench amendments from the House, allow them to go through, or not bring on the religious discrimination legislation at all. The Senate is due to adjourn at 6pm tonight, on the final day of the sitting week, and there’s stacks already on the agenda. It’s also the last Senate sitting day until budget week in late March. Considering the all-nighter in the House, it’s unlikely there will be time to consider or pass the bill today in the Senate unless the upper house passes an “hours motion” to extend its sitting. Independent senator Rex Patrick reckons that’s unlikely, claiming Labor, Greens and some of the crossbench wouldn’t back the motion. There’s also another spanner in the works, with Sky News reporting that Liberal senator Andrew Bragg could cross the floor to back the House amendments. That could mean the Section 38 (3) changes to better protect trans students could pass the Senate too – if they come to a vote at all. Could be a very long day. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews is urging his federal counterparts not to vote for the religious discrimination bill in the Senate if they can’t secure amendments to protect trans children: Every child should be protected, whether they’re gay, straight or trans. Every child should be protected and any laws that don’t deliver that ought not be voted for. Asked if he was critical of federal Labor MPs in the lower house, Andrews replied: No, as I understand it they’re going to work towards making amendments in the Senate and I’ll be urging them if you can’t amend, don’t vote for it. All kids deserve to be protected, all kids. And anyone who tells you they’re prepared to protect some and not others, I wouldn’t believe them. Regulations put in place by treasurer Josh Frydenberg to cripple proxy advisers could be knocked down by the Senate this morning. Proxy advisers give advice to super funds and other investors about how to vote on executive pay and the performance of companies on environmental, social and governance issues. They’ve long been a thorn in the side of company directors and executives, who are irked by complaints about high pay or poor performance. Frydenberg’s regulation requires proxy advisers to give the companies they write about their reports, which the industry says robs them of their property as it is these reports they sell to clients, and bars clients owning advisers – an attack on union-and-employer-controlled industry super funds, many of whom are among owners of the adviser the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors. The treasurer brought the change in by regulation in December after earlier attempts to legislate the changes, which proxy advisers have called a “Trumpian brain fart”, failed. But these kinds of regulations can be knocked out by the Senate, and crossbencher Rex Patrick plans to move a motion to do so after 11.15am today. He told Guardian Australia he was going for an up-and-down vote, with no debate, to stop the Coalition running down the clock by filibustering. Labor came out strongly for disallowance this week and the Greens are also onboard. There are also some Liberal backbenchers who are understood to be unhappy with the regulation. But the big swing factor is Pauline Hanson’s One Nation – Patrick said he did not know how the rightwing party intended to vote: The Senate is a lottery. The treasurer might have to try his luck. He may win or he may lose. Patrick is unhappy with both the way Frydenberg brought in the changes and their substance: The way in which the treasurer did it was sneaky and designed to circumvent the Senate’s role in either refusing or approving regulations. The bottom line is that this is Josh Frydenberg protecting big business. Josh Frydenberg doesn’t like super funds effectively being able to get independent advice. It harms the super funds, who’ll now have to set up a team inside each of the funds – that’ll just cost super fund members money. Assistant attorney-general Amanda Stoker has been a bit more cagey when asked if the government in the Senate would try to roll back the House amendments to better protect transgender students. Stoker told Sky News the government was “checking in with all of the stakeholder groups”, and wouldn’t commit on what it would do next – try to amend the House bill to remove the repeal of Section 38 (3) of the Sex Discrimination Act, allow the bill to go through unamended, or potentially pull it off the agenda altogether. She said: We need to make sure that we are consulting with [stakeholders] and making sure that ... we can fully appreciate the implications of that amendment, before we have to deal with the Senate. Earlier, fellow Liberal senator Jane Hume said the Coalition would “inevitably move amendments to try and revert the bill back to the government’s position”. Stoker wouldn’t commit to that, saying only that the government was “really intent on honouring the commitment we made to all of the multicultural groups, to all other religious groups, and also all of the LGBTI groups in the consultation process that we’ve undertaken”. The Australian Aged Care Collaboration, a group of six aged care peak bodies, has written an open letter to Scott Morrison urging the government to do something to address the crisis in the sector: At the start of this pandemic the aged care sector and your government agreed it was a national priority to do all we can to protect older Australians, and the passionate and dedicated people that care for them, safe from the coronavirus. For the past two years aged care services and staff have been on the frontline working day and night in the most challenging situations, doing everything they can, often with limited resources, to keep people safe. Older Australians and their families have endured wave after wave of the pandemic. Our staff and services have risen to this challenge despite the huge cost to themselves and their families. Much of the government’s response has fallen short of what Australia’s older people in care have needed. Older people, their families and our aged care workers are all suffering as a consequence. Sadly, the tragic human cost of this crisis continues to grow. The aged care royal commission released its findings last year and found that “the Australian aged care system is unacceptable and unsustainable” due in large part to “fundamental systemic flaws”. It found the workforce is undervalued, understaffed and underpaid, and services are not funded to deliver all the care that is needed to the standards that are desired. The AACC said: These fundamental issues which were cracks in the aged care system are now being turned into chasms by the pandemic. It has called on the government to immediately lift staff wages, as recommended by the royal commission, and immediately address critical staff and skills shortages. It wants the government to immediately increase subsidies paid to services to fund the increase in new operating costs incurred for improved infection prevention and protection measures, and to establish the proposed National Aged Care Covid Coordination Centre. Energy giant AGL has brought forward the closure date of its two biggest coal-fired power plants by several years, responding to a market shift towards renewable sources of electricity. In an earnings statement on Thursday to the ASX, the soon-to-be-demerged energy company said its underlying first-half profit had falled 40.9% to $194m. The main interest for many, though, will be the acceleration of the closure plans for AGL’s Hunter Valley-based Bayswater black coal-fired power station in NSW to 2033 from its scheduled demise in 2035, while its brown coal-fired Loy Yang A plant in Victoria will now close in 2045 rather than 2048. The timing would depend on “the readiness of the entire energy system to operate without our critical baseload generation”, the company said. Market forces, though, could decide on a much earlier closure date than these revised schedules. Worries about energy shortages have pushed up the cost of coal and gas globally, some of which has begun affecting wholesale power prices in Australia, despite the falling share of fossil-fuel sources in the main national market. Wind, solar and hydro plants, whose energy costs are nearly free, generated almost a third of the electricity for the eastern states in 2021. One of Australia’s oldest companies, AGL generates about one-fifth of the national electricity market’s power, with about 11,000 megawatts of capacity. By the end of 2022 it plans to split into two, with most of the generation units going into its Accel Energy spinoff and the retailing arm to make up AGL Australia. Labor MP Stephen Jones gave an emotional speech about his nephew Ollie this week. He also said this: My own son [Paddy Quilter-Jones] is also a beautiful, creative, intelligent 14-year-old. He designs and makes clothes, is a gifted makeup artist, moves seamlessly between the wardrobes of men and women. He wears heels that give me vertigo and has more handbags than his sister. He has more courage than any boy I have met. He swims against the tide. Quilter-Jones has been on ABC television this morning. He said he cried when he first heard the speech: It was a really beautiful speech. It was really important. I saw it and I thought, “Wow, like this is really important for people to see and for people to hear.” I think that the bill needs to be changed because it’s disgusting that a school would have the right to expel a gay or trans child for being who they are and it is disgusting that people of faith are protected by their religion so they can say whatever they want about gay and trans or whatever people just because it is what they believe. Quilter-Jones went on to talk about his cousin: I remember Ollie from when I was younger. I think my favourite memory of him was when we were – I think we were about five. We were out in the back garden and we were talking about things and I said, “Ollie, are you my best friend?” And he said, “No, we can’t be best friends, we’re family” and I said, “What does that mean?” And he said, “Family is closer than friends because we’re blood” and Ollie is my blood and I love him and I still love him, even though he’s gone. And, for the record, Quilter-Jones said he doesn’t have more handbags than his sister, but hers are gathering dust in her wardrobe. Sixteen Covid-positive people have died in Victoria, and the state has recorded 9,391 new cases, while 543 people are in hospital, with 75 in intensive care and 23 on ventilators. Twenty-four people have died with Covid in New South Wales and 10,130 new cases have been reported, while 1,795 people are in hospital, with 121 in intensive care. It’s a gas-fired recovery! Except gas-fired power has fallen to the lowest level since 2005, as renewable energy surges. Adam Morton reports: Liberal senator Jane Hume said the government will try to move Senate amendments to remove the Sex Discrimination Act amendments from the House, which would have better protected transgender students. Those are the amendments which Labor and the crossbench have been out this morning claiming as a huge win. The non-government members of the House (and five Coalition MPs) succeeded with amendments to remove section 38 (3) of the Sex Discrimination Act, which does not make it unlawful for religious schools to discriminate based on sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or relationship status. Labor leader Anthony Albanese called the removal of that section a “fundamental principle” to make “an enormous difference”, during an early morning press conference on Thursday. The government’s position had been to only remove “sexual orientation” from that clause but leave the rest. Instead, last night’s marathon sitting saw the House agree to remove that whole section. “The government will inevitably move amendments to try and revert the bill back to the government’s position,” Hume said in a press conference, when asked what the Coalition might do next. Hume said the amendments would be “re-prosecuted” in the upper house. She said instead the government still backed an Australian Law Reform Commission process to investigate the 38 (3) issue, “so that we get that balance right and handle the issue as sensitively as possible”: When you deal with competing rights, it’s always going to be a contentious issue ... the rights of children, sometimes very vulnerable children, with the rights of people of faith to have the choice to send their children to a same-sex school. People of faith should be allowed to express their faith to send their children to a same-sex school but at the same time we want to make sure we protect all children, particularly Australia’s most vulnerable. The federal government has prioritised the religious discrimination bill over other legislation, with only a handful of sitting days before the election. Legislation for a federal integrity commission is one of the “de-prioritised” issues – although it remains a priority for many in parliament, and many hoping to enter parliament at the next election. Labor is among those who are critical of the draft bill, calling it soft. RMIT ABC Fact Check has had a gander at senator Anne Ruston’s claims it’s tougher than a royal commission. Need a quick recap of yesterday’s shenanigans in question time? As prime minister Scott Morrison said: Bring. It. On. Sarah Martin reports: The Therapeutic Goods Administration has provisionally approved an AstraZeneca booster for adults. AAP reports that the health department stresses Pfizer and Moderna remain the preferred booster options, regardless of what vaccines someone has previously received: The decision to receive Vaxzevria (AstraZeneca) as a booster must be made in consultation with a medical professional. The department encouraged people to get a booster to better protect against severe disease. It’s been a heavy morning. It will be an intense day. Please take a moment to appreciate this video of a Nerf gun dart being removed from the gullet of a pet green tree frog: Here’s Katharine Murphy with nine of the highlights from yesterday’s National Press Club with former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins and former Australian of the Year Grace Tame. (There were many, many highlights): Women’s safety minister Anne Ruston has spoken to ABC radio about the five Liberal MPs who crossed the floor on the religious discrimination bill. She said: We allow people to be able to vote according to their beliefs and values so that was quite an acceptable thing for our backbenchers to do last night. Ruston has also been asked about Grace Tame’s accusation she received a threatening phone call asking her not to criticise Scott Morrison. She said the government was happy to work with Tame to investigate what happened but that it was up to Tame if she wanted further action taken: It shouldn’t have happened. The government and the Australia Day Council had no knowledge of this accusation that was made. We’d be keen to get to the bottom of what has actually happened. Ruston outlined what the federal government has spent on ending violence against women, in response to Tame’s calls for more to be done. Shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus said this morning it had been a “shocking process” to get the religious discrimination bill through the House. He told ABC radio: This parliament , if invited to work on a bipartisan process, can produce legislation in contentious areas that serves to unite our country and not further divide it. Dreyfus is confident the Senate will support further changes, such as adding an anti-vilification provision, and removing the bill’s ability to override state legislation. He wouldn’t be drawn on whether Labor would vote down the bill if those amendments weren’t added. He said despite removing discrimination against all children, there was “much yet to be improved”. Labor “almost got there” on amending the bill’s statement of belief, he said. Liberal senator Jane Hume pointed out that the government does not have the same numbers in the Senate. She also told the ABC it was about “competing rights”: I’m absolutely certain that at the end of the day when the bill passes both houses of parliament, that we’ll land on the right decision, balancing freedoms and rights of people with deeply held religious beliefs and their desire, particularly to send their children to a same-sex school, and making sure we protect the rights of all children as well. The debate over religious discrimination, and particularly the protections for trans students, will continue today. It’s been full of heat and emotion. Teddy Cook has written this incredibly thoughtful piece about what it’s like for trans people at the moment: Please don’t forget that trans people are not an ideology; we are real, and we are someone you know. Anthony Albanese said Labor “fought very hard” for the amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act. He told the Nine network this morning that Labor will seek further amendments to the bill in the Senate: It has passed. We think there are further amendments that should be made. We think, for example, the issue of vilification against a Muslim woman wearing a hijab, for example, that can occur or someone of any faith being vilified should be included by provisions as well. And we will pursue those amendments in the Senate. There are other issues about discrimination against older people receiving home care. The bill covers aged care residents, but it doesn’t cover home care. Labor failed to get through a change to the “statement of belief” in the bill. It wanted to make it clear it wouldn’t remove or diminish any existing protections. Also, this from 1.49am: I just ran into a veteran MP who said the last time he’d been up this late it had involved ... a dance floor. The House sat all night, debating the government’s religious discrimination bill. It passed just before 5am and will now head to the Senate. Five Liberal MPs –Bridget Archer, Trent Zimmerman, Katie Allen, Fiona Martin and Dave Sharma – crossed the floor to help Labor and the crossbench add more protections for LGBTQI+ students. Paul Karp filed the full story first thing this morning. Zimmerman said he felt compelled to cross the floor because trans children are some of the most vulnerable people in society. He told the ABC: I thought there was a glaring omission and it was a bad signal to send to this community. But he said there were still “unresolved issues” over potential discrimination against teachers. The fallout from former Australian of the Year Grace Tame and former staffer Brittany Higgins’ National Press Club address yesterday continues. Tame told a startling story about a “threatening” phone call asking her not to dump prime minister Scott Morrison in it with an election looming. The Nine newspapers are reporting that the Australia Day Council has denied it was behind the call (Tame declined to say who it was). Last night we heard the latest from the national spy agency. In the annual address Asio boss Mike Burgess said lockdowns and vaccination grievances sometimes “turned to violence” and that Australian elections were at risk from interference. He warned about young children being radicalised and said the agency had detected and disrupted a foreign interference plot. Spies have been using online dating apps to recruit people. I hope Karp is having a nap. Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Daniel Hurst, Josh Butler and Mike Bowers are all here to take you through the last sitting day for this week.Peter Dutton’s incendiary question time intervention suggesting China had picked Anthony Albanese as its election candidate plumbed new – and dangerous – depths. For weeks Scott Morrison and his defence minister have been suggesting voters must not be lulled into a false sense of national security bipartisanship. Only the Coalition, their argument goes, can be trusted not to “appease” China. At the tail-end of question time on Thursday, Dutton dialled the scare campaign up to 11. With Morrison watching on, the defence minister declared he wanted to scotch the idea that both of Australia’s mainstream political parties were equally committed to “defending our nation”. Nothing, claimed Dutton, could be further from the truth. On matters of national security, he suggested, Albanese was the least-prepared alternative prime minister since Mark Latham. Then came the deadest of dead cats. “We now see evidence, Mr Speaker, that the Chinese Communist party, the Chinese government, has also made a decision about who they’re going to back in the next federal election, Mr Speaker, and that is open and that is obvious, and they have picked this bloke as that candidate,” Dutton said. This was by no means an accidental line. Morrison used similar but vaguer language when stating “those who are seeking to coerce Australia” knew that “their candidate” in the election was “the leader of the Labor party”. The implication of these carefully crafted statements was clear – Labor would go soft on China and had Beijing’s backing. Never mind the fact that Labor has supported the government’s diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics. Never mind that Labor has not only criticised the Chinese government over human rights abuses but has also gone further than the Morrison government by calling for “targeted sanctions on foreign companies, officials and other entities known to be directly profiting from Uyghur forced labour”. Albanese has rebuffed the former Labor party elder Paul Keating who wants a return to the engagement policies of the 1990s. In a commercial radio interview, when asked whether he stood with Taiwan against the increasing military threat from China, Albanese replied with a crisp: “Yes.” Penny Wong has repudiated the Chinese embassy for putting out a personalised statement criticising Tony Abbott over his high-profile trip to Taiwan. Labor shares the government’s concerns about China’s militarisation of the South China Sea. The ALP backed the government’s defence strategic update in 2020, together with its $270bn in additional spending on defence capability over a decade, and has said it supports the Aukus nuclear-powered submarine plan despite a bunch of questions about how exactly it will be delivered. All of that was cast aside on Thursday for a crude political attack designed to suggest Albanese was Beijing’s favoured candidate (so don’t vote for him). Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Dutton and Morrison also ignored the director general of the Office of National Intelligence, Andrew Shearer, whose appointment was originally opposed by Labor because it argued he was from the conservative side of politics. Shearer has said national security “is rightly bipartisan in a more partisan world” and his dealings with Albanese and senior Labor colleagues during private security briefings have been “cordial, constructive and professional”. When Labor’s parliamentary tactician, Tony Burke, rose to complain that Dutton was alluding to treason or sedition on the part of the opposition leader, the minister tried to claim he wasn’t actually tarring Albanese. Dutton stated he was reflecting only “on the actions of the Chinese government” even if that “might be uncomfortable for those opposite”. And then Dutton dropped the head of Asio, Mike Burgess, into the domestic political fray. “Mine was a reflection on what has been publicly reported and commented on by the director general of Asio and … there are media reports today in relation to these serious matters,” he said. That was an apparent reference to Burgess’s annual threat assessment speech on Wednesday night in which the intelligence boss said Asio had “recently detected and disrupted a foreign interference plot in the lead-up to an election in Australia”. It’s important to note that Burgess was vague on the particular election, country or personalities involved – but went out of his way to say it should be taken as a general warning for all politicians and prospective candidates to be on guard for suspicious approaches. “Attempts at political interference are not confined to one side of politics, and you’d be surprised by the range of countries involved,” he said. Burgess made it clear in an interview a year ago that he did not want Asio to be drawn into domestic political debate and revealed he sometimes had a quiet word telling politicians to cease and desist. That makes Dutton’s invocation of Asio particularly egregious. Some might suggest Thursday’s theatre was aimed at diverting attention from the government’s political problems: the aged care crisis, internal leaks and spats, pandemic missteps and its tone-deaf response to calls for reform by Grace Tame and Brittany Higgins. So why not ignore it? Because prioritising politics over national security in this way is dangerous and must be called out. The Dutton intervention undermines institutional structures and conventions. It drew in the Asio chief – someone who is meant to be an apolitical security official – as collateral damage. Burgess himself noted on Wednesday that the alleged election plot had been thwarted, the prospective candidates had been unaware of it, and Australia must not allow the fear of foreign interference to “stoke community division”. That would, he said, “perversely have the same corrosive impact on our democracy as foreign interference itself”. Dutton’s intervention is also damaging because it attempts to maximise domestic division at a time of intense global challenges and when unity should be an asset. His cabinet colleague Dan Tehan observed four months ago that there was now “bipartisan recognition of the changing geostrategic environment in the Indo-Pacific and the greater assertiveness that we’re seeing from China”. In a plea to stay united on defence, foreign affairs, intelligence and trade issues, Tehan said: “The more that we can make sure that we’re united politically in how we tackle these current strategic issues I think the better it is for us as a nation.” But that unity is now being trashed for crude political reasons – an election is looming.For those versed in trade union folklore, the battle of Saltley Gate holds a special place. In 1972, workers from Birmingham factories downed tools to support striking miners, blockading a gasworks in the city where there was a huge stockpile of coking coal. Orchestrated by a young Arthur Scargill, the blockade successfully prevented lorries from collecting the coal. The action was pivotal in winning the strike for the miners, so it comes as no surprise that today, on the 50th anniversary of Saltley Gate, the Midlands branch of the TUC is holding a celebratory event. Scargill will be one of the speakers. There is much talk about how Britain is returning to the 1970s, but the detour down memory lane provided by the events in Birmingham in February 1972 shows how fatuous are the comparisons. To be sure, there is some upward pressure on pay as businesses reopen after lockdown, but the idea that Britain is locked into a wage-price spiral is for the birds. Fundamental changes to the economy that have taken place over the past half century mean prices are going to rise faster than wages this year, further eroding living standards. The factories workers surged out of to support Scargill’s call for solidarity have largely gone – since replaced by offices, call centres and warehouses. Mass pickets were outlawed as part of a concerted drive by the Conservative governments of the 1980s to weaken organised labour. The number of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements has plummeted, and in the private sector only one in seven workers belong to a trade union. Four million of the 6.6m trade union members work in the public sector, while those in the lowest-paid, highly casualised sectors, who would benefit most from the support of a trade union, are least likely to be members of one. Just how far the pendulum has swung in the past half century was illustrated in the letter by the general secretary of the GMB union, Gary Smith, to Andrew Bailey, inviting the governor of the Bank of England to try his hand as a care worker for a day to see how people coped on low pay. Bailey has taken some deserved flak for suggesting it would help the Bank of England regain control of inflation were workers – faced with rocketing energy bills and rising taxes – to moderate their wage claims this year The alacrity with which 10 Downing Street slapped down Bailey for his comments was also illustrative. The balance of power in the workplace has shifted too far in favour of employers – and even the Conservatives can sense there is a problem, not least for their own political survival. One thing that has not changed from the 1970s is that making people worse off has a political cost for the government. In theory, weakening the power of unions was supposed to liberate management to bring in new ways of working that would boost efficiency. Forcing workers to accept less generous pay awards would leave more money to spare for investment in new kit and better training. Everybody would be better off. In practice, investment has remained weak. Rather than spend money on improving skills that are lamentably poor by international standards, employers have paid themselves more and boosted the value of their assets through share buyback schemes. The 2010s were a lost decade of historically weak productivity growth and flatlining living standards. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, was quite right when she said the Conservatives had become the party of high taxation because they were the party of low growth. The current model simply isn’t working. There are lessons to be learned from the US, where Joe Biden knows the economic model is not working well enough for ordinary Americans either. Claiming to be the most pro-labour president ever, Biden has tried to make it easier for unions to organise, a move that is showing signs of paying off. Buffalo, in New York state, recently became the first city in the US to have unionised branches of Starbucks, a firm that is certainly no friend of organised labour. Biden has also listened to demands from unions to boost manufacturing through a “buy American” procurement policy. More generally, the White House’s strategy has been to keep the economy running as hot as possible, despite concerns from the Federal Reserve, the US central bank, about inflation. Strong growth has pulled down the unemployment rate, resulting in labour shortages. There have been some positive signs in the UK. The TUC was heavily involved in the design of the furlough scheme at the start of the pandemic. The “national living wage” will go up by 6.6% in April, to £9.50 an hour, shielding those on the lowest incomes from the worst of the cost-of-living crisis. Firms are struggling to fill vacancies, forcing them to offer better pay and conditions. All that said, a piece of the jigsaw is missing, and that is unions. They have a far bigger role to play in prising Britain out of its low-skill, low-pay, low-investment rut. Levelling up is a worthy ambition, but if it is to be anything more than a slogan it needs to begin in the workplace. In recent years, the balance of power between workers and bosses has been a case of levelling down. There’s no question that the UK has plenty of economic woes, but they can’t be blamed on organised labour. One of the problems is that unions are too weak, rather than too strong. Larry Elliott is the Guardian’s economics editorA lot started to make sense for Peter Keogh in the aftermath of the suicide of his son, Lewis. The 2am requests for an online game of Scrabble, for example, in the months leading up to his death. Lewis, who died in 2013 at the age of 34, was seeking relief from the grip that gambling had on him. “His suicide note said he was too ashamed to talk about it,” says Peter. “We didn’t know he was living with this horrendous addiction.” Starting on Friday, Lewis’s former partner Jane and her daughter Jilly will form part of a 40-strong group walking from Edinburgh to Glasgow. Recovering gambling addicts, bereaved families and affected others will combine. The effort forms part of The Big Step, a campaign aimed at ending all gambling-related advertising and sponsorship in football, overseen by the Gambling With Lives charity. Peter Keogh and his wife, Sadie, are longtime supporters. “Football clubs have a responsibility to the young people that come and support them,” Peter says. “Every shirt or football element that has a betting logo presents the subconscious to the seven-year-old who loves the game: ‘That must be good if my team is wearing it.’ That’s very dangerous but it is how advertising works. It is subtle but effective.” Lewis’s ashes are scattered under the pitch at Hillsborough. Sheffield Wednesday apologised to his parents after gambling-related branding later appeared at the stadium. “If you go out and look, hard work will get you your [alternative] advertising,” Peter says. Scotland is significant because its two biggest clubs, Celtic and Rangers, have the names of gambling firms across the front of their strips. The Scottish Professional Football League, Scottish Cup and League Cup no longer have bookmakers as title sponsors but until recently all did. “Gambling has always been a big financial contribution to the finances of football,” said Neil Doncaster, the SPFL’s chief executive, last year. Peter Keogh believes politicians are waking up to the fact this alliance is harmful. “It will take parliament to change things but the impetus is in our favour now,” he says in respect of banning gambling sponsorship in football. “If that takes time, it probably takes more lives. The day that we have zero betting advertising in sport will be a great one for me.” The three-day walk will call at the homes of Spartans, Hibs, Hearts, Livingston, Motherwell, Hamilton, Celtic, Partick Thistle and Rangers before concluding at Hampden Park on Sunday evening. Hearts represent an interesting case. “In 2014 we made the decision not to take any direct sponsorship from gambling companies,” says Catriona McCallum, the marketing and communications director. “We, like many clubs, strive to have a positive impact on our community and this was an important step for us. We have been fortunate enough to secure a number of large number of corporate sponsors who are attracted by our social responsibility.” Among those participating is Kelly Field. “I suffered with an online gambling addiction for many years, which was fuelled by a relentless barrage of advertising,” she says. “Gambling advertising and sponsorship, in football and elsewhere, makes people think that gambling is totally normal and safe, when the reality is very different.” Field contemplated suicide. So, too, did James Grimes, who founded The Big Step after a 12-year addiction battle. Although he believes the work of parliaments is important, Grimes feels football supporters can play their own part. “There is a core value in persuading clubs and their fans to get behind this,” he says. “If we can get fans to lobby their clubs – and this happened recently at Norwich City – then we can bring clubs with us. We now have 18 of them who back our campaign. I have no doubt that one day gambling advertising won’t be allowed in football so those clubs are getting ahead of this. We are hoping our presence at the grounds will at least persuade some clubs to rethink their partnerships or pledge to move away from them. “More and more clubs are being more socially conscious. More and more people are seeing the harm caused. Footballers themselves are also in difficulty; the Sporting Chance Clinic said gambling is now the most prominent addiction among footballers. So the clubs know what is happening.” Grimes and Peter Keogh stress that they are “not anti-gambling”; nuance is important. Grimes says: “I genuinely support people’s right to have a bet. We are not trying to stop that. We are on the side of the average gambler. We want gambling to be as safe as it can be. Taking advertisements away from football won’t stop people from having a bet. Thirty years ago, people knew where to go and put a bet on without needing that to be on the front of a football shirt or on LED boards around a pitch.” The Betting and Gaming Council, which represents gambling companies, said the industry had provided vital funding during the pandemic, including £40m to the English Football League, and that a study last year from Prof Ian McHale of the University of Liverpool “concluded there was no evidence that sponsorship of clubs or leagues by betting operators influenced participation in betting”. The BGC added that betting advertising and sponsorship had to comply with strict guidelines and that safer gambling messaging was regularly and prominently displayed. Reports have suggested the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport’s review of the 2005 gambling act could lead to a ban on gambling-related shirt sponsorships from 2023. For now, the battle for the campaigners continues. “I have never thought this is the fault of football,” says Grimes. “It is the fault of regulation, weak regulation which allows gambling companies to exploit loopholes and advertise wherever, whenever, to whomever. Football just laps it up because it is easy. I hope this walk encourages clubs to make the right choice.” • GamCare (gamcare.org.uk, helpline: 0808 8020 133) offers free information, support and counselling for problem gamblers in the UK. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.It’s the beginning of the end, then, for the two finest fast bowlers England have ever had, the decision to drop them as sudden and unexpected as a bullet in the back. Like they say in the Sopranos: “Our line of work, it’s always out there, you probably don’t even hear it when it happens.” Jimmy Anderson knows it. He wrote as much in his column just a couple of weeks ago: “Everyone’s future is in doubt, it always happens when you get beaten in Ashes.” But it’s one thing to say it, another to really believe it’s true and might be about to happen to you. He also said Joe Root had only just told him he wanted him to stay on. And he would have too, through the West Indies tour, into the English summer and beyond. If you were picking a side to win England’s next game, Anderson and Broad would be in it. There’s no argument in the statistics. Anderson has taken 56 wickets at 24 runs each in the past two years of Test cricket, Broad 52 at 21. No one else has managed more than 40. You might highlight Anderson’s growing problem with taking wickets in the second innings, but he is still a fitter bowler than Ollie Robinson, who in Australia struggled to make it through his third and fourth spells, let alone the third and fourth days. You might mention Broad’s long lean stretch on tour in Sri Lanka and India last spring, but he’s still a better Test bowler in the conditions than Chris Woakes. But of course those aren’t the numbers that matter. Anderson will hate it, given he’s been complaining for years that older players are held to a different standards, but the figures behind this decision are their ages – 35 and 39 – and the sense that England’s new interim management team, who have now sacked or dropped 11 players and coaches in a week (it’s ended up a very red and bloody “red-ball reset”), feel this is the best way to begin a new era. It can be a fine line between bravery and stupidity. Whether the management are seen to have crossed it or not will depend on how the team does in the West Indies, where they haven’t won a series in 18 years. It leaves Root, in particular, under real pressure to justify the decision to keep him on as captain even after his teams have twice been beaten out of sight in Australia. No one involved is about to discuss it in public now, but there were clear signs of friction between him and his two senior bowlers during the Ashes. He criticised his attack for not being “braver” and for bowling the wrong lengths after they were beaten in Adelaide. Anderson’s pointed public reply was: “We can’t just go after the game, ‘we should have bowled fuller’,” while Broad delivered more blunt truths later in the tour. “It doesn’t matter which bowlers you play if you’re being bowled out for 140,” he said. Broad spoke so well in that press conference that people started talking about whether he might be England’s next Test captain. “Instead of looking ahead at what’s coming next year, what’s coming in the winter, what’s coming in the next Ashes series, can we get back to the real basics of what’s ahead of us right now? How are we winning this next Test?” he said. England have ended up taking the opposite tack. Root, Andrew Strauss and Paul Collingwood have decided it will be easier to start rebuilding the team, and remodelling England’s approach to Test cricket, without Anderson and Broad. Strauss says it is only for the “time being”. He made it clear that whoever takes over as England’s managing director and head coach would have the choice of picking them again. He’ll know, too, that it won’t necessarily work out that way. It will depend on results in the West Indies and whether Anderson and Broad want to knuckle down to two months of county cricket to try to prove they deserve their spots in the Test squad – spots which, they’ll feel, shouldn’t have been taken away from them to begin with. The anger they feel in the days after the decision will have to drive them through the cold weeks of the Championship, which will feel a little different when Test selection is not taken as given at the end of them. The best, most charitable take on all this is the one Strauss offered himself. It means the new coach will have more options when they take over. They’ll know what they can expect from Broad and Anderson, after all, and have an idea if Matthew Fisher, Craig Overton and Saqib Mahmood are genuine contenders in Test cricket, and whether Robinson, Woakes and Mark Wood are able to lead the attack. But the flip side of it, which Strauss didn’t mention, is that the coach will also be in the invidious position of beginning with a difficult decision about whether or not to take a step backwards, and a righteous clamour to recall Anderson and Broad for at least one more series as a send-off in recognition of everything they’ve done for English cricket. Because it can’t and shouldn’t end like this, with a press release in the dead of winter.Keir Starmer has blamed Boris Johnson’s slur about Jimmy Savile for inciting a mob that accosted him outside parliament on Monday. The Labour leader said he had never before been accused in public of being a “paedophile protector” until the prime minister falsely accused him, a week before the attack, of failing to prosecute Savile when he was director of public prosecutions (DPP). In an interview with the Times, Starmer said Johnson had used a “deliberate slur without any basis in fact”. He added: “The PM knew exactly what he was doing. It is a conspiracy theory of violent fascists that has been doing the rounds for some time.” On Monday, police escorted the Labour leader and the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, away from demonstrators, some of whom accused him of protecting paedophiles while others shouted “nonce” and “Jimmy Savile”. The prime minister has refused to apologise for the remark but has since claimed that he was not referring to Starmer’s personal record at the Crown Prosecution Service. Starmer told the Times: “I have never been called a paedophile protector before. That happened [on Monday] for the first time in my life. If others want to argue that this is unconnected with precisely what the PM said one week before then let them make that case. But they’ll never persuade me that there is no link.” He reiterated that he had no involvement in the decision not to prosecute Savile. He said: “I knew nothing about the decision. When Savile died I instigated a review to audit whether any cases had come across the desk of any CPS officers and discovered at that stage decisions had been made.” Starmer added: “It’s not about me, it’s the way we conduct our politics. I don’t want to see us go down the route that this potentially takes us.” Following the barracking of Starmer on Monday, Johnson tweeted that the “behaviour directed” at the Labour leader was “absolutely disgraceful”. But several Conservative MPs urged him to go further by apologising for what has been called a “scurrilous accusation” against Starmer. Labour said Monday’s incident occurred when Starmer, accompanied by Lammy, was walking back from the Ministry of Defence after a briefing on the situation in Ukraine. Starmer is travelling to Brussels where he and Johnson will separately meet the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, to discuss Ukraine. “The message is that we are firm and united in our support for Nato,” Starmer told the Times. He also distanced himself from his predecessor Jeremy Corbyn – a long-term Nato sceptic. He criticised Corbyn for refusing to accept that Russia was responsible for the Salisbury poisonings. “What was said by my predecessor in relation to issues like Salisbury was wrong. I spoke out at the time,” Starmer said.“It’s the whole ecosystem – just gone in that area,” said James Cole. The eighth or ninth generation of Whitby fishers in his family, Cole has never seen anything like the death and decimation of marine life that has plagued the waters since autumn, from coral, crabs, seals and sea birds. He has witnessed “nothing on that scale or that magnitude to cause that type of damage”. The first worrying report was in October, from fishers in South Gare, at the mouth of the River Tees in Redcar and Cleveland, along England’s north-east coast. “Their lobsters died,” recounts Cole, as he unloads a meagre catch from his boat, Good Intent, at Whitby fish market. Then Cole heard from anglers in the same area looking for shore crabs, normally easily caught in rockpools or shallow waters. “They couldn’t find none, they were all dead.” More worryingly, says Cole: “From there, day on day, it spread up along the coast with the prevailing flood tide.” Four months on, crab and lobster fishers from Hartlepool to Scarborough report that their catches are a tenth of what they would normally expect at this time of year. This is a brutal blow to the coastline that is home to the largest lobster and brown crab fishery in Europe. More than 3,000 tonnes of shellfish have landed in the three main ports of Bridlington, Scarborough and Whitby, Yorkshire. “My heart is broken at the scenes of devastation,” says Stan Rennie. A Hartlepool-based commercial fisher, he received his first fishing boat for his thirteenth birthday. He contrasts waters which were “rich fishing grounds only five months ago” to the present day. “There’s nowt to catch. Fishermen are relying on savings, to try and pay the bills and boat maintenance, they could be staring unemployment in the face, if the stocks don’t recover fast enough, otherwise they’ve had it.” Cole is not only concerned for the fishing industry. “This is about more than just jobs. It’s the destruction of the environment.” This seems to have affected most living creatures on the seabed. “We’ve seen dead octopus, all varieties of crab, lobster, dead men’s fingers – a soft sponge. They take some scraping off a rock … but we even saw them on the beaches,” he said. Sally Bunce, a seal rescue volunteer, has seen a sharp increase in emaciated grey seal pups – sometimes below their birth weight – washing ashore in recent months. Many have to be put down because they lack the blubber to survive at sea. At first, she attributed it to the aftermath of Storm Arwen, but is increasingly convinced it is linked to the loss of marine life. “We are just getting so many skinny pups. For me, there has to be a connection, because when they’re weaned off, they’re not skilled at chasing fish. So they’ll head to the bottom and they’ll scavenge on whatever’s in the inshore bottoms of the water, your crustaceans, your flatfish – and I know we’ve had a lot of flatfish washed up dead as well.” A multi-agency investigation coordinated by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), found “the deaths of the crabs and lobsters potentially resulted from a naturally occurring harmful algal bloom.” Amid concerns that the deaths could have been caused by contaminated sediment dredged from the River Tees and dumped into the ocean, Defra said it is “unlikely that chemical pollution, sewage or infectious aquatic animal diseases were the cause of the deaths”. An independent expert, commissioned by the North East Fishing collective, found evidence linking the deaths to pyridine. Defra’s conclusions were greeted by Tees Valley mayor, Ben Houchen, who said he hoped “it’s not too long before we see a positive changes along our coast.” The mayor said dredging work carried out last autumn was part of the required maintenance of the river, and was unconnected to the freeport. Work to deliver the South Bank Quay, part of the Teesworks freeport project, will continue. “Following extensive geotechnical and environmental analysis, including substantial sediment sampling which is ongoing around Teesworks, will include a programme of dredging.” Although fishers and seal conservationists are unlikely bedfellows, they are united in pushing for further investigation to ensure any future dredging is safe. “I’m not a scientist,” Bunce said, “but you’ve only got to think about the Tees – it has a hundred-year history of toxic industry, so you can’t say that that sediment is safe.” “None of us are against Teesport being made into a superport. Dredge it up, put in new quays for windmills, loads of jobs, blah blah blah. Just do it properly,” said Cole. “Levelling up? Great, but I don’t see why your environment has to get flattened to level something up,” he added.I found myself, during our strange, second Covid Christmas, sandwiched between my 22-year-old daughter and my 89-year-old mother. This year, more than ever, the umbilical connection between us tugged at me as I, Janus-in-waiting, observed, monitored and enjoyed the miraculous luxury of three generations together. My daughter has tattoos. I like them, which surprises me. I understand the urge to mark life’s more seismic events upon your body. They sear themselves into our brains after all, so perhaps tattoos are just the outer version of the inner burns. My mother’s body bears witness in more traditional ways – watching her navigate its frailty and bentness is a daily learning, a meditation. She taught me to walk when I was a baby, and now, she teaches me how I will walk when I am old: how to reach for this, bend for that, move around the obstacles like an ancient, patient stream. I try not to help. Living between these bodies is an odd mixture of joy and grief. My daughter thrums. Her life force changes the atmosphere in the room as soon as she enters. We all receive the electrical charge and, once again, we dance. I must have done that once. Or my daughter comes in upset, chaotic, spinning out and sits by my mother and receives a calming nod – no questions, I note – and the chaos subsides. Whatever made us think we could live without this? We were stuck on our goals and our aspirations and – God forbid – our dreams. We were too busy to notice how the bodies silently speak to one another, how we breathe each other in, recalibrate and breathe out. But the meeting of these life forces now feels more essential than ever. We are constantly exchanging ever-altering resonances, and balance occurs. Not perfectly – nothing’s perfect – but, consistently, we change and reset one another’s state. So instead of grieving my mother’s ageing, instead of envying my daughter’s youth, I find I am buoyed up and calmed down by turn. “Why is my fanny getting bigger?” my mother breathes at me one morning as she is washing the forks. We laugh for quite a long time. Her skin reminds me of my daughter’s when she was a baby: the same almost-not-there softness, lovely to stroke. It feels like she’s returning to something. When I hold my daughter, I can feel, in deeply recessed parts of my body, her vulnerability. She’s all fire and sparks, but I know it’s there. I try not to help. She’s brimful of the world, and the image in my mind’s eye is of her walking away towards the sun carrying a rucksack, my mother sitting by the fire, dozing to the crackle, and me, standing in the doorway, held between the two states of departure. One towards action and one into stillness. It’s a rich position to be in, full of nutrients, somehow. I exist between them. I’m grateful I can still get up a hill and I’m depressed about my thighs. Emma Thompson is an actor and screenwriterLeigh Sales will step down as the host of 7.30 in late June after the federal election – some 12 years after taking over from Kerry O’Brien at the ABC’s flagship news and current affairs show. The dual Walkley award-winning journalist, who began her career at the ABC in Brisbane in 1995, will remain with the broadcaster in a new role and will lead the ABC’s election night TV coverage. With the political editor, Laura Tingle, a popular stand-in for Sales, the former print journalist is a likely replacement, although the ABC’s acting news director, Gavin Fang, said he would “start thinking about a new presenter down the track”. “There’s nothing wrong, other than I just feel a strong sense of it being time to pass the baton to the next runner in the race and to take a break,” Sales told viewers on Thursday. “The end of an election cycle feels like a good time to move onto something new at the ABC. “I’ve always approached this job with one goal and that is to ask frank questions of people in power, without fear or favour, that a fair-minded, reasonable person with some common sense watching at home might like to ask if they were sitting in my position.” Since 2010, Sales has covered the terms of five prime ministers, anchored nine federal budgets and covered two federal elections. The next poll will be her third. She said when she started on the program she didn’t have children and they had only known their mum working four nights a week. “While it’s truly been an unbelievable privilege to host 7.30, it’s also a demanding job that comes with enormous responsibility and pressure and scrutiny,” she said. The ABC’s managing director, David Anderson, said Sales was respected by audiences and all sides of politics. “Leigh’s integrity, intellect and courage are evident in everything she does,” he said. Fang said he wanted her to stay in the role but Sales had wanted a new challenge. “We would love to have her stay in that role, but it’s in Leigh’s nature to seek fresh challenges, and it’s exciting for everyone to see what she’ll do next in journalism,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In 2021 7.30’s average audience rose 3% to almost 1 million total viewers an episode with a 13% share of metro audiences in its time slot and 12.5% of regional audiences, according to ABC figures. Sales has written three books, worked for several charities and co-hosts the popular podcast Chat 10, Looks 3 with Annabel Crabb. In 2019 she was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia for her services to broadcast journalism.There is something remarkable about Joe Burrow. Call it an aura, call it swagger, call it what you want. In the abstract, talk of an ‘it factor’ feels like a whole lot of blathering to explain the unexplainable: His Cincinnati team playing above their understood talent level. And then you watch the games, and you see it: Tough to identify; impossible to ignore. Burrow has rejuvenated a sorry Cincinnati franchise who, up until the quarterback’s arrival in 2020, had laid their claim to fame as being the cheapest, most stable presence in the league. They rarely hit rock bottom, lows were always accompanied by flashes that the good times were around the corner: The heady days of the Carson Palmer-Chad Johnson era; five-straight trips to the playoffs (and five-straight losses) behind Marvin Lewis, Andy Dalton, and a stacked roster. There have been smatterings of success, but the Bengals have rarely been Fun. When Johnson rechristened himself as Chad Ochocinco the team briefly flirted with the idea that football could be about more than just getting by. But the fetishization of mediocrity has been the overriding principle of the 33 years of Mike Brown’s ownership. Hitting .500 is enough, the playoffs are a bonus. Burrow walking through the door changed everything. You will struggle to find another team so disconnected from the scars of their past. The Bengals have that delightful sense of a good-not-great team a couple of years ahead of schedule. There’s none of the bitterness of tough playoff losses or the pain of years of toil. They’re young, fun, fearless. It’s a franchise that now oozes charisma; whose quarterback sports a monogrammed, diamond-encrusted chain; whose kicker delivers one-liners before drilling game-clinching kicks; whose gaggle of young stars gather for victory cigars after each playoff win. Their quarterback’s own story is now well-documented: the former four-star recruit from Ohio who went to Ohio State to represent the Buckeyes, was beaten out by Dwayne Haskins, transferred to LSU, then – boom! – lift-off. Burrow led the Tigers to a national title in his second season, serving as the conductor for what is widely regarded as the finest offense in the modern history of college football. He won the Heisman Trophy too. He took an LSU team that had been inconsistent before his arrival (and collapsed as soon as he left) to heights that even one of the game’s great programs had yet to scale. It’s been the same story in Cincinnati: Burrow arrived when the team had hit a low, a two-win season that secured the first overall pick in the draft and a chance to bring Burrow back to Ohio. Within two seasons, he has taken them to the Super Bowl. At first glance, Burrow has done all of that without an obvious [cliché klaxon] – elite, physical skill set. Run through the list of young quarterbacks who have elevated into the upper tier in the NFL in recent years. All of them have a defining physical trait: Lamar Jackson has speed; Josh Allen, Justin Herbert and Patrick Mahomes have their size and arm strength. Not Burrow. His superpower is his pocket mobility, that prescient sense for when to slip and slide, to evade the pass-rush, to extend plays, and to find open men down the field. Pair that with uncommon down-the-field accuracy and smarts, surround him with playmakers like Ja’Marr Chase, Tee Higgins, Tyler Boyd and CJ Uzomah, and – hey presto – you have yourself an explosive offense. A reminder: Burrow is doing all of this behind one of the league’s most porous offensive lines. The Bengals ranked 28th in pressure rate this season, a statistic that usually sends a team tumbling to the top of the draft, not the Super Bowl. The line was bad enough last year that there were calls for the Bengals to bench Burrow before he got hurt and threatened the future of his franchise, a season in which he ended up tearing his ACL. Things aren’t much easier for him this season. At the right guard spot alone, Cincy has gifted 48 pressures over the course of the season. And perhaps Burrow has another superpower: an unusual ability to connect with others. At LSU, his coaches viewed him as a partner in all of the key decisions and gameday playcalls. They ditched the usual top-down player-coach dynamic and viewed the relationship with Burrow more as a partnership. That same connection has extended to his fanbase and the wider football-watching world. Maybe it’s that innate ability to straddle the line between cool and dork. Maybe it’s the JB9 jeweled pendant … or the cigars … or that coat … or the quiet, assured confidence … or the seeming effortlessness of his excellence. It’s important to note that the rest of the Cincy roster isn’t just along for the ride. The Bengals defense is as advertised: Savvy, splashy, ultra-confident, the players comfortable in their own skin, and a pain to play against. The skill positions surrounding the quarterback are loaded. Still: This is Burrow’s team and Burrow’s story. Only five quarterbacks have won the Super Bowl with the team that drafted them No1 overall in the modern era – including Eli Manning who was part of a draft-day trade. On average, those titles came in the quarterback’s seventh season with the franchise. Being drafted first overall is a recognition of a player’s talent – and it’s also a burden. Teams select first overall because they stink. Their roster is flimsy, the culture rotten. It takes time to turn a failed team around. To hit on the right coaches. To build the right scheme around the right players. To cobble together enough talented players to make a playoff run. It requires hitting on the draft and free agency year-after-year amid roster churn; an aspect made more difficult in the salary-cap era. In fact, of the quarterbacks selected first overall in that era, only two have gone on to win the Super Bowl with the team that selected them – both happened to have the surname Manning. Scaling that mountain is supposed to be hard; Burrow has made it look easy. If Burrow leads the Bengals to the title on Sunday, he will become only the third quarterback in the history of the league to win a national championship in college and a Super Bowl. Nobody has hit for the quadruple crown: Winning the title and the Heisman trophy in college, being selected first overall in the draft, and then winning it all in the pros. Burrow is on the verge of conquering all four inside of three years. “I think if you told me before the season we would go to the Super Bowl, I would have called you crazy,” Burrow said after the AFC title game. Crazy to him, perhaps. But it shouldn’t be to anyone else. This is who Burrow is: Everywhere he goes, he wins – and wins big. The Bengals have not been a championship organization in the modern era. At times, it’s felt like they’ve been playing a different sport to everyone else, with different goals. They’ve won in spurts, often despite their own team-building principles. Now, they have the most important ingredient in a championship roster: A franchise quarterback, in every sense. Burrow and the Bengals have arrived. And they’re not leaving anytime soon.Cameroonian asylum-seekers deported by the Trump administration suffered imprisonment, torture and rape on their return, and many were forced in to hiding or fleeing the country once more, according to a new report. In the last months of the Trump administration, the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) agency stepped up its deportations of African migrants, especially Cameroonians. Over 80 of them were flown to Cameroon in October and November 2020 alone, amid allegations of abuse, in which Ice detainees said they had been forced to sign or fingerprint documents believed to be waivers agreeing to their deportation. The deportations took place despite warnings from lawyers and human rights groups that those being sent back would be in danger. A Human Rights Watch (HRW) report published on Thursday found that almost all of those deported in 2019 and 2020 faced reprisals of some sort on their return to Cameroon, from rape and beatings to detention and extortion or simply having their identity cards confiscated. West Cameroon is still in the grip of a conflict between the government and armed anglophone separatists, with frequent reports of arbitrary killings and military patrols in the streets. Anyone without an identity card faces the risk of detention. The 149-page HRW report, “‘How Can You Throw Us Back?’: Asylum Seekers Abused in the US and Deported to Harm in Cameroon,” says that between 2019 and 2021, Cameroonian security forces detained or imprisoned at least 39 people who had been sent back by the Trump administration. Many of those were held without due process and in inhumane conditions, some in solitary confinement. HRW found 14 cases of physical abuse, 13 by Cameroonian security forces and one by armed separatists. Three women were raped in custody by “state agents”, and other detainees were severely beaten during interrogation. The deportees had all fled Cameroon to escape the conflict, in particular the government’s brutal treatment of those suspected of involvement in the separatist movement. On being forcibly returned to Cameroon, they were additionally accused of having harmed the country’s reputation by seeking asylum. The HRW report found that Ice had failed “to protect confidential asylum documents during deportations, leading to document confiscation and apparent retribution by Cameroonian authorities”. One woman who was deported in October 2020 said she was tortured and raped by government soldiers over six weeks in detention in Bamenda, northwestern Cameroon. “Every two days ... they were using ropes, [rubber] tubes, their boots, military belts ... They hit me all over my body,” she told HRW. “They said that I’ve destroyed the image of Cameroon ... so I had to pay for it.” After initially being allowed home, another returnee was summoned to a police station two weeks later, supposedly to pick up his documents, but he was detained instead. “They said ‘you are the guys who go out there spoiling the name of the country’. That is when my second nightmare began,” he told the Guardian. He was held for five months until his family paid a CFA franc 2m ($3500) fine for his release. He has since fled the country and is hiding elsewhere in West Africa. Many of the returnees went into hiding to avoid arrest. In the case of seven of them, according to the report, the police or army targeted family members to try to force them to reveal their whereabouts. One returnee’s sister is alleged to have been shot and killed, another’s mother was severely beaten, and the 11-year-old son of another returnee was abducted and questioned by security agents. One of the deportees, known by the pseudonym Cornelius in the report, said he and others were interrogated on arrival in 2020. “Army officers were asking us why we had sought asylum, what we had told American immigration,” Cornelius told the Guardian. Some of the returnees on the same plane were arrested and taken away and Cornelius did not see them again (HRW has not been able to trace some of the deported Cameroonians). Cornelius and others were held in a detention facility for a few days and then released, but without their personal papers. “They took our documents, our ID cards, passports and everything,” he said. “They never told us a reason, but a police officer later on told me that we may think we are safe but they can arrest us at any time. So since then, we were all scared.” Cornelius went into hiding, staying indoors for the next ten months, until he managed to get a receipt for his ID card from the police. He had been held in Ice detention centers for 18 months, mostly in Louisiana and Mississippi. He was placed in solitary confinement for a month, and saw other Cameroonian detainees being pepper sprayed, put in stress positions and doused in water. In Mississippi, he said he was threatened with the same treatment if he did not sign papers agreeing to his deportation. “I was so so so down. I was demoralized. I didn’t know what to do,” he said. In the end the guards grabbed his hand and pressed his fingerprint on to a document. He was put on a plane back to Cameroon soon after, on 14 October 2020. “This was not the America we were watching on the movies or hearing about on the news. I thought this is not the America they were talking about,” he said. In February 2021, the Biden administration stopped an Africa-bound Ice deportation plane from taking off, and several of the Cameroonians on board were questioned in what officials said was an investigation into allegations of Ice abuse. No results of any investigation have been made public, and in October 2021, several more Cameroonians (HRW estimates three or four) were deported. he Department of Homeland Security did not respond to a request for comment. In response to the HRW report on abuse of returnees in Cameroon, a state department spokesperson said: “Actions of this nature, such as those in these allegations, are abhorrent to our values. The United States promotes respect for human rights and condemns abuse of any kind.” “As we are learning of these allegations, we will take appropriate steps,” the spokesperson said. “The Biden administration will probably try to pass it off on the Trump administration because some of these egregious abuses occurred while Trump was in office,” Lauren Seibert, a HRW refugee and migrant rights researcher and author of the report, said. “But I don’t think the systemic issues that really led to what happened to these people have been resolved at all within the US immigration and asylum system.” “The Cameroon and US governments need to remedy these abuses, and US authorities should provide opportunities for wrongly deported Cameroonians to return and reapply for asylum,” Seibert said.The state of California is suing Tesla over allegations of operating a “racially segregated workplace” at its factory near San Francisco. California’s department of fair employment and housing (DFEH) said it had filed a lawsuit alleging widespread discrimination and harassment of black employees following complaints from hundreds of Tesla workers at its main factory in Fremont. “After receiving hundreds of complaints from workers, DFEH found evidence that Tesla’s Fremont factory is a racially segregated workplace where black workers are subjected to racial slurs and discriminated against in job assignments, discipline, pay, and promotion creating a hostile work environment,” Kevin Kish, the DFEH’s director, said in a statement. The department claimed black Tesla workers were subjected to racist graffiti and racial slurs. The agency said it filed its lawsuit at on Alameda county superior court late on Wednesday, and would make the complaint available to the public on its website on Thursday. In a blogpost pre-empting the announcement of the filing, Tesla described the lawsuit as “misguided” and said it would ask the court “to pause the case and take other steps to ensure that facts and evidence will be heard”. Tesla said the DFEH had “declined to provide Tesla with the specific allegations or the factual bases for its lawsuit”. “Attacking a company like Tesla that has done so much good for California should not be the overriding aim of a state agency with prosecutorial authority. The interests of workers and fundamental fairness must come first,” it said. “Tesla strongly opposes all forms of discrimination and harassment and has a dedicated employee relations team that responds to and investigates all complaints.” Tesla was ordered by a Californian federal court last year to pay almost $137m (£101m) in damages to a black former employee who said he endured racial abuse while working at Fremont. Owen Diaz, a former contracted elevator operator who worked at the plant between 2015 and 2016, alleged he was harassed and faced “daily racial epithets” including the “N-word”. He also said employees drew swastikas and left racist graffiti and drawings around the plant. Diaz was awarded $6.9m in damages for emotional distress and $130m in punitive damages, in what is believed to be the largest such verdict of its kind.A police sergeant in a remote Aboriginal community briefed officers on a proposal to safely arrest a fugitive but they ignored this plan the night the Warlpiri man was shot dead, prosecutors allege. Sgt Julie Frost was in charge of the police station in Yuendumu, 300km north-west of Alice Springs, in November 2019 when 19-year-old Kumanjayi Walker was shot three times by Constable Zachary Rolfe during an attempted arrest at a house. Rolfe is on trial for Walker’s alleged murder in the Northern Territory supreme court. He has pleaded not guilty to that and alternate charges. Frost told the court on Thursday that on the night Walker was killed she provided a briefing to Rolfe, three colleagues from the Alice Springs-based Immediate Response Team – who receive specialised training in arresting high-risk targets – and an officer trained to handle police dogs. Frost said she had called in the extra resources because of multiple issues including local officers deployed elsewhere, a spike in break-ins, unrest in a nearby remote community, the departure of medical staff, and the need to safely arrest Walker, who days earlier had threatened two police with a small axe. Rolfe and the other officers from Alice Springs arrived in Yuendumu about 7pm on 9 November 2019. Frost told the court that in a briefing which started about this time, she had told the officers she expected them to spend the rest of the night handling jobs that came through the on-call phone, conducting high-visibility patrols that would “saturate” areas where there had been break-ins, familiarising themselves with the community and escorting medical staff on any jobs. She said that as part of that briefing, and in a separate plan she had also emailed the officers earlier that day, Frost told the officers that they would meet up at 5am on 10 November with a view to arresting Walker while he was sleeping about 30 minutes later. “A early-morning arrest like that is a far safer time to arrest people,” Frost told the court. “We know that they will be sleeping, and it gives the element of surprise.” During the briefing, Frost said one officer, though she could not remember who, asked what they should do if they came across Walker that night, to which she responded “by all means pick him up”. Frost told the court that Constable James Kirstenfeldt – who she found before the briefing to be “very dominating” as “it appeared he was trying to take over the conversation and would not listen to me” – also asked whether there were many guns in the community, to which she responded there was not. The briefing finished after about five minutes and images shown to the court indicate Rolfe left the station with his colleagues at 7.06pm. Frost did not deploy with the officers. Prosecutors have previously told the court that Rolfe and the other officers went immediately to House 577, a property where Walker had often stayed with his partner. The officers were told at the house that Walker was not there but he may be at a property known as House 511, where his grandmother lived. Rolfe and his colleague, Constable Adam Eberl, located Walker inside that house. He was asked to put his hands behind his back by Rolfe, but instead pulled a pair of medical scissors from his pocket and brought them down in a stabbing motion into Rolfe’s left shoulder. Eberl then struggled with Walker, who was shot soon after by Rolfe, the court has heard. The first shot is not subject to any charges but the second and third shots, which the prosecution alleges were fired several seconds later from close range by Rolfe when Eberl had control of Walker, are the basis for the murder charge. The three shots were fired at 7.21pm – 15 minutes after Rolfe left the Yuendumu police station. David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, said his client would defend his actions as being reasonable and justifiable in the context of the danger faced by him and Eberl. Edwardson said Rolfe was acting in self-defence, and to defend the life of Eberl, when he fired the second and third shots and his training emphasised that “edged weapon equals gun”. The defence also disputes that Eberl had control of Walker when the second and third shots were fired. Edwardson said gathering intelligence on Walker was included in the plan and so therefore it was logical to attend house 577 and see if he was there. Edwardson will cross-examine Frost on Friday. On Thursday, the court also heard from Lottie Robertson, the grandmother of Walker’s partner Rickisha Robertson and a Yuendumu elder. She said Frost had been “really angry” when she spoke with her about Walker threatening the officers with an axe, with Frost saying that he could have been shot dead or harmed a police member. Robertson had agreed with Frost that Walker should hand himself in, and said “we tried very hard to talk to him”. She clarified that culturally it was more appropriate for her husband Eddie responsibility to speak to Walker, which he did, but she said there was little response from Walker about whether he would surrender. “He’s not a man of many words,” she said. Robertson said Walker had come back to Yuendumu after escaping from a residential alcohol treatment centre and removing an electronic monitoring device to attend a funeral. Detective Acting Snr Sgt Evan Kelly completed his evidence on Thursday. He was not in Yuendumu at the time of Walker’s death, but was Rolfe’s supervisor in Alice Springs and had previously instructed him to “take a look” at Walker’s background after he was identified as an arrest target. Kelly said he met with Rolfe the night of the shooting after he had returned back to Alice Springs, but did not discuss the incident with him. He said three or four days later, he also went to Rolfe’s house where he was joined by colleagues including other officers who had been in Yuendumu on the night of the shooting: Eberl, Kirstenfeldt, and Snr Constable Anthony Hawkings. He said “we were basically having a barbecue and a couple of beers as a welfare check on Constable Rolfe” but said he did not discuss the shooting and he did not hear anybody else discussing it. He gave extensive evidence about police training, including that it was futile to make “rigid” arrest plans, and he had been taught that if he was to shoot an offender he should fire twice then assess if he had “gained subject control”, before firing again. Kelly also gave evidence that it was a matter of “personal preference” whether officers decided to walk with their hands on their firearms during certain operations. Earlier this week, the prosecution showed footage of Rolfe raiding a property with his hand on his firearm, which had been unclipped – something they argue indicates he was more willing to use his firearm than is supported under his police training. “Some officers will walk with their hand on their firearm. Some officers don’t,” Kelly said. “But having your hand close to your firearm will allow for a faster draw if something presents itself.” Under questioning from Sophie Callan SC for the prosecution, Kelly clarified it was not common for officers to leave retention devices on their holsters unclipped, in order to be able to remove their firearm more quickly – something the prosecution alleges Rolfe did while raiding other properties in Yuendumu. The trial before Justice John Burns continues.Ever since the monochromatic thrills of 1996’s Pokémon Red and Blue, I’ve dreamed of embarking on a sprawling 3D Pokémon adventure. While 2019’s Sword and Shield did their best to belatedly bring the series’ love-worn formula in to the third dimension, a lack of real innovation left the franchise’s legions of older fans despairing over their Pikachu plushies. More than two years later, the ambitious Pokémon Legends: Arceus sees creators Game Freak attempting to really modernise the series. Dispatched on a time-travelling mission by none other than Pokémon God, Arceus, Legends begins with your adolescent avatar plummeting through a portal to the past. Mercifully, the titular divinity isn’t completely unreasonable – you’re at least sent on your way with a fully charged smartphone. Cheers, your holiness. As calming flute melodies float around your ears and dramatic feudal-Japanese fonts fill the screen, it’s hard not to be swept up in the novelty of it all. At least until you take a closer look at your surroundings. While the Nintendo Switch may not be a technical powerhouse, the little handheld that could has delivered a slew of sprawling spectacles, from gamechanging launch title Breath of the Wild to niche role-playing game Xenoblade Chronicles 2. It has consistently punched above the weight of its spindly specs. Bafflingly though, Pokémon Legends looks like complete arse(eus). While the colourful creatures move and react more convincingly than ever, the world around them is jarringly sparse, with blurry rock textures and large landscapes lined with anaemic-looking Christmas trees. Visually, it’s hard not to feel a little short-changed. Still, beauty is more than skin deep. Thankfully, Pokémon Legends: Arceus has one hell of a personality. A few hours in I begun to warm to its charms. It quickly becomes apparent that this isn’t your dad’s Pokémon adventure. Gone are series stalwarts like gym battles, obstacle-clearing special moves, even the need to fight creatures before lobbing a ball at them. Sure, you can always send a Pokémon in to battle to weaken your chosen target, but if you don’t fancy it, just bypass the brawl entirely by lobbing a well-timed Pokéball at your quarry. This time, it’s up to players to help researchers write the very first Pokémon encyclopedia: the Pokédex. Where the exploration segments and Pokémon battles were once separated into two separate screens, here the two are finally unified. Your trainer can run around battling Pokémon with no regard for their own safety. For arguably the first time since the series began, everything feels fresh, and thrillingly unpredictable. From crafting your very own wooden Pokéballs to carefully stalking wild Pokémon in real time, Legends’ immersive new approach immediately clicks. Thanks to the Feudal-era setting, the mammoth metropolises of previous games are gone. Your new homestead is the quaint and scenic hub of Jubilife Village, where you’ll find residents ploughing fields, cooking mochi and shifting whatever rudimentary goods or services they can offer. It’s all refreshingly calming and surprisingly low-stakes stuff, giving players the freedom to tackle their Poké-duties at whatever cadence they fancy. As your journey grows in scope and you roam new regions, your curiosity will naturally get the better of you. Freed from linear shackles and strolling Legends’ open plains, gigantic and exciting creatures are too much to ignore. While riding a majestic deer Pokémon toward my next quest, I regularly found myself stopping in my tracks, compelled to catch imposing creatures that I’d forgotten existed. The scale of these Pokémon is tangible, too. In your early hours roaming the plains of Hisui you’ll meet suitably pocket-sized monsters, but it’s not long before you come face to face with a gargantuan Parasect, one of the original 151 Pokémon. This weird, spore-emitting mushroom crab was never the most intimidating thing on a black-and-white screen, but now it’s downright terrifying. As its once-laughable attacks fill the screen in a purple poisonous hue, I find myself scurrying away in panic. Only, I’m too late. My poor, unsuspecting anime avatar cannot shake the smog, and gasping desperately for air, crumples sickeningly to the grass. While Arceus may be a sight that leads to sore eyes, this ambitious reboot sets Pokémon on an exciting new trajectory, finally recapturing a lost sense of adventure. What made those initial Pokémon games special was the way that they embodied a childlike spirit of discovery. The problem was that its creators struck gold on the first attempt – and spent decades repeating the same trick. Now, 26 years after I caught my very first Pokémon, the franchise is new again, and that gleeful sense of excitement is back. Pokémon Legends: Arceus is out now; £39.99From Wings of Desire to Run Lola Run, from Cate Shortland’s Berlin Syndrome to one-take wonder Victoria, quite a few film-makers have been seduced by the liberating possibilities of the German capital. But too much freedom can often equate to directionless freestyling – and the authority-resistant, hard-partying, gender-fluid spirit of Berlin goes straight to the head of Irish writer-director Samuel Kay Forrest in this rambling and cringingly earnest feature debut. Forrest plays wandering soul Angus, a twentysomething with a side-shave haircut and a thorny family background set on finding himself in the capital of Euro-hedonism. When he’s not railing against fascism and scarpering from the polizei, or oh-so-seditiously spray-painting his tag “HipBeat” around town, he has a budding relationship with local woman Angie (Marie Céline Yildirim). She’s unaware, though, that he’s sleeping around with members of both sexes – and, after a pep talk with an inspirational drag queen, becoming more intent on exploring the parts of himself in between. For a film about searching and transition, too much of this identity crisis is baldly spelled out through voiceover, with Angus’s interior monologue prone to such zingers as: “We’ve all got scars. Yeah – I’ve got a few.” Only once does Forrest, rather than the obvious approach, grapple in properly dramatised form with gender and sexuality: during a 13-minute, single-cut scene in which Angus nervously reveals his new incarnation to Angie. It’s a bold gambit; though over-elongated, this vignette engages far more plausibly with the issues of judgment and acceptance. Most of the time, though, HipBeat can’t rouse itself to be much more than a mood piece – even as it nominally counts down to a climactic Kreuzberg street protest. Despite the added charge from these scenes being shot in real life, its political ideas are stuck in an embarrassing studenty register: “I feel a beat in the street as I look at the city. A change is coming.” It’s on firmer ground – backed up by Joshua Monroe’s attuned urban cinematography and a choice outing for Mr Flagio’s Italo-disco classic Take a Chance – when arguing how change is ultimately rooted in a personal revolution. • HipBeat is available on digital platforms on 14 February.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has been hit with a damaging cabinet leak revealing he was rolled over a plan to convince renegade MPs opposed to the government’s religious discrimination bill. After a torrid start to the parliamentary year, which saw Morrison’s character come under question after the leaking of a damaging text message, the prime minister has spent the week attempting to corral MPs into supporting the religious discrimination bill. In a story published late on Thursday, The Australian reported Morrison had been rolled in a cabinet meeting on Monday over a proposal to try to win over moderate MPs by introducing a beefed-up version of the government’s integrity commission bill. Sources have confirmed to Guardian Australia that a discussion on such a proposal took place. The leak comes at a precarious time for Morrison, who is urging unity among MPs as the government lags behind in the polls and as voters express growing dissatisfaction with the prime minister’s performance over summer. While supporters of both Peter Dutton and Josh Frydenberg downplayed suggestions of leadership strife, the airing of the cabinet discussion in which Morrison’s proposal was overruled is likely to fuel instability ahead of next week’s parliamentary sitting. It will be the last sitting of the House of Representatives before the budget in March, after which Morrison is expected to call an election for May. In a joint partyroom meeting on Tuesday, Morrison appealed to Coalition MPs to “come together” in the lead-up to the election, emphasising the importance of a unity of purpose. “I’m going to lead, and I’m asking you once again to follow me to an election victory,” Morrison said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But the call for unity was followed by an immediate display of division, after five moderate MPs defied Morrison’s plea and crossed the floor to support amendments to put in place protections for LGBTQ students. This sparked a backlash from conservative MPs and the Christian lobby, prompting Morrison to shelve the bill. Morrison is now unlikely to be able to deliver on the promise of legislating on religious discrimination or a commonwealth integrity commission before the next election. Amid the upheaval for the government, Morrison sought to direct attention to the Coalition’s traditional strengths of national security and the economy, using question time to target the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, saying he was “happy” to appease China. “Those who are seeking to coerce Australia and our region do not want to see this government re-elected, they don’t want to see us re-elected, they know who their candidate is in this election, it is the leader of the Labor party,” Morrison said. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, went further, sparking uproar in the House of Representatives by saying the Chinese government had “made a decision about who they will back in the next federal election”. “We now see evidence, Mr Speaker, that the Chinese Communist party, the Chinese government, has also made a decision about who they’re going to back in the next federal election, Mr Speaker, and that is open and that is obvious, and they have picked this bloke as that candidate,” Dutton said. The manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, said any suggestion of treason, sedition or anything against the national security of this nation “has been dealt with by Speakers in the strictest terms”. But in remarks that were condemned by Labor, Dutton suggested that his comments were based on “what has been publicly reported and commented on by the director general of Asio”, pointing to remarks made on Thursday by the Asio boss, Mike Burgess, about the risk of foreign interference at the upcoming election. “I have not made any allegations against the leader of the opposition,” Dutton said. “Mine is a reflection on the Chinese government, the actions of the Chinese government, and that is the context in which I made the comment, and it is perfectly in order. It might be uncomfortable for those opposite but it is perfectly in order.” The combative senior conservative also suggested Albanese was “unprepared” to become prime minister, comparing him to the former Labor leader Mark Latham. Speaking after question time, Albanese asked the Speaker of the House, Andrew Wallace, to examine the Hansard record of Dutton’s remarks and report back to the parliament, saying the reflections on his approach to national security were of a “very serious nature”. “I take that very seriously and the idea that that should be the subject of partisanship and partisan domestic debate at a time of international uncertainty is just not acceptable and not in Australia’s national interest,” he said. He asked that Wallace seek a briefing from Burgess, criticising Dutton for bringing into parliament the “purported view” of the Asio director. “To bring in someone from outside who is well respected, who has a job in our national security infrastructure and to attempt to use them in a partisan way is a very serious matter indeed,” Albanese said.Leaked training documents from Target, one of the largest retailers in the US, reveal how the company is directing management at stores to prevent workers from organizing unions. At the end of January 2022, Target emailed store management new training guidelines on labor relations to complete, prompting managers to look for warning signs of worker and labor union organizing within their stores and coordinate with corporate human resources to quell union organizing campaigns. The training email and documents were leaked anonymously to the workers’ advocacy group, Target Workers Unite, and come as other large US chains including Amazon and Starbucks are fighting unionization plans. “This training will help you understand Target’s philosophy on unions and how unions could impact our Brand and our team,” states an introduction slide to the training. The training goes on to characterize unions as “a business that makes money from the dues and fees paid by its members”, but then explains a union is formed when employees come together and express the desire to have a union represent them, typically through an election process. Target warns a union could reduce flexibility and narrow job descriptions, increase operational costs and create conflict between managers and employees. The company emphasizes preferring working directly with its workers over directly negotiating with workers represented by a union. “We don’t believe that a union or any other third-party representative would improve anything – not for our team members, our guests, or the company,” states the training. Target also claims in the training the company isn’t “anti-union” but rather “pro team member and guest”. Managers are informed during the training that their critical role in leadership is to create an environment where workers don’t feel the need to organize a union, and provides managers with training on how to determine and intervene in any behavior of workers that signals dissatisfaction with working conditions and flags potential warning signs of union organizing. Some examples included small gatherings of workers, the emergence of employees as leaders in vocalizing concerns, seeing workers meet with recently terminated workers, and work-related conversations among employees regarding issues such as pay, benefits, job security or other grievances. The training also flagged “unusual activities”, such as union flyers distributed in store parking lots or missing corporate documents such as schedules or payroll rosters. “Early detection and response to the signs of organizing is vital in maintaining a union-free environment,” states the training. The training includes a question-and-answer section on different theoretical scenarios prompting managers to take actions in response to union organizing signs, such as surveilling workers’ participation on worker-related blogs or pages on social media, and notifying human resources for guidance on proper action. Adam Ryan, an organizer with Target Workers Unite and an employee at Target in Christiansburg, Virginia, said the training documents were leaked from his store shortly after his flyers to promote a local event presentation on Black labor in Richmond, Virginia, for Black History Month co-hosted by Target Workers Unite, were removed from the break room. “I confronted HR about it. We still have a standing settlement from the NLRB [National Labor Relations Board] in 2018 and taking down the flyer was in violation of that settlement. I argued with them that the no solicitation policies would be true but they didn’t consistently enforce those policies,” said Ryan. He claimed the bulletin board at the time included non-work-related content such as a memorial for Betty White and new baby pictures from employees and that managers began questioning employees one-on-one shortly after the incident on work-related issues, as the labor relations training directed. Ryan is currently involved in a union card authorization drive at his store location in an attempt to garner enough support from his co-workers to form a union that Target must directly negotiate a contract with. “If you look at the training, they try to say they’re not anti-union, that they’re pro guests and pro team members, but they wouldn’t be having these training forced on management at our stories if they weren’t actually trying to union-bust and prevent us from exercising our rights,” said Ryan. “Target is no better than any other company out there. They talk a big game, they say they’re this very progressive company that cares about their workers, but then when workers start exercising their rights, they respond just like any other company that doesn’t want a union coming in.” Andrew Stacy, a Target employee in Indianapolis, Indiana, for over two years who is also trying to organize his coworkers to form a union, experienced similar issues, which he has since filed an unfair labor practice charge with the National Labor Relations Board over. In December 2021, Stacy explained he was distributing union flyers with a co-worker and a manager confiscated and removed the flyers, then interrogated his co-worker about it. The labor relations training, Stacy argued, undermined the company’s claims of being pro-worker. “It just shows how little Target thinks of us, that we don’t know what we want and they know what’s best for us,” Stacy said. “This union-busting training, that unions are a business is 100% untrue. We’re the union. Unions are the workers and what I’m organizing in my store is a rank-and-file effort.” A Target spokesperson said: “At Target, we’ve always been committed to listening to our team and creating an environment of mutual trust where every team member’s voice matters. “We regularly provide training to leaders on a variety of topics, and this particular training was recently used in a few stores to help leaders build and maintain Target’s culture of care, identify and address any team member concerns and ensure our team members feel supported and their voices are heard. This training also makes it clear that Target wants our team members to make informed decisions and respects our team’s right to discuss their varying viewpoints on representation.”A Republican candidate for governor in Georgia has said he would not let “any of the left” run elections in his state, adding repeatedly that it would happen “over my dead body” and underscoring the violent tone that has come to shape discourse around democracy in America. Former Senator David Perdue railed against his Democratic opponent, Stacey Abrams, in a video of a speech given on 4 February in Fayette county. Abrams, a voting rights activist, would be the first Black governor in the state’s history if elected. Perdue, who has been endorsed by Donald Trump, told his supporters: “My vision for Georgia is this: over my dead body would I ever, ever turn an election process over to Stacey Abrams or any of that woke mob ever again.” At another campaign event in Alpharetta, Georgia, Perdue repeated the “over my dead body” line,saying: “Over my dead body will we ever turn over an election to any of the left that we saw happening in 2020.” The Purdue campaign did not respond to a Guardian request for comment. The Georgia governor’s race is among the most closely-watched elections this year and a likely key battleground in the upcoming 2024 election. It played a vital role in president Joe Biden’s 2020 victory as he flipped the state, and it was also crucial to winning Democratic control of the senate when the party won two run-off elections there. That outsized role has seen Georgia become a ground zero for the national fight over voting rights and for Republicans’ baseless claims that the state’s election process was somehow fraudulent. It has also sparked a fierce fight for the office of the secretary of state, which helps run Georgia’s elections. The seat is currently held by Republican Brad Raffensperger. Perdue is one of 51 election deniers running for governor in 24 states, according to tracking by the States United Action , a non-partisan organization that monitors elections. Perdue lost his Senate seat in a runoff to Democrat John Ossoff last January. Now Perdue is running in the Republican primary against the incumbent Republican governor, Brian Kemp, who earned Trump’s ire after certifying Georgia’s election results, a process he was legally bound to uphold as governor. Perdue has earned Trump’s endorsement by expressing fierce loyalty and echoing the former president’s baseless claims about voter fraud in the 2020 election. In December Perdue went further and told Axios he wouldn’t have certified the state’s 2020 election results if he had been governor at the time. The same month, Perdue joined a lawsuit in Fulton county, Georgia, reviving unfounded allegations of voter fraud and seeking to review absentee ballots that he claimed would prove Trump won the 2020 election. Several recounts of the presidential vote affirmed Biden’s victory in Georgia. Raffensperger had also resisted pressure by Trump in an hour-long phone call in 2020 to “find” enough votes to overturn the election. Trump has now endorsed Raffensperger’s Republican opponent for secretary of state. Perdue is promising voters that if elected he will create “an election law enforcement division of the Georgia bureau of investigation”, the state’s criminal investigation agency, to ensure that only legal votes are counted. Trump falsely claimed 5,000 dead people voted in 2020 in Georgia, but a state review found only four cases of dead people voting. Perdue is already outlining how he would change the way elections are certified if he was elected. “I believe that before you can certify an election, whether it’s a president or a US senator, or a statewide basis, you have to have an outside third-party entity audit the results. Not the secretary of state,” Perdue told voters in Fayette, adding that he believed allowing the secretary of state to certify and audit elections was “sort of like you grading your own homework”. Perdue’s use of violent rhetoric comes on the heels of an unprecedented campaign of intimidation against election officials. A Reuters investigation found more 100 threats of death or violence to US election workers. It also comes as the Republican party increasingly embraces Trump’s “big lie” of a fraudulent election. In a recent poll only 21% of Republicans said they believed Joe Biden’s election was “legitimate”.Last week the RNC voted to declare the January 6 attack “legitimate political discourse’ and censured the Republican representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger for participating in the House’s investigation into the attack.When I was 28 years old, the first of my university friends gave birth. We marvelled over her baby, but her tone changed when I started to talk about my future because, well, “Was I planning …?” and: “Wasn’t I thinking about …?” and: “Didn’t I want to have children?” Until that moment, I had not asked myself the question. I thought it was no longer something that had to be asked, or answered; this was the 00s, not the 50s. Women no longer ran their lives by the internalised tick-list of husband, house and baby. But in the following decade, the world began to look and sound as if it was full of timeless, retrograde anxieties and paranoias over fertility windows and body clocks. The myth of motherhood runs deep, and the lie that, secretly, all women want children is still so potent that it felt like biological gaslighting. Why did I not feel this elemental hunger? Was there something wrong with me? And finally, what was wrong with me? I went to my mother, who had never hidden the fact that she regarded motherhood as a burden. I told her I was thinking about adoption because it was least preoccupied with DNA and bloodlines and my beautiful baby, born of my womb. To my surprise, she liked the idea and started talking about the tradition among some Pakistani women to pledge their next pregnancy to a family member. As an unborn baby, she had been promised to a cousin who was desperate for a child, until my grandmother changed her mind. For a while, we hatched the plan to adopt a girl and raise her between us in our own mini matriarchy. It never happened, but if I were to become a mother in a second life, this is how I envisage it happening. As I got older, I began meeting men and women, some with partners, some without, some gay, some straight, who had either not wanted kids or just not had them. The tyrannical tick-list of husband, house and baby, in that order, became just what it was: a capitalism of the body and mind that packaged up maternal instinct and sold it back to me. Now, as a 49-year-old, I have not experienced biological motherhood, but I have felt connected to my womb and its cyclical ebbs and swellings. It is a reminder that my body is not a static entity but a transforming thing, multitudinous in its possibilities. I have also seen the physicality of motherhood through friends and family. Pregnancy and childbirth is wondrous in what it achieves. That I have not experienced it is of no loss to me; I have experienced other wonders. Just like the universalising of fear around the biological clock that I was confronted with more than a decade ago, there is an apocalyptic ring to many of the stories I hear of menopause now, as my body creeps closer to the prospect of brain fog and hot flushes. I hear of all the ways it needs to be controlled and medicalised. Once again, my ovaries and uterus are sites of anxiety and fear. I discuss this with a British Pakistani friend and tell her how a menopausal woman in my spinning class said she would get so hot in restaurants that she would begin tearing off her clothes in heated delirium. “She should try coming to Karachi for the afternoon,” said my friend, half in jest, but it pointed to a bigger truth – there is not one definitive experience of menopause – perhaps we embody what we are taught to expect, culturally. I still do not know how to answer the questions my friend asked me at the age of 28. It is the framing that is the problem. I have not become a mother just as I have not become an acrobat or a brain surgeon. It might have been one kind of life and this is another: meaningful, rewarding, joyous. Arifa Akbar is the Guardian’s chief theatre criticOn Tuesday, Scott Morrison warned his colleagues disunity was political death. He told colleagues in the party room: “I’m going to lead, and I’m asking you once again to follow me to an election victory.” Just before dawn on Thursday morning, five Liberals ignored the prime minister’s exhortation, and crossed the floor in the House of Representatives. The rebellion was bigger than senior figures had anticipated. The news in the other chamber was no better. As the sun rose, it seemed certain the government would not have the numbers to push its religious discrimination legislation through the Senate. The Liberal senator Andrew Bragg also intended to cross the floor. But free-range moderates were not the prime minister’s only problem. Morrison was also facing a boilover on the right. The Australian Christian Lobby was so displeased about events overnight it called for the legislation to be pulled. The ACL’s reverse ferret imperative was promptly echoed by the veteran conservative Eric Abetz. Conservatives, beyond furious with the moderates, were now baying for blood. Without a course correction, and pronto, there was going to be an explosion. Bear in mind religious discrimination was supposed to be Morrison’s signature reform; the pinnacle of his prime ministership. It was also supposed to be a potent political wedge against Labor in the outer suburban contests that will ultimately determine the next government of Australia. But given the insurrection – the public vote of no-confidence by inner-city Liberals in a divisive package that failed to protect vulnerable kids – Morrison’s ability to weaponise religious discrimination in the coming election would be diminished. So things were bad. By the time weary MPs lined up in the coffee queue at Parliament House, the government was in full strategic retreat. The bill disappeared from the Senate list. Journalists were briefed that amendments moved by the independent Rebekah Sharkie and passed in the House of Representatives were problematic, according to legal advice. There could be “unintended consequences”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, wrote to the crossbencher making this contention. The letter was released to the media before Sharkie had time to read it. In the letter, Cash told Sharkie “concerns have been raised”. It was not clear, at least in the correspondence, by whom. Sharkie was clearly sceptical, given she’d lived through a previous iteration of “unintended consequences” with the medevac legislation. Back then, the government said it had legal advice highlighting problems, but when a redacted version of that legal advice was later released under freedom of information, it wasn’t entirely as advertised. Sharkie made it clear Cash had not shown her any legal advice. If it was shared, she would consider it very carefully. But the crossbencher insisted the amendments the Liberals had supported on the floor of the House were “sound”. Things were going to get worse for Morrison. After question time, the Ten Network political editor, Peter van Onselen, had a rare cabinet leak. On Monday night, when the cabinet met, the prime minister had floated an idea. He would put the government’s shelved national integrity commission bill back on the notice paper for debate. This gesture would hopefully keep the moderates in the tent for the looming religious discrimination votes – Tasmanian Liberal Bridget Archer in particular. Perhaps some crossbenchers likely to cause trouble on religious discrimination could also be mollified. But a number of colleagues told Morrison this was a terrible idea; too clever by half, and risky, given the government couldn’t control what its own people and other parliamentary actors might do with an integrity commission once the proposal was on the floor of the House of Representatives. Van Onselen’s story painted a very grim picture. Here was a prime minister in the dying weeks of parliament willing to horse trade protections for vulnerable children with the resolution of an integrity commission – and being rolled in the process. I’m confident some version of this conversation certainly happened on Monday night. But some counsel the dialogue wasn’t exactly as depicted. The more benign version says Monday night was a strategy session with Morrison wondering out loud whether or not there was a universe where the government could kill two birds with one stone – get religious discrimination and the integrity commission through the parliament – rather than some high-octane, hideously transactional, roll of the dice. Some also contend the prime minister can’t have been rolled on Monday night because there was no firm landing point. No decision, because events were too fluid. There are always nuances. But whatever the nuances, fact is the confidential conversation leaked, and it leaked on the day where Morrison had to kick his religious discrimination package into the long grass. This felt like a direct hit. An absolute bullseye. But as direct hits go, this one is passing strange. These things are clear. The Morrison government, five minutes from an election, is tired and ragged. Relations between moderates and conservatives are strained to breaking point. Unresolved factional poison in New South Wales has disrupted the equilibrium in Canberra. The rolling tumult of the past fortnight also tells us someone, or more than someone, wants to cause a ruckus. Someone clearly wants to cause Morrison some capital “T” trouble. But the endgame of this capital “T” trouble is entirely unclear. If Liberals are planning to roll the prime minister before the election, with the predictable precursor to regicide being random acts of violence – a steady drip feed of leaks, and back biting and free character assassinations – it’s not clear who Morrison’s challenger is. People close to Peter Dutton swear black and blue that the Queenslander is not moving this side of the poll. Colleagues also insist that it is not in Josh Frydenberg’s interests to move on Morrison three months out from an election contest he could easily lose. Why would the next big thing render himself yesterday’s man? It has been obvious to anyone watching politics that Dutton and Frydenberg are positioning for an inevitable leadership succession face-off post-election. But there’s no evidence either man has an army marshalling covertly on a beach. So this is a spiral, no doubt. But it’s a deeply surreal plunge.The number of people in England waiting to start routine hospital treatment has risen to a record high, and waits at A&amp;E, for cancer care and for ambulances to arrive are also worsening. At the end of December, almost 6.1 million people were waiting to have an operation – the highest number since records began in August 2007. The number of people forced to wait more than 52 weeks to start non-urgent treatment was 310,813, up from 306,996 in the previous month and 39% higher than in December 2020. A total of 20,065 had waited for more than two years. Overall, 92% of patientswaiting are those meant to be treated within 18 weeks. “These figures show that sadly millions of patients and their families will be waiting anxiously or in pain for routine or planned surgery for some considerable time to come,”said Sarah Scobie, the deputy director of research at the Nuffield Trust thinktank. NHS England’s figures come two days after it published its elective recovery plan, setting out how it hopes to cut waiting times. It plans to tackle the backlog through the use of community diagnostic centres where people can have tests such as scans and X-rays, and surgical hubs, which carry out large numbers of the same type of operation such as joint replacements. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, told MPs that the NHS planned to treat everyone who had been waiting for surgery for more than two years by July and eradicate 18-month waits by April 2023, 65-week waits by March 2024, and one-year waits by March 2025. But the waiting list would keep on growing until March 2024, he added, because up to 10 million people who did not seek medical help during the pandemic were doing so in greater numbers, increasing the demand for NHS care. There is growing unease in Downing Street and among Conservative MPs that stubbornly high waiting lists could prove a problem in the run-up to the next election, which is due in May 2024. Ministers have been given estimates that the headline total of the waiting list could reach as many as 10.7 million people, or 9.2 million under the best case scenario, by spring 2024. The Guardian disclosed this week that in the first seven months of 2021-22, 290,428 people in England with possible symptoms of cancer did not get to see a specialist within the 14 days after being referred by a GP that the NHS seeks to guarantee, and the total could hit almost 500,000 – more than double the previous biggest annual tally of 235,549 – by the end of March. The latest monthly figures show that more than 400,000 people had to wait longer than two weeks during 2021 to see a specialist while 33% – the most ever – had to wait more than 62 days to start treatment. Performance against the series of cancer waiting times has been “going from bad to worse over the last year”, said Minesh Patel, the head of policy at Macmillan Cancer Support. Almost 300,000 people with heart problems are now waiting for surgery, such as having a stent fitted to keep open damaged arteries. “Hundreds of thousands of real people [are] at higher risk of avoidable heart attacks, disabling heart failure or even premature death as they face dangerous delays for potentially life-saving heart care,” said Dr Sonya Babu-Narayan, a cardiologist and the British Heart Foundation’s associate medical director.Michail Antonio has questioned whether his West Ham teammate Kurt Zouma’s mistreatment of his cat is “worse than racism”. The France defender has been widely condemned after a video emerged of him dropping, kicking and slapping the pet. He has since apologised and been fined two weeks’ wages – understood to be in the region of £250,000 – as well as losing his sponsorship deal with Adidas. Zouma remains under investigation by the RSPCA after his two cats were taken into the care of the charity, with two of West Ham’s sponsors having withdrawn their support for the club. When asked about the incident during an interview with Sky Sports News, Antonio said while he did not condone Zouma’s actions, he felt there was a wider debate to be considered. “I’ve got a question for you. Do you think what he’s done is worse than racism?” Antonio said. “I’m not condoning a thing that he’s done, I don’t agree with what he has done at all. But there’s people that have been convicted and been caught for racism, and have played football afterwards. They got an eight-game punishment or something like that, but people are now calling for people to be sacked, for them to lose their livelihood.” Dagenham &amp; Redbridge have said Zouma’s brother Yoan, who filmed the video, will not play for the club in any competitive match until the RSPCA has completed its investigation. Yoan Zouma has said he deeply regrets his involvement. “Any further action deemed necessary to be taken will be made at the conclusion of the RSPCA investigation,” the National League club said. Experience Kissimmee, the tourism authority for Osceola County, Florida, had been evaluating its relationship with West Ham since Zouma was selected to start Tuesday’s game against Watford after the footage went viral. “Experience Kissimmee announced today that it has ended its sponsorship of West Ham United Football Club,” the club’s destination partner said in a tweet. Vitality, West Ham’s wellness partner, had previously suspended its sponsorship, saying it was “hugely disappointed” with the judgment shown by the club in response to the video. It said it would be “engaging with the club to understand what actions they will be taking”.My fellow interfaith activist Gurdeep Singh, who has died of a heart attack aged 59, was the co-creator of Gurdwara Aid, a community interest company that helps Sikh temples in the UK to deal with all kinds of administrative chores, from obtaining food safety certification to registering for gift aid and arranging safeguarding training. Gurdeep set up Gurdwara Aid with a friend, Mandip Singh, in 2019, after having spent a number of years on the committee of his local gurdwara in Hitchin, Hertfordshire, where he became involved in all aspects of its running. Initially the idea was to help and encourage other gurdwaras to claim gift aid, but soon he found himself in demand for advice in lots of other areas, including governance, risk assessments, charity registration and dispute resolution. Gurdeep was born in Pragpur in the Punjab, India, to Ajit Singh, a till installer at a computer company, and Surjit Kaur, a factory worker, who emigrated to Britain in 1964 and settled in Hitchin. After attending Hitchin Boys’ school, Gurdeep studied telecommunications engineering at Kingston Polytechnic (now Kingston University), graduated in 1984 and worked as an a engineer with GEC Plessey Telecommunications until 1989. Settling for the rest of his life in Stevenage, after two years with Mercury Communications as a maintenance engineer he moved into management at Nortel Networks (1991-94), Telewest (1994-97) and various other telecoms companies, including Tekmark, until, through his gurdwara contacts, he became involved with the Sikh Channel television station in 2012. At the invitation of the channel’s proprietor, Gurdeep presented a weekly programme called Sikh Spectrum, in which he interviewed Sikhs from all walks of life. The show ran for two years, during which time Gurdeep co-founded the Khanda Poppy project to honour the Sikh contribution in the two world wars. Eventually the Sikh Channel appointed him as head of operations, and later CEO, and he remained there until he set up Gurdwara Aid. Gurdeep brought to his new venture great business sense, an enormous smile, a big heart and the ability to look for the best in everyone. Gurdwara Aid conferences were always packed because they reflected his caring and committed attitude, backed up by admirable professionalism. During the first Covid lockdown, the company was instrumental in setting up a group to provide Sikh feedback to the government via a special taskforce, advising on timings for the re-opening of places of worship. Gurdeep also built an online network of Sikh support, the smile shining as bright as ever each Sunday over Zoom, on which he would help to share and solve problems. When PPE became short he quickly found a donor and ensured that masks, aprons and gel were delivered in generous quantities not just to gurdwaras, but to mosques, synagogues, churches and other temples. Gurdeep is survived by his wife, Kalvinder Kaur, whom he married in 1988, a son, Jeevan, daughter, Pavenn, and three granddaughters.Michael Cash is a hewer – he descends into the subterranean shafts and tunnels of the Black Country to swing a pickaxe at the seams of coal that run there. If a more perilous occupation exists in England in the 1870s, then it perhaps belongs only to the often-orphaned children who are paid a pittance to drag the wagons that Michael and his colleagues fill, and whipped if they stop to scratch the sores made by the chains that bind them. Here, subterranean stalls propped up by planks can collapse instantly, killing those who made them, and noxious gases permeate. In a good week, Michael earns enough to buy leeks and potatoes with which his new wife can make broth to feed the family, but not enough to pay for his six-year-old son Luke’s schooling. A bony roach or two lifted from a dreary pond supplements their diet. Like so many miners, Michael’s main motivation is preventing his son from having to follow him down into the Dante-esque circles of hell that Daniel Wiles brilliantly evokes in this confident and moving debut. Sun-starved life above ground in a cruel November isn’t much better. Here, “ossdrawn barges churned up silt from the cut floor as they slithered past … One boat held so many people that some nippers even swam behind it in the dark matter, only visible by the light that hung behind the boat. Dogs swam with them, their eyes reflecting like buoyed beacons.” A change in fortune comes when Michael and his fellow hewer Cain secretly discover a seam of gold, and suddenly we’re in a proto-Klondike world, had the Yukon gold rush been chronicled by a far less florid DH Lawrence. The lump of gold provides one of the few flashes of light in a soot-covered West Midlands that is otherwise defined by poverty and hardship, so it comes as little surprise when the violent Cain double-crosses Michael. He is then forced to travel to Dudley by barge, an epic autumnal journey that feels as weighted with foreboding as Marlow’s in Heart of Darkness. Here we see the Industrial Revolution (and by extension, the British empire) as it really was: merciless and driven entirely by greed and exploitation. Wiles’s writing throughout is as chiselled and pure as the sedimentary rock from which carbonised coal is created, while the equally pared-down Black Country dialect – all compressed consonants and flattened vowels – is poetically minimalist: “Ow bist yow?” men nod to one another. Though the relentless hardship on display initially leans towards steely US writers such as Cormac McCarthy, Ron Rash and Daniel Woodrell, in Michael there’s also a quiet nobility and stoic sense of morality towards those even less fortunate that recalls Claire Keegan’s masterful recent novella Small Things Like These. The unforgiving land itself is a central character. “Mercia gives and teks,” Michael recalls his father saying, using the Anglo-Saxon name for the heartland of England. “All of life’s fates explained by this one simple rule. There is no give without take, and Mercia’s take was always fair.” There are few words wasted here, and only when the book ends do we learn that Mercia has taken more than enough: the novel is inspired by real events and dedicated to 22 men and boys who died in the colliery disaster at Pelsall Hall near Walsall in 1872. A granite obelisk erected in their memory still stands today, though Mercia’s Take is an equally powerful tribute to all those who toiled at the coalfaces across Britain so that an avaricious empire might expand, whatever the cost. • Benjamin Myers’s short story collection Male Tears is published by Bloomsbury. Mercia’s Take by Daniel Wiles is published by Swift (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.When the Taliban reached Parveen Tokhi’s home province of Zabul in mid-August and asked to use her school as a temporary barracks, the headteacher was frightened but clear about what she had to do. She spent the bleak years of the first Taliban government in the 1990s stuck at home like almost all Afghan women, barred from education and work. She was determined that the same shadow wouldn’t engulf another generation. “I said: ‘OK, you can stay there overnight, but these buildings are a girls’ school, and I have sacrificed all my life for the education of these girls.’” The men had to be out in time for morning classes to start as usual at Bibi Khala school the next day, she insisted, undaunted by their guns. Then she got the contact number for senior Taliban officials and rang them directly to say there was no Islamic justification to bar girls from the classrooms and corridors where she had spent most of her life, first as a student, then for four decades as a teacher. “I said: ‘I will not close the school, even if someone kills me for this, because the girls come in hijab, and the teachers are female.’” Southern Zabul province, where Tokhi teaches, is so deeply conservative that even under the previous government only three girls’ high schools operated, all clustered in the provincial capital, Qalat. Girls in rural areas ended their education at sixth grade, if they got one at all. It was not an obvious place for a pioneering experiment in Taliban education policy. But to the surprise of many, in Zabul and beyond, the new Taliban officials agreed to let all girls carry on with their classes after making a few compromises. Girls must now wear “hijab” – by which the Taliban mean the burqa – when they travel to and from school, while the handful of male teachers at the site have been sacked and primary school classes for boys once held on the same site have been moved. “The women came here [to the education department offices] and demanded that they should continue their education, and we decided to allow them,” said Muhammad Usman Huriyat, Zabul’s education director. The Taliban recognise the importance of girls’ education, and want to train more women doctors, he said. “We are all responsible for this. We know about human rights, the need of the people.” The Zabul schools stayed open even after the central Taliban government brought in a de facto ban on high school education for girls last September, blithely shrugging off years of international promises to recognise women’s right under Islam to study and to work. So while the situation in Qalat would be utterly ordinary in most of the world, in the new Taliban-ruled Afghanistan, it was exceptional. The country has 34 provinces, but fewer than a third have allowed any of their girls’ schools to reopen, and even fewer have restarted all secondary classes. Millions of girls are being robbed of their right to an education. “Now I am home all day with nothing to do. I cook or wash clothes, or clean the house. I feel like I am in a prison,” said Arifa, a 15-year-old in Kabul who hoped her excellent grades would be her family’s path out of poverty. “I feel like I am no longer a member of Afghanistan society.” Last spring suicide attackers killed dozens of her classmates, but she still returned to school. She tries to bring that courage and determination to her current agonising wait. “I miss my friends but we have never given up. We want to open the doors of the school again, and we still have hope.” Tracing where girls were allowed back into high schools and why classes resumed – or in a few cases were never stopped at all – may offer insights into how a disparate band of militants can perhaps be nudged on policy. The areas still permitting girls to study – from Zabul in the south to Herat in the west, and Balkh in the north – have differences in wealth, ethnic makeup, popular support for Taliban and past attitudes to women’s education. Some are templates for resistance where activists have taken on the Taliban with protests, strikes or appeals to local leaders, putting their jobs and perhaps their lives on the line. The Taliban are cracking down on women’s rights activists, and there is growing fear over the fate of six campaigners abducted in Kabul last month. In Herat, a powerful speech by a young student demanding her education went viral, while teacher unions threatened mass public protests outside government offices if girls were barred, a senior union official said. Officials relented and schools reopened, though girls were not allowed to take their end-of-year exams. In Zabul, local women’s activists said Tokhi’s outspoken stance helped persuade the Taliban to take an unexpected path, although she has since been demoted. “From the beginning I was very straightforward,” she says, sanguine about the change. “That’s probably why I lost my job. All because of my commitment to the students of Zabul.” Elsewhere, including northern Mazar-e-Sharif city, militants appear to have chosen a different path from the moment they took control, recognising deep-rooted support for educating women. The Taliban director of education for the city even has a wife who teaches at a madrassa. He is proud of her role, even though it may bring contempt from many of the Taliban’s rank-and-file members. “We are trying to have very good education for girls here, and we opened the schools on the second day [after taking the city],” said director Mawlawi Mohammad Naeem as he inspected a school, armed with a pistol and belt of ammunition. “We want to have very nice mothers and sisters in future, so education is vital for that.” Those provinces where girls are still at school offer some hope. But they also serve as a bleak warning of how badly the new Afghan government is damaging the lives of women and girls, even in areas where it is ruling in the most moderate way. Girls who can graduate face futures heavily constrained by the misogyny of Taliban rule, with women restricted largely to work in health and education. “First my dream was to be the president of Afghanistan, but I changed. My hope now is to become a doctor to help our people,” said Narges*, a 12th-grade student in Zabul. The quality of education has also declined in most schools, teachers privately told the Guardian. A ban on male colleagues meant fewer colleagues and that they lost specialists. There is also the constant threat that the classes may be taken away again. “Sometimes I cry, because in Afghanistan we don’t have open-minded people who allow girls to study,” said Zainab*, another high-school student in Zabul who is haunted by the stories of girls barred from classrooms elsewhere. Taliban officials have suggested the five-month-old bar on high-school education for girls is only short-term. The spokesman Suhail Shaheen told the BBC he “hoped” that when boys returned to class in March after the long winter break, girls would be with them. The west has tried to reinforce that promise with a pledge to pay teacher salaries if girls are allowed to study. Another Taliban official said new schools were needed for girls to study in isolation, although students were already segregated by gender. Afghans who remember the last Taliban government are skeptical. In the 1990s, a sweeping bar on all girls’ education was justified as a temporary response to security concerns, but in the five years they ruled, it was never lifted. Many fear that the new ban may also stretch on open-ended. Reopening in places like conservative Zabul makes a mockery of claims that the education system needs significant alterations. What little hope there is may lie in the changes of the last two decades, among the Taliban and all Afghanistan. Many of the senior Taliban leadership now embrace educating their own daughters, and even ordinary fighters are less suspicious of western-style learning. At one private academy, militants who might once have attacked classrooms have instead joined them to study English and computing. A teacher, who asked not to be named, said: “A group of Taliban came in, and I heard them saying: ‘We used to kill students at places like this, now we are studying here.’” Women have changed too. Twenty years of education mean the Taliban have inherited a country radically different to the shattered Afghanistan of their last rule. In 2000, Unicef estimated that only 4-5% of all primary age students went to school in Afghanistan. Today there is a generation of educated young activists ready to fight for the right to continue studying. “We are not going to let them [get away with this],” said Mahbouba Seraj, a prominent women’s rights activist still living in Kabul. “There is nothing, in the Qur’an, or in the Hadith, or as an example in other Islamic countries, that would permit stopping women from going to school.” “When [the Taliban] took power in the 1990s there were no women, or anybody in Afghanistan, who could raise their voice on this issue. But now they cannot do it, because we are after them.” * Some names have been changedHenry Leckenby, 54, recalls a feeling of scarcity when he first started working as a substitute teacher. Each morning, he jumped on the computer first thing to see which assignments were open that day. Now, he has his pick of jobs he wants to take and schools he wants to work in. “I’ve gotten the impression that every single day I wake up, I have work if I want it. The other day there were literally at least a couple dozen openings,” he said. Leckenby, who lives in La Crosse, Wisconsin, has a PhD in physics, but found it difficult to find work after a university job dried up. “‘Overqualified’ is a word I heard a lot,” he said. But substitute teaching offered a flexible schedule that fit his needs and he’s been doing it ever since. Substitute teachers like Leckenby suddenly find themselves on the winning end of a supply-and-demand problem facing schools across the country: Too few full-time teachers, and not enough substitute teachers to cover for them. As the Omicron variant hurtled across the nation, political leaders from the White House to local school boards faced intense pressure to keep open brick-and-mortar schools – and most have. “Let’s put it in perspective: 95%, as high as 98%, of the schools in America are open, functioning and capable of doing the job,” president Joe Biden said at a press conference last month. He urged school districts to use funding to keep schools open. But that reality has left the nation’s public schools scrambling to fill holes created by a lack of available teachers to fill vacancies. And it’s created a cascade of day-to-day disruptions within school buildings as staff chip in to cover for absent colleagues, leaving some assigned duties aside in the process. Research has shown teacher absences have a detrimental impact on student learning, which could compound the learning loss caused by ongoing disruptions in education over the past two years. States have taken a variety of measures in a desperate rush to solve the problem – from lowering entrance requirements and increasing pay to more drastic measures. Oklahoma governor Kevin Stitt issued an executive order last month that permits state agencies to allow their workers to work as substitutes while keeping their regular pay. That brought uniformed police officers into schools – to lead classroom instruction. Meanwhile, New Mexico’s governor Michelle Lujan Grisham called on state workers and members of the National Guard to volunteer for classroom duty. By early February, at least 78 members of New Mexico’s National Guard reported for classroom duty. In Austin, Texas, 400 employees from the school district’s central office have chipped in to work as substitute teachers, the district said last month. So did a county judge. ‘A double hit’ Beneath the immediate need for substitutes is a shortage of full-time teachers that predates the pandemic. But data indicates that Covid may have hastened some teachers’ departures from the field. In July 2020, in the months that followed Covid’s arrival, the seasonally adjusted rate of workers who quit state and local public education jobs reached 1.5% – a 20-year-high, according to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. By the following summer, however, the quit-rate had fallen to a record low of 0.3%. And by December, the quit-rate was on par with similar government jobs. Some who resigned from education jobs may have been lured by higher pay and a better work-life balance offered in the private sector. But Peggy Wirtz-Olsen, president of the Wisconsin Education Association Council, said others have been driven away by the challenging conditions teachers have long endured. “It’s been a double hit, with the absences caused by the pandemic plus an alarming number of teachers leaving the profession due to unrealistic workloads, low pay, and a lack of input in school decisions. All of that exacerbates the situation we find ourselves in right now,” said Wirtz-Olsen. And with remaining teachers out sick for longer periods of time this year, finding enough substitutes has presented an acute challenge. More than three-quarters of school leaders have struggled to find substitute teachers, according to a nationally representative survey conducted in the early weeks of the school year by EdWeek Research Center. Before the pandemic, schools nationally were able to fill about 80% of teacher absences, while this year it may be closer to 50% or 60%, EdWeek reported. And in California, the nation’s most populous state, fewer people are applying for permits to become substitute teachers than before Covid arrived. Between 2019 and 2020, the number of people applying for permits to work as substitute teachers dropped by 25%, according data from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. While applications rebounded in 2021, they were still 87% of pre-pandemic numbers. In Wisconsin, Wirtz-Olsen said the current challenges underscore the need to improve working conditions both to recruit and retain full-time teachers as well as the high-quality substitutes they depend on. The alternative would mean further disruptions to student learning. “The constant need to step in and cover for others is putting additional stress on an already stretched system – both on educators and our support professionals in buildings who are increasingly asked to cover,” she said. “And for the student experience, that disruption is causing a lack of consistency from day to day.” In Milwaukee, Wisconsin’s largest school district, full-time elementary school teacher Angela Harris said she doesn’t remember seeing a substitute teacher in her school all year, despite staff being out sick. More often, paraprofessionals or other support staff will step in to cover for absent teachers, she said. She worries about the loss of routine and what it means for students. “It’s been a revolving door for our students, and I’ve seen the ripple effects across my school,” Harris said. “There were disparities that already existed, and Covid-19 has just exposed those gaps and made them even worse,” she said. ‘I’ve been deeply alarmed’ Despite the demands and potential risks, many still find in substitute teaching the flexibility that fits their needs. That’s true even for some teachers who are at heightened risk of complications from Covid. Linda Carter, 70, works as a substitute teacher in Lee County, Florida. Because a paralyzed nerve in her diaphragm left her lung useless, she wears a non-invasive ventilator to help her breathe 18 hours a day. Carter relies on augmented voice technology to deliver instruction, feeding her lesson plans into the software in advance, then letting the electronic voice take the lead in the classroom. “I just push one of my buttons and it will tell the students what they need to do, provided they stay quiet and follow instructions,” Carter said. “I teach hi-tech.” Carter, who serves as the treasurer for the National Substitute Teachers Alliance, said she finds the work deeply rewarding and has no plans to leave the classroom anytime soon. But she can’t say the same for all of the substitute teachers she knows, many of whom are retired educators who’ve left the job out of concern about contracting and spreading Covid. Currently, at least eight states, including Florida, have banned school districts from issuing universal mask mandates. “A lot of teachers have decided to hang it up because it’s not worth the risk, and I think it’s the same around the country,” Carter said. In La Crosse, the crunch to find substitute teachers has meant better pay for Leckenby. He’s seen an increase from around $120 a day when he first started, to around $140 today. Still, fear of Covid lingers. Leckenby’s wife works with vulnerable populations. And at 54, he worries about the complications Covid could cause for him. “I haven’t been scared away. But there have been times I’ve been deeply alarmed,” he said. “With substitute teaching, there are no benefits. So if I test positive or get sick, that’s at least five days where I’m just out of work. You’re looking at several hundred dollars that could just disappear,” he said. That’s why, in addition to being vaccinated, boosted and wearing an N95 mask, Leckenby chooses to work only in school districts he knows take masking and mitigation strategies seriously. “Thankfully, there are some school districts that have mask policies and actually enforce them,” he said. “If there weren’t, it would be a lot more difficult to continue to do this work.”College took a back seat the moment Izzy B called the suicide hotline. Izzy, 18, had spent her senior year of high school online. Then she’d gone straight to online summer school at a local community college near Denver. When in-person classes there started this past fall, she was glad to be back in the classroom and finally experiencing some real college life. But after Omicron forced classes back online late in the semester, Izzy, who was living with her parents, felt overwhelmed by loneliness; she struggled to focus on her schoolwork and enjoy life. “We’re at this age where we’re supposed to be hanging out with our friends and socializing,” she said. “It definitely affected my mental health.” Izzy, whose full name has been withheld to protect her privacy, said she had always earned straight As, so the B she received in one class this fall was a sign something was wrong. As she seriously considered suicide, Izzy sought help and moved into her grandparents’ home in Wyoming to be closer to her extended family. And she stopped attending school. Thousands of other students around the country are leaving college – some because of mental health issues, others for financial or family reasons. Educators worry that many have left for good. Of the 2.6 million students who started college in fall 2019, 26.1%, or roughly 679,000, didn’t come back the next year, according to the National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. That was an increase of two percentage points over the previous year, and the highest share of students not returning for their sophomore year since 2012. The dropout spike was even more startling for community college students like Izzy, with an increase of about 3.5 percentage points. Researchers usually look at how many college freshmen become sophomores because if a student is going to drop out, that’s when it’s most likely to happen. While national college dropout figures have not yet been compiled for the current school year, the Omicron surge and the continued uncertainty around the virus are elevating concerns that the numbers of students abandoning college could continue to grow. The rising dropout rate on college campuses has consequences for individual students, their families and the economy. People who leave college before finishing are more likely to face unemployment and earn less than those who complete bachelor’s degrees, and they are about three times as likely to default on their student loans. With fewer college-educated workers to fill skilled jobs, the economy could also suffer in terms of lost business productivity and lower GDP. “People are worried the shadow this casts will be quite a bit longer than the pandemic itself,” said David Hawkins, chief education and policy officer for the National Association for College Admission Counseling. “This pandemic has really made an impact on a lot of students’ ability to free up time to attend school.” Related: Another million adults ‘have stepped off the path to the middle class’ The wave of students dropping out of college has hit schools of all sizes and characteristics around the country, but in different ways and for different reasons. Nassau Community College on New York’s Long Island has seen a sharp drop in returning students for the spring semester. College leaders believe some students are tired of online classes, said David Follick, dean of admissions and an assistant vice-president. Even though spring classes are evenly split between online and in-person, demand for the latter is outpacing that for online classes by at least a 2-1 ratio, Follick said. The school is trying to get students to stick around regardless of how they attend classes, he said. “We’re looking for the silver bullet,” he said. At private Ohio Wesleyan University, with an enrollment of just over 1,300, a few dozen students decided not to return this fall because the school required vaccinations, said Stefanie Niles, vice-president for enrollment and communications. And while most students have returned to Michigan State University this year, officials are alarmed by a loss of lower-income students and those who were the first in their families to attend college, said Mark Largent, the associate provost for undergraduate education and dean of undergraduate studies. Even though freshman retention is up overall, to 91.7%, the share of returning students eligible for Pell Grants (federal aid for low-income students) has dropped more than a percentage point, to 86.3% and the share of first-generation college students has fallen by 1.4 percentage points, also to 86.3%. Those students often have financial burdens forcing them to drop out. “For one student it might be a car repair, for another student it might be childcare,” said Marjorie Hass, a former college president and now president of the Council of Independent Colleges, a 765-member coalition of non-profit colleges and universities. Congress could help, she said, by dramatically increasing the amount available in a Pell Grant. Largent said Michigan State has provided additional financial help to the highest-need students, and has also been digging through data to figure out which students might benefit most from some human contact. The school recently emailed about 1,000 students who had yet to register for the spring semester; about 25% responded. Largent worries about the other 75%. “The students I engage with and the students who come back, we can learn what they need,” he said. “But what we really need to study are the students who don’t come back. The students who … sort of fall out of communication with us.” Colleges and universities have good reason to be worried about uncommunicative students, said Sara Goldrick-Rab, a professor of sociology and medicine at Temple University, who studies college students’ basic needs. “There is a very significant mental health crisis,” she said. “Students just are not OK. Students feeling lost, students feeling depressed, students feeling anxious – it’s weighing really heavily on them.” Staff members at Cal Poly Pomona have been so overwhelmed by students’ needs during the pandemic that they created a chatbot to help answer questions. If a student mentions certain key words, including suicide, the message is passed on to a counselor, who reaches out personally. “Students have told us they are leaving because they lost both their parents,” said Cecilia Santiago-González, the assistant vice-president for strategic initiatives for student success. “There’s definitely a lot of mental health concerns that have been brought up.” Several college officials mentioned students are taking fewer credits than before, or registering for a full load of classes and then withdrawing from some of them. Both are possible precursors to failing to graduate. About 81% of students who attend college full time graduate within six years, according to the National Student Clearinghouse Research Center, while just 21% of part-time students graduate within six years. Students who mix full-time and part-time attendance complete degrees at a 44% rate. Often, all it takes to keep a student from dropping out of college is some personal attention. Leaders at California State University, San Bernardino, alarmed by the pandemic’s effect on student retention, recently hired re-enrollment coaches to help students who had fallen off the grid. About a quarter of those students registered for classes within three days of being contacted by the coaches, said Lesley Davidson-Boyd, the interim associate vice-president and dean of undergraduate studies. “It’s a lot of hand-holding,” she said. “Students have said things like, ‘Wow, it’s like somebody actually cared.’ ” Izzy B said she did not receive that kind of support from her Colorado college. She said she called her advisers repeatedly but never reached anyone. In California, Victoria Castro-Chavez had a different experience – and it made all the difference. In fall 2020, Castro-Chavez had about nine classes left to go at California State University, Stanislaus. But she felt pushed past her limits. Covid was devastating her family, she was working full time moving trucks at a logistics company, and she was driving more than an hour to sit in a classroom while fearing for her life. When her college classes went virtual mid-semester, she struggled to learn from a computer screen. “I was having a really difficult time passing classes and was really burned out,” said Castro-Chavez, 23, a communications studies major who hopes to become a public school teacher. “And I’ve lost four family members to Covid now. It hit me pretty hard.” As that fall semester wrapped up, Castro-Chavez, who had recently tested positive for Covid herself after losing her aunt and cousins, told her adviser she wasn’t sure she’d be back. The adviser encouraged her to take a short break and then return to school slowly, maybe just taking a couple of classes to start. The pep talk worked. Castro-Chavez took the spring semester off and focused on her trucking company job. But this past August she re-enrolled, first with a course load of two classes, and then, this semester, three. It can be challenging getting any student back on track after time off. Just 2% of 2020 high school graduates who did not immediately enroll in college showed up in fall 2021, according to the National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. The center also found that 30,600 fewer transfer students who took time off from college returned this past fall, a drop of 5.8% from the year before. Maggie Callow, 19, bucked those national trends but said it was tough to get into the college mindset after taking a pandemic-induced gap year last year. Having struggled with online classes in her final two months of high school in 2020, she just couldn’t fathom spending her first year of college online. So she spent the year at home in Bozeman, Montana, working in a pizza shop, hiking and taking a French class at Montana State University. Now halfway through her freshman year at Pomona College in Southern California, Callow was deeply disappointed when the college announced the first two weeks of the spring semester would be online. A lot of her classmates are having trouble, she said. “I think a lot fewer people are going to graduate from college,” she said. Izzy B, the 18-year-old from Colorado, said she wants to return to college eventually, to become a therapist. But for now, she’s working on her mental well-being. “We just don’t take mental health seriously,” said Izzy. “It wasn’t until I was thinking, ‘Oh, I’m going to kill myself,’ ” she said, that she realized she needed to take action to care for herself. “That was a very concrete point.” If you or someone you know is having thoughts of suicide, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), and the Crisis Text Line – text HOME to 741741 – are free, 24-hour services that can provide support, information and resources. This story about dropping out of college was produced by The Hechinger Report, a nonprofit, independent news organization focused on inequality and innovation in educationThe Thursday quiz was criticised the other week in the comments for being too down and self-deprecating in its opening blurb. What an unfair charge. So here are 15 more questions on general knowledge and topical trivia for you. You may need a cup of tea, because the repetitive in-jokes are sorely in need of some refreshment. Oh I see what they meant. Anyway, there are no prizes, it is just for fun. There is a hidden Doctor Who reference to spot for a bonus point. Let us know how you got on in the comments. The Thursday quiz, No 42 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and also a picture of David Tennant is not a “hidden” Doctor Who reference. It is more cryptic than that.Winning tip: Valentine’s in Venice – I mean Aveiro I told my fiancée we were going somewhere where we would drink wine on a gondola so she was a bit surprised when we got on a plane to Portugal and not Italy. I had to explain that I meant the Venice south of Porto – the pretty canal town of Aveiro. The stay there, I informed her, would be half the cost of the real Venice and just as nice – both of which turned out to be true. Aveiro also has pretty, colourful waterfront houses and loads of cafes and seafood restaurants hugging its extensive network of calm, peaceful canals. I risked being dubbed a cheapskate but we both loved it – a great romantic choice for a Valentine break on a budget. Nigel Mimosas and seductive beaches, Côte d’Azur Forget red roses, picture instead hills swathed in fragrant yellow mimosa. Mandelieu-la-Napoule is overlooked by the Massif du Tanneron, said to be the largest mimosa forest in Europe. More intimate than nearby Cannes, this Côte d’Azur gem nestled under the pine-swathed, extinct volcano San Peyre, also boasts the fairytale, medieval Château Napoule, which stands alongside one of several seductive golden beaches. Mandelieu was our base for a Valentine’s mini-break one February. It coincided with the town’s annual 10-day mimosa festival, a feast both visual and olfactory. Spectacular sunsets over the blush-red rocks of the Esterel massif added to the romantic vibe. Roi Romance in Rutland If a stroll by a picturesque lake watching wildfowl against the backdrop of a deep orange sunset is your idea of romantic, a stay in Rutland, England’s smallest historic county, could fit the bill. To celebrate our wedding anniversary just after Valentine’s Day, we stayed near Rutland Water at the Rutland Hall Hotel (doubles from £109 B&amp;B). As well as Rutland Water, we enjoyed exploring the small market town of Oakham nearby. Particularly impressive is the Norman Great Hall of Oakham Castle, included on the town’s heritage trail. Admission is free; it is also available for wedding hire. Sharon Pinner Frozen lakes, hot cabin, Sweden My perfect romantic trip is a Swedish adventure starting in Stockholm. In the day I’ll meander through the city window-shopping, visit the national museum and be inspired by Rembrandt, Renoir and Degas, making sure to stop for cosy fika (coffee and cake) breaks. Then at night I’ll watch the city come alive in moonlight with a romantic stroll in the snow after a candlelit dinner. The next evening I’ll catch the night train up to Luleå close to the Arctic Circle, spending time with my partner in our cabin and getting ready to explore the giant frozen lake on ice skates. Imogen Cappelow Candles and couples, Kotor, Montenegro Perast, Montenegro, is historic, peaceful and relentlessly romantic. The Unesco-protected, car-free town climbs the hillside from the Bay of Kotor. Opposite, limestone mountains stretch down to the bay. Some Venetian palaces have been transformed into boutique hotels; others linger as crumbling memorials. Jetties radiate giving access, in summer, to sunbathing, swimming and boating. In the late afternoon, day trippers from Kotor depart and calm descends. Candle-topped tables line the waterfront, inviting couples to feast on fresh fish or sip a glass of local Varna wine. Eyes constantly savour the reflecting bay, towering mountains and two small isles, capped with charming chapels. Debbie Rolls A roof terrace and a rising moon, La Gomera, Canary Islands We had a wonderful holiday on La Gomera in the Canary Islands one year, getting there by ferry from Tenerife. The lack of direct flights from mainland Europe means the island retains its simplicity and charm. We spent easy days on the beach, swimming and eating fresh rolls filled with local avocados. One memorably romantic night, we dined at La Orquidea in the town of Valle Gran Rey. Sitting on the roof terrace overlooking the sea, we ate lenguado (sole) with the Gomeran speciality mojo sauce, and watched the reddest of sunsets followed by the rising of the full moon over the sea. Utterly unforgettable. Gill White The lovely bones and Michelangelo, Rome I could have stared into the eyes of Saint Valentine for ever … well, where the eyes would have been, at least. What’s claimed to be his skull is in Rome’s Basilica di Santa Maria in Cosmedin. A short walk along the river later, we were in the stunning Sistine Chapel. In the afternoon, we tried our hands at boating on the lake at beautiful Villa Borghese, and then took in the breathtaking views over the ancient city from the nearby Casina Valadier roof bar: a perfect spot for an evening cocktail. Before returning to our hotel, we had a relaxing night-time visit to the luxury De La Ville spa. Così romantico! Shelly Asquith Cosy up with a cream tea, Dorset I love walking with my partner along the beaches of Lyme Bay. On a good day you’ll see the stunning cliffs of the Jurassic coast, deep-blue sea and matching sky. On a wintry one, everything’s shrouded in atmospheric stormy grey. Keep walking from the visitors’ centre – it’s blissfully quiet this time of year. We love fossil-seeking and rockpooling, finding starfish and tiny, translucent shrimps. If you don’t have any luck with dinosaurs, you can alway take home a heart-shaped sea stone! To round off a glorious Valentine’s Day, warm up with a cosy cream tea in a Lyme Regis cafe or wander around the Town Mill craft workshops. Sophie All romantic roads lead to Rhodes Saint Paul’s Bay in Lindos, Rhodes, is beautiful. I went there with my husband-to-be when we were dating – it was our first holiday together. I’ll never forget swimming close to the mouth of the bay with him and watching a gigantic shoal of fish glide past. It was magical. We go back to Rhodes now as a married couple and always visit Saint Paul’s Bay to relive that wonderful first holiday. Esra Kelham A tandem cycle between the marvels of Berlin The Unesco city of Potsdam is an easy train ride from Berlin. It’s ideal to explore by bike – in true romantic style, we took a tandem. Cycling through Sanssouci Park there are many fabulous buildings to marvel at, including Sanssouci Palace and the Chinese House. Equally thrilling was Glienicke Bridge, or the Bridge of Spies, as it was known during the cold war era. Prefer warmth? There’s plenty to do inside, including a film museum, the Barberini museum and cosy venues for kaffee und kuchen. FiThere could never be a good place to sustain an anterior cruciate ligament injury. The crushing blow sustained by Harry Souttar in Sydney arrived with immediate realisation that he had to complete a lengthy journey back home to England. Leg one, to Dubai, at least came with support given Souttar’s international colleagues were heading for a World Cup qualifier against China. “Leg room on planes isn’t great for me anyway but with this injury it was 10 times worse,” says Souttar, who stands at 6ft 6in. “The physios were unbelievable at trying to look after me even though it was a night flight, topping up ice and giving medication.” Souttar is now 10 weeks post-operation and back working in the gym. Pre-season is a legitimate target for an on-field return. An indicator of Souttar’s sharp development under Michael O’Neill at Stoke is endorsed by the fact the commanding centre-half was linked with umpteen Premier League clubs immediately before cruel fortune struck. Souttar, 23, joined Stoke from Dundee United at 17. As the club struggled, he feared the move might never work out. “I think of the scene from Goal the movie when he signs for Newcastle and told he is training with the first team,” Souttar says. “That was like me. I was told I was going to train with the first team: Arnautovic, Shaqiri, Adam, Shawcross; I could go on. I was signing these guys on Football Manager two months earlier.” It took until early last season for Souttar to encounter a sense of worth. After loans to Ross County and Fleetwood, O’Neill successfully challenged the player to elevate his own status. “He thought I could stay and play here if I was patient,” Souttar recalls. “I wasn’t in the squad for the first few games then got into the team for a cup tie against Gillingham and stayed. I played 38 of 46 league games. I think about it a lot; in my head at one point I would be heading back to Fleetwood and weeks later I’m playing in the Championship. Fine lines. “Up until last season, I never really felt like a Stoke player. I was signed by the club but I had been on loan and in my head the first team was so far away, especially when I was younger and they were in the Premier League. For the manager to say I could stay and get a chance was all I needed. Then he kept faith in me. I started to think: ‘You know what, I do belong here and I’m not just being picked to fill a jersey.’ The manager told me I could influence games and start play from the back, that I was important. I could tell myself had a lot of responsibility.” Souttar emphasises “a real solidarity” at Stoke now, and it seems easy to infer that has not always been the case amid relegation from the top flight and the carnage as followed. There is no wild controversy attached to the fact that Souttar, born and bred in Scotland, represents Australia, for whom, he qualifies via his mother. Australia made a pitch for Souttar and succeeded. He loves the environment, which renders the injury picked up in his 10th cap, against Saudi Arabia, somewhat bittersweet. “I have had an unbelievable two years with Australia,” he says. “It is such a great group, one big family. I am always so excited to see everyone. “As soon as I went to turn, I felt a pop in my knee. I knew it was something bad. The outside of my knee right down to my foot was in tingling pain. My attitude was: it has happened. I can’t go back and change it. Yes, I was disappointed but I had to crack on. I can look very close to home; John [his brother] has had three achilles injuries, has been out for a number of years. This is nothing compared to what he has been through.” Perspective does indeed arrive within a family circle. John Souttar has battled back wonderfully from career-threatening problems, the 25-year-old now in the Scotland fold and having agreed to join Rangers from Hearts. For a long time, Harry was viewed only as the brother of John, who made a Dundee United debut at 16. “It was a reason I wanted to come to England as soon as I could, to make my own name. I was my own man when I came down here and I absolutely loved that.” Adversity has brought the siblings closer. “We are in contact most days,” says Harry. “Strangely enough that wasn’t really the case when we were both at Dundee United, in the same building. “He has given me so many tips, some books to read and things to write down that helped him through injuries. I know if I have problems I always have him to speak to. I’m delighted for him the way things have turned out because I remember – I don’t think he will mind me saying this – after the third achilles injury we had a conversation over WhatsApp and he was like: ‘I don’t know where I’m going. I don’t know what to do now.’ It could have been his career over at the age of 23. I am lucky to have him.” Souttar is reluctant to disclose much about the health struggles of a third brother, Aaron, but there is acknowledgment that he, too, is a source of inspiration. “I don’t really want to speak about it because I don’t think it’s my story to tell but that is the case,” Souttar adds. “We all support him. Again, to see what he is going through and to see how he is taking it and coping … whenever I am in a bad place I just think of him or John. My problems don’t seem all that relevant.” Souttar has Qatar on his mind as he plots a comeback. “When you are injured it’s good to have goals to keep you motivated,” he says. “That’s a major one for me, to be playing in a World Cup would be incredible.” For now, the small steps of recovery continue.For most, finding an apartment with the right balance of square footage, amenities, neighborhood, and monthly rent is akin to a competitive sport. These New Yorkers – who lucked into the housing lottery, moved in decades ago, or inherited – placed on the podium and are staying put. Inheritors ‘I’m definitely always keeping this apartment’ Growing up on the Upper West Side, Hattie Kolp, like any kid, didn’t think much about the apartment she and her family moved into in 2002, but the roughly 1,500-square-foot two-bedroom has become the center of the 30-year-old’s life as an influencer. She shares photos of the apartment’s details that hint at the building’s 1890 construction – like an original butler’s pantry and ornate fireplaces – with her 90,000 TikTok followers and 52,000 followers on Instagram. “My parents knew this was not their forever home, so they didn’t really care to do any projects,” says Kolp, who assumed the lease from her parents in 2018. “I got really into design, because I suddenly had my own space. It was through that that I really started to appreciate what I had.” The project that made the biggest difference for her was uncovering the original pocket doors – hidden behind walls in her youth – that now tastefully divide the apartment’s procession of rooms. For New Yorkers who are acutely aware of how much a place like this should cost, Kolp’s rent – $1,300 per month – is jaw-dropping. Plus, it’s rent-stabilized – meaning it can only increase in rent modestly once a year. There are only 1m such units in New York City. “I don’t know anyone else who’s my age who can afford a two-bedroom apartment, let alone one that’s a pretty good size,” Kolp says. “I’m definitely always keeping this apartment. I truly cannot fathom living anywhere else.” Lifers ‘You can’t give up the kind of apartment that I have, where I have it, for the amount of rent that I pay’ It’s that clear-eyed view of the realities of being a renter in New York that have led countless tenants to plant roots in their rarefied digs. Joan Hall has never left the apartment she moved into in 1974 in Westbeth, a West Village building of subsidized artists’ housing. She’s turned the 750-square-foot one-bedroom on the ninth floor with views of the Empire State Building and the New York skyline into a home befitting an artist. Antique oak office furniture, filing cabinets of various shapes and sizes, a collection of antique blue enamel pots, and two 1930s stained glass pieces inherited from her parents give the apartment that lived-in feeling. Hall, who hails from Brooklyn, pays $833.20 per month for what she described as a $5,000 apartment in any other building in the neighborhood. Will she ever leave? “They’ll have to carry me out in a box,” the 82-year-old sculptor says. Rosa Pizarro has lived on a block in the East Village since the 1960s, in a roughly 1,000-square-foot one-bedroom apartment for which she’s paid $700 a month for decades. Pizarro, who is from Puerto Rico, knows she’s lucky and says she was taught by her mother and grandmother to pay it forward. “When people don’t have a place to go, I say ‘Stay with me!’” Pizarro says. “My friends say, ‘You’re crazy! You give them everything and you sleep on the floor,’ and I say, ‘Well, that’s the way we do it in Puerto Rico!’” Pizarro says even as her neighborhood changes, everyone on her block knows each other. It remains a community. “Now there’s buildings with pools and everything, but of course the rent is different than here. It’s like $5,000,” said Pizarro, who works in elder care. “Where am I gonna get that?” Ruth Sherman, pictured above, still lives in the rent-stabilized two-bedroom West Village apartment she and her then-husband moved into in 1974. The New Jersey native raised her two daughters in the apartment but has mostly lived alone for the past 25 years. Her rent was less than $500 a month when they moved in, and she now pays just under $2,000. Sherman’s ninth-floor home is large, with three exposures overlooking the landmarked rooftops of Greenwich Village. The kitchen may be small, but its secondary dining area, two full bathrooms, big bedrooms and tons of sunlight make up for it. Sherman, who is in her 80s and has been active in the arts throughout her life, said she’s thought of leaving the rental, if only for a change of scene. But she always comes to her senses: “You can’t give up the kind of apartment that I have, where I have it, for the amount of rent that I pay. Where do you go, Ohio? Ohio, I’m sure, is a lovely place, but it’s not New York City.” Reeeally lucky people who win the housing lottery ‘Oh my God, millionaires live here’ Emily Auffrey did, in fact, move from Ohio to New York. While not the beneficiaries of a rent-stabilized apartment, Auffrey and her family are the recipients of something equally fabled: winning the affordable housing lottery. The building received 93,000 applications for fewer than 1,000 apartments – at the time, the largest turnout ever for a city building’s housing lottery. The housing lottery often gets a bad rep for its use of the word affordable: it offers rent prices at several levels based on income and the area median income, but they are competitively sought out because they are below the market rate of similar units. Auffrey acknowledges the $3,300-a-month rent for the two-bedroom, two-bathroom apartment may sound high, but the view of the East River and Manhattan skyline, the 800-square-foot terrace, and her building’s amenities (a gym, children’s playroom, party room and a landscaped rooftop terrace) would rent for thousands more without her win. The median rent in December for a three-bedroom in Long Island City was $5,800. Auffrey, who works in healthcare, became enamored with the building in 2017 when she was picking up a baby item advertised on a Facebook swap page. “I walked into the building and I was like, ‘Oh my God, millionaires live here.’ It was just so beautiful,” she says. The woman she was picking up from told her the building was part of the affordable housing lottery. The building’s waitlist opened in 2020, when spots were freed by New Yorkers leaving the city because of the pandemic. After a deluge of paperwork, Auffrey, her husband, Matthew, and their son, who’s now four, moved into the seventh-floor apartment in November 2020. Auffrey decorated it with intention. “I wanted to make it dreamy because it was kind of unreal,” Auffrey says. She played up the juxtaposition between the apartment’s view over the steel and glass of the city and her interiors style, which revolves around about 70 houseplants and bohemian touches such as rattan furniture and colorful printed fabrics. Auffrey also celebrates her Black heritage by bringing in bespoke items like pillowcases and indigo modcloth from Black-owned businesses. “We’re never going to move out of this apartment unless we move out in New York City,” Auffrey says. “But we have no plans to move out of New York City.”Two hours after she toured a one-bedroom apartment at a New York City Housing Authority (Nycha) development in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, Christina Johnson returned to the building’s management office with $1,861 – exactly one month’s rent plus a security deposit. It was the last week of September 2020, and years of careful saving for an apartment of her own were finally over. After returning the requisite paperwork, she waited for a follow-up call from the management and daydreamed about her new home – how she’d set the bedroom furniture up, what she’d put in its five closets. Johnson, a single mom with one son, rewatched the video she’d made of the apartment and talked to everyone about it. She refreshed the Nycha portal regularly, scanning for updates. Six days after touring the apartment, Johnson saw on the portal that her application status had changed from certified to “pending ineligibility”. Puzzled, she went back to the management office and found her money had been returned. “I was told to call the Nycha hotline and I left the office with absolutely no explanation,” said Johnson, now 25. “It didn’t seem right to me, but humbly I called. And the call was what broke me.” The supervisor told her she and her son were ineligible for housing through Nycha – the nation’s largest public housing agency – because her criminal record surfaced through a background check. Depending on the severity of the crime, Nycha bars potential tenants with criminal records for various lengths of time starting with three years for misdemeanors. Johnson says she was told she was ineligible until 2027. A misstep as a teenager – one, she emphasized, she has never repeated – landed Johnson in prison at 17. She served three years for the felony and was released in 2016. Afterward, she started a job as a case manager at the Fortune Society, a New York City non-profit that works for and with those who are incarcerated or returning home from prison. Despite years of stable employment and enough savings to cover her moving costs, Johnson’s criminal history repeatedly resurfaced during her years-long apartment hunt, prompting a flurry of rejections. (She estimates that between 2016 and 2020 she applied for 30 to 40 apartments.) Getting the September 2020 call from Nycha for an apartment that fit her needs and budget represented progress, she said, making the agency’s apparent reversal that much more gutting. “Everything that I worked so hard for, it was just taken away from me,” she said. “This is something that I’ve wanted all my life. I literally only have had my own bedroom when I was in prison.” Johnson is one of roughly 750,000 New York City residents with criminal convictions in their history, advocates for the incarcerated estimate. Though several other US cities – including Detroit; San Francisco, Los Angeles, Berkeley and Oakland, California; and the states of Oregon and New Jersey – have enacted “fair chance for housing” laws, New York City, perhaps the most competitive arena for renters in the nation, never has. These laws – which prohibit treating rental applicants or tenants differently based on this history – could smooth some of the obstacles keeping New Yorkers out of housing and contributing to homelessness, and they could stem recidivism. “Landlords have the ability to scrutinize your background – to a certain extent that’s totally, totally fair,” said Wendell Walters, a policy advocate at the Osborne Association, which provides treatment and vocational and educational services for New Yorkers whose lives intersect with the legal system. “But in New York City, you have three-quarters of a million people who have a conviction history and they’re effectively shut out of the housing market.” Some of these New Yorkers – who are predominantly Black and Latino – first try the usual routes to housing, such as relying on brokers and online searches. Some spoken to for this story detailed discriminatory treatment during their searches – even before their conviction histories were revealed – including markedly different treatment from agents and potential landlords when they met in person. Racial discrimination in rentals and sales has contributed to New York City’s rank as the third-most-segregated city for Black Americans in the US and second-most-segregated for Latinos and Asian Americans, says the Fair Housing Justice Center. Some give up on the search altogether, at this point, and move in with family and friends, advocates said. Others end up in transitional or supportive housing programs. Some enter the city’s overwhelmed shelter system. Securing housing is additionally complicated for some of those who have been paroled and need to have their home address approved by the state, said Robert Blocker, director of re-entry services at Project Renewal, a New York City non-profit that operates employment and healthcare programs, homeless shelters and supportive housing. “If the parole officer doesn’t approve your address, then your next address will be one of the New York City shelters,” said Blocker, whose team works with those slated to be released from nearby prisons including Sing-Sing and Bedford Hills correctional facility. Even a certain breed of dog can cause a housing option not to be approved, he added. “If there’s a dog, in particular, a pitbull, living in the unit, [a parolee] will not be allowed to return to the unit – no, really.” ‘I paid my debt to society’ “At this age, most people are preparing for retirement and I’m just acclimating myself to society again,” said Roslyn Smith, a Queens native who went to prison at 17, in 1979, and was released from Bedford Hills correctional facility in Westchester county in early 2018. She planned first to get a job, and then an apartment. “I had all these dreams,” said Smith, the Beyond Incarceration project manager at V-Day, an organization that works to end violence against women. She searched for an apartment for months. “But I’d never put in the factor that I’m formerly incarcerated and I have a criminal background,” she said. “I thought freedom entailed me doing my time. I paid my debt to society. I knew that I had to have a job. I knew that I had to be a good citizen. So all these things that I hoped for didn’t pan out the way that I hoped they’d pan.” More than once, she said, she found a place she liked and applied, paid the background and credit check fee, and then was completely ghosted. Johnson and other formerly incarcerated New Yorkers interviewed for this story described this seemingly discriminatory treatment in the hunt for housing in the five boroughs, from dozens of denied and unsuccessful applications to frosty unexplained silence from brokers and landlords after a background check. Once, in early 2020, she contacted the realtor after applying for a one-bedroom in Central Harlem. “I was like, ‘I put my paperwork in two weeks ago. What’s happening?’” The broker blamed “some technical thing”, she said, and assured Smith she would hear back. “Three weeks later, I get a denial because of my criminal background,” she said. “It was devastating. I’m able to pay the rent, I met all the criteria for the apartment – they want 40 times the rent and your salary [information]. I had a 730 credit score at the time. I did everything that I needed to do, and they denied me because of my criminal background.” Seeking a solution In her January state of the state address, New York’s governor, Kathy Hochul, proposed plans to “improve housing access for renters with justice involvement”. One of these new proposals would “eliminate a private landlord’s ability to automatically reject individuals with justice involvement and will require housing providers to conduct individualized assessments that account for the circumstances of a conviction and evidence of rehabilitation while still ensuring the safety and welfare of existing residents”, Hochul’s office stated. In 2020, the New York City council member Stephen Levin sponsored fair chance for housing legislation that would prohibit discrimination in housing rentals and sales because of an applicant or tenant’s arrest record or criminal history. The draft law, which was not heard by the council before Levin’s term ended, would bar landlords, owners, agents, employees and brokers from obtaining arrest or criminal record information during the rental process, though landlords could take select actions to comply with laws safeguarding victims of domestic violence, sexual offenses or stalking. The bill also wouldn’t prevent landlords from making inquiries into the state sex offender registry, but it would require them to provide the applicant with written notice about the inquiry and time to withdraw the application. It would also create a procedure for applicants to dispute an “adverse action” – such as a landlord denying a rental application, hiking application fees or offering unfair lease terms – based on an arrest record or criminal history. (Levin’s bill wouldn’t apply to Nycha because the agency receives federal funding.) Officials at the New York City commission on human rights, which enforces the city’s anti-discrimination laws, have testified in support of similar laws, pointing to policies elsewhere in the US. “Cities recognize that given the long history of racial discrimination in the criminal legal system, arrest or conviction histories ought not to bar people from accessing stable housing for themselves and their families,” said Zoey Chenitz, former senior policy counsel at the commission, in written testimony supporting the proposed legislation in September 2020. “Policies like this one represent a step toward ensuring that – whether they are recently returning to their communities from custody or if their records are older – New Yorkers with arrest and conviction histories and their families are given the best possible opportunity to thrive.” Advocates are optimistic that the new city council, which was sworn in at the beginning of this year and is seen as more progressive and racially and ethnically diverse than in the past, will consider passing fair chance for housing legislation like that proposed by Levin. Its protections would be some of the strongest in the country for apartment-hunters with criminal histories. Changes ahead Colleagues at the Fortune Society assisted Christina Johnson in appealing Nycha’s decision, and at the end of 2021 she moved into an apartment in the same Bed-Stuy complex she toured in September 2020. “With the help of the Fortune Society and some cool Nycha leaders that saw that I did rehabilitate and I would be no threat, I now have a home for my son,” Johnson said. “But that is the story for Christina Johnson and her son.” She understands her situation is unique – she had the advantage of working alongside advocates who are well-versed in the Nycha appeal process, which is notoriously difficult with a low rate of success. Many people don’t even know an appeal is an option. “What about those that aren’t as lucky as me? What about those that took the no and ran with the no?” Johnson asked. While Johnson was in the process of appealing, Nycha was embarking on a review of policies to make the agency’s housing more accessible for people like her in the future. In March 2021, Nycha finalized a series of criminal justice policy reforms, including an individualized screening process and panel review to determine eligibility. These reforms are expected to be in place by the end of 2022, according to a Nycha spokesperson. Nycha’s new housing admissions criteria will evaluate conviction histories with a focus on “risk and prevention of harm”, the spokesperson said, “not on being an extension of the criminal justice system”. In September, Nycha lessened the number of offenses, primarily felonies, that would deem potential tenants ineligible from 397 to 160, and the number of misdemeanors from 117 to 12. Johnson and her son celebrated Christmas and the new year in their new place. “We have a beautiful one-bedroom apartment,” Johnson said. “It’s nice, it’s spacious and it’s just enough space for me and him and we are making it work.” She is focused on moving forward, she said, and on helping others through her work at the Fortune Society. A support system that can help navigate the inevitable rejections during the housing search is critical, she advises others with conviction histories. “Prepare yourself to hear more ‘no’ than ‘yes’,” she cautioned, “but never give up because we all deserve housing. “All of us have had several chances in life in different ways,” she added. “It just so happens getting a second chance for housing is the hardest.” • This article was amended on 10 and 13 February 2022. Roslyn Smith was released from prison in early 2018, not 2020 as stated in an earlier version.In 1974, a year before the release of Nasty Gal, the third studio album by funk and fashion trailblazer Betty Davis, the New York Times predicted that her radical, raunchy music would eventually be appreciated, if only people would let themselves catch up with her: “Miss Davis is trying to tell us something real and basic about our irrational needs, and western civilisation puts its highest premiums on conformity and rationality and rarely recognises the Bessies or the Bettys until they’re gone.” Rather than conform, Davis, who has died aged 77, let the landmark discography she recorded in the 1970s speak for her, along with the sultry, futurist stage persona she created in a powerfully tall afro, cosmic leotards, sequinned hot pants and silver thigh-high boots. “I made three albums of hard funk,” Davis said in the 2017 documentary They Say I’m Different. “I put everything there.” And then, for decades, she vanished from the public eye. That those albums still sound revolutionary in 2022 says as much about the world as it does about Betty Davis, who will be remembered for the doors she opened and for the incandescent mark she made. Davis was the geist of her zeit, a fashion design student and model who worked for Halston, Norma Kamali and Betsey Johnson. She wrote songs for the Commodores that got them signed to Motown; the Chambers Brothers perform a slinky version of her Uptown (to Harlem) at the Harlem Cultural festival of 1969, finally immortalised in the Questlove-directed, Oscar-nominated Summer of Soul. She electrified Miles Davis, with whom she had a brief and reportedly stormy marriage, during which she turned him on to the psychedelic and funk music of her friends Sly and the Family Stone and Jimi Hendrix, pointing the way toward Bitches Brew. She also helped Davis ditch his formal Italian suits in favour of scarves and platform shoes. Meanwhile, Marc Bolan encouraged Betty to record her own music. She recorded with the Pointer Sisters and Sylvester as well as members of the Family Stone and also her own actual family – a band of cousins and friends from North Carolina called Funk House. In a 1970s radio interview, asked to characterise her music, Davis let her answer slowly crackle. “Mmm,” she said. “I’d just say it was raw.” You could try to dredge up some metaphor about that rawness, the feral howl of her voice, how its gritty undertones might have absorbed the smoke of the cigarette factories in her hometowns of Durham and Reidsville, North Carolina, or the steel mills of her teenage years, after her family moved to Pittsburgh. Born Betty Gray Mabry in 1944, Davis was raised on her grandma’s BB King, Elmore James and Jimmy Reed records. Decades later, Davis would call herself a “projector”, not a singer. What Davis projected was liberation. Once in the early 1960s, Davis showed up at Park Place AME Church in a fur coat, miniskirt and fishnet tights. In a phone call on the day of Davis’s passing, Connie Portis, her friend of 65 years, recalled her teenage friend in a local talent show, performing an original Davis had titled Get Ready for Betty. “That was the handwriting on the wall.” Years later, when Portis saw Davis perform on a bill with “either War or Kool and the Gang” in DC, she was shocked by her wildness. But backstage, Portis says, “She was the same Betty. She never drank, never smoked, never did drugs.” Betty autographed publicity photos of herself in sky-high boots and hot pants and mailed them back home to North Carolina, personalising them “to Grandma”. Davis was a projector, too, of unabashed individuality and sexuality in a way that scared her male peers. “I even turned your head around now,” Davis sang in Nasty Gal. More handwriting on the wall, a lipstick scrawl. “You said I love you every way but your way / And my way was too dirty for you now.” In the 1970s, her songs were frequently banned from the radio. Even the NAACP urged a boycott of her work on the grounds that it perpetuated negative stereotypes. For a woman, and especially a Black woman, in the 1970s to sing about desire and sex so openly and unabashedly was outside the realm of the civil rights movement. Although Island Records failed to renew her contract, she had already paved the way for others. Remove Betty Davis from the strand and you can picture the fallen pearls scattering around the room: Janelle Monáe, Outkast, Cardi B. Miles Davis said she was Madonna before Madonna, Prince before Prince (who played her song If I’m in Luck I Might Get Picked Up as inspiration for his own band). In the wake of Davis’s death, a quote circulated from a conversation about Davis between musicians Erykah Badu and Joi. As Badu concluded: “We just grains of sand in her Bettyness.” Her Bettyness extends far and wide: King Coffey of influential Texan punk band the Butthole Surfers recalled his adulation for his favourite Betty Davis song, Game Is My Middle Name, calling it “certainly the toughest riff of 1973”. Her influence continued after she retreated from music: over the last 15 years, Light in the Attic has unveiled previously unreleased Davis gems, including another come-on, I Will Take That Ride, in which Davis sang: “Is it true that you want to hi-ho my silver?” (The label will reissue Davis’ final studio album, Crashin’ from Passion, later this year.) After breaking with Island, and following the death of her father, with whom she had an especially close bond, Davis spent a year recording and performing in Japan, before returning to Pittsburgh. I believe Davis will be remembered for this, too – of extending the bravery she exhibited on stage to her backstage self, to work to heal herself and to protect the parts of her self and her life that were her own. “She was very private, but she never stopped writing,” Portis says. “Betty opened up the way for others to be brazen and brash and to say what they wanted to say.” We still have some catching up to do.The BBC has pulled a documentary about a cryptocurrency entrepreneur from television schedules at the last minute after the Guardian raised questions about some of its central claims. The programme, called The Crypto-Millionaire and due to be broadcast at 7.30pm on Wednesday night, was to tell the story of Hanad Hassan, a 20-year-old from Birmingham who said he had become incredibly wealthy by trading cryptocurrencies. The programme claimed he had turned a $50 (£37) investment at the start of 2021 into $8m (£5.9m) by the end of the year – suggesting he had made an astonishing investment return of almost 16,000,000% in just nine months. An accompanying BBC website article entitled “Birmingham’s self-made crypto-millionaire giving back” also displayed Hassan’s £30,000 BMW and his city centre flat, while describing how he “decided he was going to become a millionaire while he was still a teenager”. The documentary, due to be broadcast on BBC One in the West Midlands, followed Hassan as he distributed money to food banks in Birmingham, supposedly funded by a charitable cryptocurrency he set up himself. The Guardian asked the BBC if it was confident in his claimed financial returns and questioned why the programme’s promotional material did not mention that Hassan’s cryptocurrency Orfano was abruptly shut down in October, with many unhappy investors claiming they were left out of pocket as a result. The BBC swiftly said it had withdrawn the show but did not make any further comment on its editorial checks. An accompanying online article, which had featured prominently on the BBC News homepage, was also deleted without explanation shortly after the Guardian raised questions. Hassan has also been approached for comment. The decision to pull the show from BBC One schedules hours before it was due to be broadcast is embarrassing for the corporation, as it was one of the channel’s headline commissions for its new regional television news show We Are England. This new show replaced the long-running Inside Out regional current affairs series, which was cancelled as part of BBC funding cuts in a decision that resulted in many investigative journalists based outside London losing their jobs. Continuing cuts to BBC budgets and deep job cuts, caused by successive licence fee freezes, have been blamed for recent errors in the corporation’s news output, especially in regional English newsrooms. The BBC has a patchy track record of covering cryptocurrencies and publishing stories about young entrepreneurs making large amounts of money from online trading. In October the corporation infamously promoted the rapidly rising price of a cryptocurrency that used the name of the Netflix show Squid Game, days before its price collapsed in an apparent scam. A BBC Three show about a 20-year-old from Wales who claimed to be making £8,000 a day from online currency trading was also removed from iPlayer in 2020 after the broadcaster accepted it “wasn’t explicit enough about the potential risks involved in forex trading”.Early on in this three-act, two-interval, three-hour-long piece, protagonist Jyoti laments that stories like hers don’t get told. This piece goes some way to redressing the balance. Vinay Patel’s An Adventure was first seen at the Bush in London in 2018 and receives its regional premiere here. In the intervening four years, thanks to the efforts of journalists such as Sathnam Sanghera, we’ve begun to have a wider historical lens on the story of British colonialism and its effects on the south Asian subcontinent. Viewed through the prism of that fuller story, this tale of a couple who meet in post-partition India in 1954, marry and move first to Nairobi then 1970s England, feels richer. It is not doing anything as deliberately ambitious as telling the story of the empire via individual lives, but the context of Britain finally having those conversations is undeniable. The sparkiness of the opening scene in which teenage Jyoti (Saba Shiraz) interviews Rasik (Esh Alladi), one of five prospective husbands, is a delight. It is still the most vivid, lively and funny portrayal of an arranged-marriage first-meet that you will see on a British stage. It is dumbfounding that Shiraz is making her theatre debut here; her wit and confidence in the role is that of a far more experienced actor. The overlong second act does, as it did in the original production, meander. The problem is that Patel traverses a lifetime in the story, travelling over six decades in the lives of Jyoti and Rasik, and while we see the waves in a marriage that goes through choppy waters, simply watching them navigate them is not compelling enough. Director Kash Arshad, who is building an impressive set of credits, could power through the piece a little more yet still draw out the big moments. While Madani Younis’s Bush production landed more heavily on the text, with Patel’s tendency towards big statements writ larger than they are here, Arshad directs with a lighter touch, which means you lose some of the grander emotions. That said, come the moving finale you can’t help but feel vicariously grateful that a woman like Jyoti has had a chance to tell her story. At the Octagon, Bolton, until 26 February.Today in a nutshell: Nathan Chen and Chloe Kim had a golden day for the US, but the delay in presenting medals in the team figure skating event continues to tarnish the Beijing Games Next up: The US face the hosts in the men’s ice hockey, Great Britain’s women seek to get their curling campaign back on track, and tomorrow Ester Ledecká goes for a double-double Nathan Chen, the world’s most dominant skater, roared to the Olympic men’s title, winning for the US by more than 22 points after a mesmerising long programme that included five quadruple jumps and a pair of triples. He had arrived in Pyeongchang in 2018 as joint-favourite, then had a torrid time on the ice, eventually finishing fifth. Chen has gently pushed back on the redemption narrative throughout the run-up to Beijing, preferring to frame his journey in terms of personal fulfilment. Japanese rivals Yuma Kagiyama and Shoma Uno took silver and bronze, respectively. The figure skating remains mired in controversy. The medal ceremony for the team event has still not taken place amid a legal wrangle. The Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) are competing in Beijing under that banner due to Wada sanctions for state-sponsored doping that were halved by the court of arbitration for sport in December 2020. Their figure skating team were originally placed first. The US finished second, Japan third, Canada fourth. The IOC has refused to comment on whether the athlete at the centre of a doping controversy at Beijing 2022 is 15-year-old Russian figure skater, Kamila Valieva, despite the teenager being named in multiple reports around the world. Sean Ingle has more for us directly from Beijing. Finland took silver and bronze in the women’s 10km cross-country skiing classic race with Kerttu Niskanen second and Krista Pärmäkoski in third. Convicted doper Therese Johaug of Norway won the first gold of these Games, and she took a second in this event by just 0.4 seconds. American snowboarder Chloe Kim has become the first woman to successfully defend the Olympic halfpipe title. She set the bar with a huge first run, which included two 1080s and three spins. She fell on her subsequent runs while trying to debut the 1260 – three and a half revolutions in the air – but her opening foray was more than enough to secure the gold over Queralt Castellet of Spain and Sena Tomita of Japan. Austrian skier Johannes Strolz won the Olympic gold medal in the Alpine combined race, following in the ski-tracks of his father. The first father-son duo to clinch Olympic gold in the same Alpine skiing event, Strolz said: “It’s really a great moment for me and I’m so thankful that I finally can live my dream and have this gold medal in my hands like my father did in 1988 in Calgary and, yeah, just a dream come true.” Things you might have missed Sweden’s men beat Latvia 3-2 in the men’s ice hockey. Last night’s late match saw Denmark beat Czech Republic 2-1. The US ski team says Mikaela Shiffrin will compete in the super-G after all. Shiffrin failed to finish either the giant slalom or slalom, missing a gate in each within seconds of starting each time, and yesterday hinted that she might not compete any further. Germany continued their traditional luge domination with a one-two in the doubles event, and having complained about the judging the other day, South Korea’s Hwang Dae-heon claimed his country’s first gold of these Games in the men’s 1,500m short track. You might also enjoy: Biles and Vonn rally around Shiffrin after latest Winter Olympics DQ The wrong trousers? Norway’s plain display disappoints curling fans Podcast: History in the making – Australia’s first Olympic curling team The briefing’s picture of the day I must confess the highlight for me of the TV coverage of the Games so far was being on-board with Lucas Eguibar’s helmetcam live during the small final of the men’s snowboard cross as Tommaso Leoni crashed out in front of him and took Eguibar out. Nobody was hurt. The gold went to Austria’s Alessandro Haemmerle in a photo-finish after Canada’s Eliot Grondin came agonisingly short in a photo-finish as he fell crossing the line. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Thursday 10 February 7.50pm Freestyle skiing – the second and final run in the mixed team aerials 🥇 8pm Speed skating – women’s 5,000m competition 🥇 8.05pm Curling – women’s round-robin matches including Team GB v Sweden 🥌 9.10pm Ice hockey – the US face China, while Canada play Germany, both in Group A of the men’s competition 🏒 9.30pm Luge – the team relay competition promises exciting and dangerous chaos 🥇 Tomorrow – Friday 11 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – just take it as read that there is men’s and women’s curling all day long every day now 🥌 9.30am Snowboard – there will be huge interest in the men’s halfpipe with Shaun White looking for one more gold in his last Olympics 🥇 9.30-11.00am and 8.20pm-9.55pm Skeleton – the morning sees two heats for the women, which will include Britain’s Pyeongchang bronze medallist Laura Deas. The evening features the last two runs for the men and the medals 🥇 11am Alpine skiing – Ester Ledecká attempts to retain her women’s Super-G title for an historic double-double 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – there are men’s preliminaries but the main attraction is the US v Czech Republic in the women’s play-off quarter-finals at 12.10pm. Canada’s women face Sweden at the same stage in the late session 🏒 3pm Cross-country skiing – the men’s 15km classic🥇 4pm Speed skating – it is the long distance of the speed skating. The men race over 10,000m and I can’t wait 🥇 5pm Biathlon – it is the turn of the women to do the 7.5km sprint 🥇 7pm–8.43pm Short track – the session culminates in the women’s 1,000 metres final 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 5 🥈 3 🥉 4 total: 12 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 5 🥈 3 🥉 0 total: 8 3 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 4 🥈 1 🥉 2 total: 7 4 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 4 🥈 4 🥉 4 total: 12 5 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 3 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 9 6 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 3 🥈 3 🥉 1 total: 7 7 🇨🇳 China 🥇 3 🥈 2 🥉 0 total: 5 8 🇮🇹 Italy 🥇 2🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 8 9 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 2* 🥈 3 🥉 6 total: 11 10 🇸🇮 Slovenia 🥇 2 🥈 1 🥉 2 total: 5 11 🇫🇷 France 🥇 1 🥈 5 🥉 0 total: 6 12 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 1 🥈 3 🥉 6 total: 10 [*The ‘Not Russia’ total includes the team figure skating gold which is yet to be formally presented] I got so excited at the end of the Nordic combined race yesterday that I quickly updated the emoji table and botched it, incorrectly placing Germany above Norway. I would extend my apologies to Norway, but their curling team immediately came out to play in disgracefully boring trousers so let us just call it evens. Do drop me a line with your thoughts on the Games at martin.belam@theguardian.com. The last word The whole credibility of the Olympic Movement and the Paralympic Movement stands teetering on the edge of us saying that we really believe and live the values that we say we stand for” – Susanne Lyons, chair of the US Olympic and Paralympic Committee Board of Directors, responds to the delay in awarding the team figure skating medals.France will vote to elect a new president in April, and the list of competitors became clearer on Saturday with the nomination of the centre-right Les Républicains party’s candidate, Valérie Pécresse. The current president, Emmanuel Macron, has yet to declare his candidacy but is expected to run again. His second-round opponent from 2017, the far-right populist Marine Le Pen, has already launched her campaign. Alongside those three on the ballot will be Anne Hidalgo, the Socialist candidate, and Yannick Jadot, representing the Green movement. Would-be candidates have until 4 March to present the 500 signatures of elected officials supporting their run, which the law requires. Some of the politicians hoping to be candidates will by then have withdrawn from the field, but in 2017 11 candidates were on the official ballot. A first round is to be held on 10 April, and in the likely event that no candidate receives a majority of the votes, a second round runoff will be held two weeks later, featuring the two leading candidates from the first round. Polls have shown that the most likely candidates to enter the run-off are Macron and Le Pen, the leader of the far-right Rassemblement National (National Rally) party. Who might stand, and how do the polls rate their chances?My sister, Kate Mitchell, who has died aged 42 in suspicious circumstances in Kenya, was a development worker with BBC Media Action, the BBC’s development charity. Kate was born in North Shields in Tyne and Wear, to Rodney Mitchell and his wife, Sue (nee Kennedy), who were both teachers. Our parents were keen outdoors enthusiasts, and most of our early, happy childhood holidays were spent on camping trips or sailing in the North Sea from our base in Whitley Bay, where we lived. However, our father died after a long illness when Kate was 10, and our mother was left to bring up two young children on her own. Although Kate’s intelligence could command any room, she never believed she was clever: her attendance at Marden high school in North Shields was scanty, and she never took A-levels. She then spent much of her time up to her late 20s being offered permanent jobs and turning them down – out of a desire to travel, an unwillingness to be tied down and a basic restlessness that was to define her life. In London in the late 2000s, she finally found herself working for the BBC Trust and was then seconded to Media Action, where she was to stay for the 14 years until her death, first working in London and then increasingly overseas: in Lusaka, Zambia, as a project officer; for two years in Juba, south Sudan, as deputy country director, and then in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, as a project manager. At the time of her death she had been moved to Nairobi as a temporary security measure due to the ongoing conflict in Ethiopia, and had done so only under protest: characteristically, she had wanted to stay with her Ethiopian colleagues, doing the work she loved. While working full-time and between countries, Kate had taken up education again, and completed a degree in social sciences through the University of London extramural course, followed by an MA in development studies at Birkbeck, University of London. Wherever she lived was always full of books, and she travelled constantly and with a consuming curiosity. Her greatest talent was for friendship. She was bottomlessly interested in other people and quietly attentive to their needs: she is remembered at the BBC as unfailingly generous with her time, expertise and support. She also volunteered widely, with organisations that helped refugees and homeless people, and at womens’ shelters. Since her death we have continued to hear stories about her often extravagant acts of kindness and solidarity – many dating back decades – to which, with characteristic self-effacement, she never drew attention. Although Kate’s career was clearly taking off at the time she died, she was resistant to pursuing higher-paying managerial jobs since she was happiest in the field, engaging with development partners and gaining an intimate knowledge of the countries and cultures she lived in. She is survived by her partner, John Marks, her mother and me.The last couple of years have seen flower fans branch out (pun intended), with plant and bulb sales booming during the pandemic. Yet, when it comes to Valentine’s Day, traditional red roses can be harder to resist than the lure of a forbidden love affair. A dozen of these long-stemmed flowers might once have signalled the height of romance, but after a quick look at the environmental impact they don’t smell quite as sweet for UK-based buyers. So how can you make sure you are giving an ethical bunch on 14 February? The bloom is off the rose Due to Britain’s climate, the vast majority of roses sold in this country during the early months of the year are imported. Most come from Kenya, where it is warm enough for them to grow naturally, or the Netherlands, where they are grown under artificial heat and light. Around 8m stems (570 tonnes) are imported via Heathrow alone during February – about three times as many as any other month, leading to a carbon footprint of around 30kg of CO2 for a mixed bouquet of 11 Kenyan and Dutch stems. They are often sold at a loss, in the hope that customers will buy other, more expensive items as they shop. “We do a lot of work in events, and often we would find there was a huge disconnect,” says Olivia Wilson, co-founder of SSAW Collective, a community of chefs, florists and growers, who are urging buyers to take a seasonal approach to flowers. “Sustainable sourcing of the food menu would be considered, but the tables would be covered with imported flowers.” Valentine’s Day is perhaps the biggest culprit when it comes to shopping out of season. “It is one of the most significant events in the floristry calendar but it’s very stark in February,” says Wilson. “When you look outside and see what is growing naturally, it definitely doesn’t look anything like traditional rose bouquets.” As with food, supporting local businesses is often the best option. “Once flowers are flown into the country, they are usually transported around the UK in huge refrigerated vehicles, which also have an impact on the environment,” says Alison Down, a flower farmer at Boho Flowers, Hertfordshire. “From cutting to customer, it can take a week.” Have a spring fling If you want to say it with flowers, roses are not your only option. “A lot of Cornish growers have narcissi available by February, especially the bridal crown and paperwhite [daffodil] varieties,” says Jess Geissendorfer, who also co-founded SSAW Collective. In addition, she recommends snowdrops, cyclamen, quince and winter-flowering blossoms as alternatives to roses. “I’ve seen a shift to tulips and early spring bulbs,” says Debra Prinzing, founder of the Slow Flowers Society and author of books including The 50 Mile Bouquet. “Other gift ideas are also gaining popularity, such as flower subscription services – so you give the certificate to your sweetheart now, but maybe the first delivery doesn’t arrive until May.” SSAW Collective’s own subscription service launches this month, offering sustainable flowers on a weekly, fortnightly or monthly basis. “Last year we provided seasonal spring bouquets for Valentine’s Day, grown in the UK without pesticides and not wrapped in plastic,” says Down. “You could have hellebores, narcissi, hyacinths, tulips, anemones and alstroemeria – you can get all those from UK growers. We also use lots of dried grasses, contorted hazel and willow (they’re like wiggly sticks with little catkins), lots of eucalyptus and evergreen foliage.” Bloom &amp; Wild, the online postal florist, is forgoing red roses on Valentine’s Day for the second year running. “We ran a survey and found that 58% of people thought roses were a cliche,” says Charlotte Langley, VP of brand and communications. “From a sustainability point of view, this also meant we had no bouquet wastage last year. Historically, we’d seen double-digit wastage on red rose bouquets because the demand drops off so dramatically after Valentine’s Day.” You don’t need to look far to know that dried flowers are all the rage. “Some farmers are growing flowers specifically to dry, cutting them at the right time so that they retain that colour, and a lot of them have that pink/red Valentine’s Day palette,” says Prinzing. “I know someone who is teaching a wreath workshop for Valentine’s using all dried flowers, showcasing them in a new way.” Being long-lasting, dried flowers also help to minimise waste, which leads us to … What happens when the love dies? Or, at least, what should you do when your ethical posy wilts? “A lot of flowers dry well by being hung upside down,” says Wilson. “Tulips make excellent confetti and spring flowers press really nicely. You don’t need a flower press; you can do it using blotting paper and books.” Langley advises: “If you’re not feeling crafty then it’s best to pop them in your compost or garden waste bin, rather than in your normal bin, otherwise they would be sent to landfill.” It’s what’s on the outside that counts Opting for imported blooms is not the only pitfall for shoppers when choosing a bouquet for their valentine. “You also want to think about packaging,” says Langley. “Our letterbox packaging has been 100% recyclable for a long time but we’ve now moved our flower food from plastic to paper sachets and we’re working on swapping bubble wrap for cardboard vase protectors and using compostable moisture bags.” “Another major sustainability issue is the conventional green florists’ foam,” says Prinzing. “It’s single-use plastic, which doesn’t break down in landfill. Giving flowers which use an alternative shows your recipient that you care about the environment.” Put a label on it Aside from eschewing roses, there are other things to look out for if you want to be sure you’re picking an ethical posy. “Pesticide use is incredibly harmful for the environments where flowers are grown en masse and for the people working with them,” says Wilson. “We’re really passionate about improving labelling because it’s difficult for florists to always know where their flowers are coming from, and what chemicals have been used to grow them.” Down agrees that better labelling would also make it much easier for customers to identify ethical bouquets. “You want to see that they are fair trade and organic,” she says. If you’re not buying directly from a local grower, then it’s worth considering how the businesses you buy from have committed to supporting local communities. “Do a little bit more research into where flowers come from,” says Geissendorfer. “Search online for what’s available in your local area; it’s really rewarding to build relationships with small independent businesses.” A little research can go a long way when buying from bigger floristry businesses, too. “If a company is taking their responsibility to the environment and the community seriously, they should be able to show that; check out their credentials before buying,” advises Langley. “Are they thinking deeply about issues across the whole spectrum, from sourcing to delivery and packaging? Are they offsetting emissions and working on a plan to get to net zero?” Lastly, get into the habit of seeking out seasonal produce. “By summer, you can get a bouquet that’s full of variety, grown entirely in the UK. There really is no need to import anything,” says Wilson. “It’s important to think about flowers in the same way you might fruit and veg: strawberries in December would feel a little odd.”Huge numbers of refugees could be forced to flee Ukraine for other eastern European countries if Russian troops invade, the UK’s defence secretary has warned, as he admitted that military tensions were still moving the “wrong way”. Ben Wallace said it would be a “lose-lose” scenario if Moscow directed its soldiers stationed along Ukraine’s borders with Russia and Belarus to attack. A trio of warnings was issued by senior UK government figures on Thursday, with Wallace suggesting a sanctions package against Russian leaders was being finalised to apply if there was an incursion into Ukraine, while Boris Johnson headed to Brussels and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, was in Moscow. Half of all Russia’s combat troops had so far been deployed to the Ukrainian border, Wallace said, adding that the country was also “planning to start a nuclear strategic exercise soon”. “Despite the talking, the direction of travel is in the wrong way,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Wallace said UK defence chiefs expected moves from the “Russian playbook” that would give a “pretext for an invasion or some other activity”, such as a false flag operation whereby responsibility for an act is wrongly attributed. Cyber-attacks and further stoking of political division could also be used to fan the flames and increase the chances of war, he added. Wallace said other eastern European countries such as Poland and Romania would “feel the heat” of an invasion of Ukraine. “I think we can expect very large movements of people as refugees,” he said. “And that in itself can be very destabilising to small and medium-sized states.” After it was announced that 1,000 British troops would be deployed to Nato countries to provide support in case of a Russian invasion, Wallace said they would be able to help with any “humanitarian crisis”. “Soldiers are able to deal with that and provide force multiplier to the allies that are on the frontline,” he told BBC Breakfast. “There is a cost, there’s a human cost. Russia will remember as the Soviet Union the human cost of Afghanistan. It will remember the human cost of the likes of the Chechnya wars. “Just like Britain reflects on the cost of Afghanistan and Iraq and all those conflicts we are involved in.” After Truss’s plan to put the UK’s “toughest sanctions regime against Russia” on the statute book in time for her trip to Russia fell through, Wallace insisted they were almost ready to present to parliament. He said: “Energy supplies is one area to target; financial institutions is another one. And … individuals. It is important that the people in that regime or in the government feel the cost of their actions as well.” In her meeting with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, Truss said a war in Ukraine would be “disastrous” and would “have massive consequences and carry severe costs”. Meanwhile, Johnson is heading overseas as parliament prepares to go into recess. He will meet Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, in Brussels, before travelling to Poland for meetings with the prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, and President Andrzej Duda.Rightwing MPs in southern Spain have ignored protests from the central government, the EU, Unesco and several ecological groups by voting to grant an amnesty to illegal strawberry farmers who have been tapping water from the aquifer that feeds one of Europe’s largest protected wetlands. On Wednesday afternoon, the Andalucían regional parliament approved the proposal, which will “regularise” 1,461 hectares (3610 acres) of land near the Doñana national park, thereby allowing farmers who have sunk illegal wells and built illicit plantations on the land to legitimise their operations. The controversial proposal was brought by the conservative People’s party (PP), which governs the region, and backed by the centre-right Citizens party and the far-right Vox party. The regional branch of Spain’s ruling Socialist Workers’ party abstained, while its national coalition partner, Unidas Podemos, opposed the move. The regional president, Juan Manuel Moreno of the PP, has defended the planned legislation, claiming it would allow the authorities to more closely monitor the tapping that has been going on for years. “No one should think that we’re going to erode our natural jewels by as much as a millimetre,” Moreno said last month. “We’re going to protect it because that’s what the law tells us to do, and because that’s what we want to do.” Such comments, however, have done little to convince opponents of the plan. SEO BirdLife, the Spanish ornithological society, described Wednesday’s vote as “another step towards Doñana’s extinction”, while WWF Spain said it would use all the resources at its disposal to fight “this mortal blow to the already over-exploited aquifer that gives Doñana life”. On Tuesday, Spain’s minister for the ecological transition, Teresa Ribera, wrote to Moreno, saying the mooted amnesty risked damaging Spain’s international image, undermining efforts to tackle the climate emergency, and could result in the EU taking costly legal action. “Given the enormous harm, both economic and environmental – not to mention the damage to Spain’s image abroad – I … call on you to abandon this process before the Andalucían parliament, which could prove so damaging for Spain,” wrote Ribera. Water supplies to Doñana, where marshes, forests and dunes extend across almost 130,000 hectares in the provinces of Huelva, Seville and Cádiz, have declined drastically over the past 30 years because of climate change, farming, mining pollution and marsh drainage. Doñana is visited by millions of migrating birds each year and is also home to a major population of endangered Iberian lynxes. In 2013, Unesco – which declared the national park a world heritage site in 1994 – said that treasured status could be lost if efforts were not made to crack down on illegal water extraction to feed strawberry farms. The UN agency has already asked the Spanish government for an urgent report on the amnesty “before any decisions are taken that might be difficult to reverse”. Soft fruit farms play a huge role in the local economy. Between January and June last year, Huelva’s exports of soft fruit – almost 20% of which are to the UK – were worth €801.3m (£678m).A woman from north London is taking legal action against her local council to try to block the construction of a 700,000-tonne-a-year rubbish incinerator. Dorothea Hackman, 69, a church warden and head of the Camden civic society, is the claimant in a judicial review challenging the decision to award the £755m contract to replace and extend the electricity from the waste incinerator in Edmonton, one of the country’s poorest areas. “It’s sort of like buying a bigger digger for these boys,” she said. “I’ve just bought a bigger digger for my two-year-old grandson, he was ecstatic. This is what the Edmonton incinerator reminds me of. They’ve got one that pollutes, and should be replaced, but what it should be replaced with is a state-of-the-art recycling centre.” The Edmonton incinerator, which opened in 1971, is the oldest in the UK, and one of the oldest in Europe. It currently burns about 500,000 tonnes of rubbish a year, but is due to reach the end of its life in 2025. Opponents have fought a rearguard action in an effort to stymie the replacement project since planning permission was granted in 2017. But the board of the North London Waste Authority (NLWA), the publicly owned consortium that runs the incinerator, agreed in December to a contract with Acciona, a Spanish firm, to build the plant. In a pre-action letter to the NLWA, Hackman claims its board, which is made up of representatives from seven local councils, were not given the full facts on which to decide on the contract. A report by the authority misled councillors about the scale of the pollution from the proposed incinerator, Hackman’s letter claims, with the 28,000-tonnes-a-year figure given amounting to a fraction of the 683,000 tonnes implied by the independent carbon screening report on which it was based. Councillors were also misled, according to the letter, on the plant’s readiness for carbon capture and sequestration technology, and by the claim that installing such machinery would “likely make the facility carbon negative”. “On 16 December, the NLWA met in Camden and they were given disinformation,” Hackman said. “They were led to believe that carbon capture could happen, and there is basically no provision for it.” The proportion of the UK’s household waste that goes to landfill has plummeted since the beginning of the century. But while Britons now recycle about three times as much, growth in recycling has been flat for a decade. The gap has been filled by incineration. Across the UK last year, 41% of waste was recycled, and 48% was burned; in London, the worst performing region, 64% was burned. “We [in London] are currently recycling less than 30%,” Hackman, a retired teacher, who has lived in Camden for 45 years, said. “Areas without incinerators in the UK already recycle 60%, and that can be improved.” Hackman and fellow activists point to research suggesting incineration can cause a range of ill-effects to the health of people living nearby. In December a cross-party group of MPs said incinerator expansion should be halted immediately to protect human health and cut carbon emissions. There are 90 incinerators across the UK, with 50 more planned. Hackman said: “Above all we need to stop manufacturing plastic, we can’t keep on with the plastic; we’ve got to, and we should, stop it. At the moment we are burning plastic for our heat and energy and I can’t think of anything more insane. We would be better off burning coal.” NLWA says the plant “exceeds statutory requirements” and “will be the safest and cleanest in the UK”, while supplying electricity for up to 127,000 homes and heating 50,000. The consortium has pointed to an analysis by Imperial College London researchers, funded by Public Health England, that found no link between exposure to emissions from municipal waste incinerators and infant deaths – an effect cited by opponents. The development also includes £100m of new recycling centres – “London’s largest public investment in recycling facilities for decades”, NLWA says – which are intended to help achieve a recycling rate for the area of 50%. A NLWA spokesperson said it stood by the validity of the decision to enter into the contract with Acciona. “We are entirely satisfied that the decision our members took … was the right one and was properly taken,” the spokesperson said. “This is a world-class infrastructure project that presents the best environmental, technical and economic solution to the treatment of waste in north London.”Good morning. Target is instructing store managers to prevent the retailer’s workers from unionizing, leaked training documents reveal. The guidelines sent out at the end of January tell managers to look out for warning signs of labor union organizing in their stores. Managers are urged to stamp out union campaigns by working with corporate human resources. The company claims in the training, which was leaked anonymously to the workers’ advocacy group Target Workers Unite, that it isn’t “anti-union” but rather “pro team member and guest” and that unions would not “improve anything – not for our team members, our guests, or the company”. How does the training characterize unions? As “a business that makes money from the dues and fees paid by its members” – but then goes on to say they’re formed when workers join and express the wish to be represented collectively. The leak comes as other US chains including Amazon and Starbucks fight unionization. Capitol attack inquiry intensifies as panel subpoenas top advisor The House select committee investigating the 6 January insurrection has subpoenaed the former White House senior adviser Peter Navarro as the panel intensifies its inquiry. Navarro is a crucial player: he helped finalize the plot to prevent Joe Biden’s election win from being certified. Investigators want to depose him as they believe he could shed light on what Donald Trump knew in advance of plans to stop the certification. The congressman Bennie Thompson, the chair of the select committee, said in the subpoena letter: “Navarro appears to have information directly relevant to the select committee’s investigation. He hasn’t been shy about his role in efforts to overturn the results of the 2020 election and has even discussed the former president’s support for those plans.” Why is the move significant? It suggests the panel is close to investigating potential culpability for Trump. When did Navarro discuss 6 January? He has spoken about the events of that day in his book In Trump Time, on his podcast and with reporters. This means he should be free to speak to the panel without legal impediment. Why is he of special interest? Navarro was an influential advisor to Trump while also being in regular contact with the political operatives behind the scheme to stop the certification of Biden’s victory. One in three Americans have detectable levels of toxic weedkiller, study finds A third of Americans have detectable levels of a cancer-linked herbicide, a large national study has found. Despite a multitude of environmental and health concerns, including birth defects and hormonal imbalances, farmers have increasingly used the herbicide 2,4-D, according to the study evaluating the footprint of the chemical. Human exposure to the chemical, which can be ingested through the skin, mouth and nose, has risen from a low of 17% in 2001-02 to a high of almost 40% a decade later. Why is exposure rising? 2,4-D was developed in the 1940s, but its popularity fell after farmers and gardeners switched to Roundup (glyphosate). The subsequent emergence of Roundup-resistant weeds has meant industrialised farming has ramped up its used of 2,4-D. Are some groups more affected? Children aged from six to 11 and women of childbearing age had substantially higher levels of 2,4-D in their urine. In other news … Cameroonian asylum-seekers deported by Trump administration suffered imprisonment, torture and rape on their return, a Human Rights Watch report has found. Almost all of those deported in 2019 and 2020 faced some kind of reprisal, ranging from having their identity cards confiscated to rape. The US has been accused of racial profiling over the China Initiative, with American academics who used to, or still have, links to China caught up in the geopolitical tension. The attorney general, Merrick Garland, said the Department of Justice was reviewing the program. Republican congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene has been mocked after she ranted about “gazpacho police” patrolling the Capitol building in Washington DC. The Georgia congresswoman appeared to have mixed up the Nazi-era secret police with the Spanish cold tomato soup. Comedian Bob Saget’s death was caused by an accidental blow to the head, his family have said. The Full House star was found dead in a Florida hotel room on 9 January. The statement added that no drugs or alcohol were involved. Stat of the day: businesses risk losing $50m daily due to US-Canada bridge blockade Anti-vaccine protest blockades on the Ambassador Bridge, the busiest border bridge between Canada and the US, risks manufacturers in the region incurring losses of $50m a day. The bridge, which has been targeted by a “freedom convoy” protest triggered by a federal vaccine mandate for truck drivers crossing the Canada-US border, is responsible for 27% of all Canada-US trade. Don’t miss this: how felony charges are weaponized against pipeline protesters Authorities are increasingly using felony charges as a tactic to hinder protest against pipeline construction, legal advocates have warned. More than a dozen states have passed laws criminalizing fossil fuel protests. Following last summer’s protests against the Line 3 oil pipeline in Minnesota, lawyers warned that authorities were making “very creative use” of felony laws. Climate check: record winter heatwave heads for California Record temperatures are forecast for multiple Californian regions from the San Francisco Bay Area to Los Angeles as the state gears up for an unseasonable winter heatwave. Temperatures are predicted to be 15-20F above normal from Wednesday morning through Sunday in southern California, with officials warning that the unusual weather would result in faster dehydration and heat stress. Last Thing: painting vandalized by ‘bored’ gallery guard who drew eyes on it A security guard who was “bored” during his first day at work at a Russian gallery drew eyes on a valuable avant garde painting using a gallery-branded ballpoint pen. Anna Leporskaya’s Three Figures was insured for 75m roubles ($1m). The curator of the exhibition at the Boris Yeltsin Presidential Center in Ekaterinburg, Anna Reshetkina, said: “His motives are still unknown but the administration believes it was some kind of a lapse in sanity.” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comBoris Johnson has said the Ukraine crisis has entered “the most dangerous moment” on a visit to Nato’s headquarters as Russian forces continued their military buildup on the borders of its southern neighbour. The prime minister said “our intelligence remains grim” but told reporters in Brussels that he didn’t think a decision has yet been taken by the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, to order an invasion. “This is probably the most dangerous moment. I would say that in the course of the next few days, in what is the biggest security crisis that Europe has faced for decades, we’ve got to get it right,” Johnson said. Military analysts estimate Moscow has massed more than 135,000 troops on the borders of Ukraine, both in Russia and in Belarus – and some now believe nearly all the necessary elements are in place if Putin wanted to attack. Johnson’s concern was echoed by the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg. “This is a dangerous moment for European security. The number of Russian forces is going up. The warning time for a possible attack is going down,” he said. Johnson said the UK and Nato would not intervene militarily if Ukraine was attacked, but repeated that Moscow would face unspecified economic sanctions. A conflict, he added, would be a disaster for both countries, as he called on Putin to de-escalate. “I know that in the Kremlin and across Russia they must be wondering whether it is really sensible to expend the blood of Russian soldiers in a war that I think would be catastrophic,” the prime minister said. “And all I would say is that this is the moment now to think of another way forward.” In response to a question from the BBC, Johnson did indicate the UK may be willing to provide arms to support any Ukrainian insurgency if Russia were to invade, saying: “It’s possible, I don’t want to rule this out.” Johnson added: “We will consider what more we can conceivably offer, but I have to tell you that, you know, the Ukrainians are well prepared. There are things that we’ve offered that they, in fact, don’t seem to need because they think they have them in enough numbers already.” Last month, Britain gave 2,000 light anti-tank weapons to Ukraine’s military, to boost the country’s defensive capability. Ukraine’s army numbers 145,000 personnel, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, but there are up to 400,000 people who have fought in the conflict with Russian-backed separatists in the eastern Donbas region who Kyiv says may be willing to join an armed resistance. The UK prime minister said he had agreed with the Nato chief “a package of support” to boost Britain’s military contribution to eastern European members of the alliance. Britain would be “doubling the presence” of troops in Estonia, Johnson said, where the UK contributes 900 troops to a Nato battlegroup it leads. The RAF, he said, would help provide “air policing in Romania, increasing the number of Typhoons we are deploying out of Cyprus” and the UK will send a T45 destroyer and the offshore patrol ship HMS Trent to the eastern Mediterranean. Stoltenberg said further discussions about increasing Nato’s defensive presence in eastern Europe were ongoing, including on the establishment of Nato battlegroups “in the Black Sea region, in Romania” in addition to those stationed in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland. The Nato chief said he had sent a letter earlier on Thursday to the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, offering to discuss more transparency around exercises, as well as nuclear arms control. “We are prepared to listen to Russia’s concerns,” he said, adding that Nato was ready for a “serious conversation on arms control”. Johnson heads to Poland for meetings in Warsaw with the prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, and the president, Andrzej Duda, as part of a wider burst of British diplomatic activity. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is already in Moscow and will be followed by the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, on Friday. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, is heading to Nato’s headquarters in Brussels this afternoon, where he will offer support to the military alliance in its response to the Russian threats to Ukraine. “The message is that we are firm and united in our support for Nato,” Starmer told the Times in an interview overnight.Pension funds should face legal obligations to bring their investments in line with the net zero greenhouse gas emissions goal, the film-maker Richard Curtis has said. Curtis, a co-founder of the Make My Money Matter campaigning group, urged ministers to follow up the UK’s legal commitment to reach net zero emissions by 2050 by making it mandatory for pension schemes to align their portfolios with the target. He told the Guardian: “The moment has arrived. Why not invest in sustainable investments? We can see the risks of the climate crisis. This is one of the most practical changes possible.” He added that everyone must take responsibility for their impact on the climate crisis. “People can’t say, I will sit this one out. It’s not going to go away. And [making net zero mandatory on pension schemes] is one of the levers of change.” Ministers have been reluctant to make mandatory changes that would affect how companies invest, though at last year’s Cop26 climate summit the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said large companies would have to disclose their exposure to the risks of the climate crisis by 2025. But many campaigners think the mandatory disclosure of climate risk alone does not go far enough, as it does not penalise companies for investing in high-carbon activities. Tony Burdon, the chief executive of Make My Money Matter, said: “The government needs to ensure that net zero is mandatory [on pension schemes] to help trustees. At the moment, some trustees are fearful. They think they might see a legal challenge [if they moved to net zero]. We think just the opposite – that if they do not move to net zero, they could see legal challenges.” If the government made net zero targets mandatory on the pension industry, the default position for advisers would switch to advocating investments with a low carbon footprint, which would have a transformative effect on the UK’s investment landscape, said Burdon. While the UK has had a legally binding target since 2019 to reach net zero by 2050, most pension funds have not shifted their portfolios to reflect this, although many of the people investing in pensions today will be drawing them by 2050. Make My Money Matter estimates that £1.7tn worth of investments in UK pension funds are not yet in line with the goal of holding global temperature rises to 1.5C, the limit targeted by the government at Cop26, and which the net zero target is needed to meet. This includes about 70% of the UK’s largest pension schemes, many of which are older-style final salary schemes. Aligning investments with net zero would be possible for those schemes, Curtis said, pointing to the £1tn of UK pension fund investments that have already shifted to portfolios compatible with a net zero target. “There is a very positive range of options for investors. There are very exciting companies to invest in,” said Curtis, whose films include Love Actually and Four Weddings and a Funeral. “Changing my pension [to ensure it is invested in line with 1.5C] is the biggest change I have made for the climate. It’s 21 times more effective than changing your energy provider.” He said his son had been marching with Fridays for Future, the global movement of young people inspired by Greta Thunberg’s school climate strikes. “I’ve been very inspired by the younger generation’s focus on the climate,” he said. “Weather used to be the last thing on the news – now it’s the first thing on the news.” Curtis said it was vital to talk to young people now about pensions and the impacts they could have on the future of the planet, rather than focus on people nearer to pension age. “It took a lot from my dad to convince me that I should get a pension at all,” he said, but added that younger people were more aware of their future as the evident dangers of climate breakdown had become more obvious, and pensions should be part of this. “Younger people are thinking about their purchases, about the impact of what they do and what they buy, their clothes and their food. Pensions are one of the most effective ways to get change.”A married woman has a BDSM encounter at a conference. Sex in an artificially generated afterlife. A bisexual woman cheats on her wife with a baker … and all as written by Louise Erdrich or Chigozie Obioma or Téa Obreht or Paul Theroux or Helen Oyeyemi or Jeet Thayil or any one of 20-odd other authors. That’s the tease of a new collection of erotic short stories, Anonymous Sex. Editors Hillary Jordan and Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan write in their introduction that they wanted to “create intrigue” by not revealing which of the high-profile contributors have written which story: “Readers would have to guess.” A fatal premise is revealed: writing about sex is risky because one’s own predilections might be unmasked in the process. This is odd, given for example the recent anthology Kink, edited by RO Kwon and Garth Greenwell, whose contributors (including Alexander Chee and Carmen Maria Machado) felt no need for such a cover. Anonymous Sex feels old-fashioned, as if it’s arrived too late, too apologetically, on the stage. The authors in the collection are truly global, yet the book’s premise shares something with one of the UK’s most wince-inducing exports: the Bad Sex award in fiction. The rationale of the award – to “draw attention to the crude, tasteless, often perfunctory use of redundant passages of sexual description in the modern novel, and to discourage it” – combines the kind of finger-wagging moralism and chortling jocularity recognisable to anyone familiar with English culture. Apart from its dubious assumptions (whose taste?), its aims are clear: to humiliate writers for “unnecessary” incursions into the erotic, and perhaps too for revealing something of themselves in this process. Anonymous Sex ostensibly does the opposite – it is encouraging sex writing. But it wants things both ways: to create the conditions for an untrammelled erotic freedom in writing, while also inviting us to sniff the writer out. Some of the stories are fantastic; several are fine; a few are not. Some are elegant and arch, some witty and bawdy. In the almost knowingly quaint Find Me, a widow takes a long train ride across America to join a new husband, sharing a night of passion with an exciting bandit. The Next Eleven Minutes conjures the hazy border between vertiginous sexual excitement and terrifying insanity. Rapunzel, Rapunzel is a charming, sexy retelling of the tale; Love Doll an intriguing exploration of racialised power dynamics set in Hawaii in a multicultural English language class My outright favourite is En Suite, a story of two young women friends on a trip to a seaside town, staying in a cheap – and badly soundproofed – hotel. The story moves briskly between awkward, unpleasant or comedic encounters with other holidaymakers to evoke the flaring of desire between the two women. It’s a tale of longing, mishaps and missed opportunities, capturing the sense of possibility and terror that desire can evoke. It’s gorgeous and heartbreaking, and whoever wrote it is in supreme command of their skills. What a shame we don’t know who it is! History Lesson opens with an epigraph from psychotherapist Esther Perel, portentously announcing its themes: “Most of us get turned on at night by the very things that we’ll demonstrate against during the day.” Denise, a married professor, has an arrangement with Michael, another professor: they meet at an annual conference; she agrees to his every desire, including to his filming their sex; an element of jeopardy is introduced in the threat of the video being released to the conference attenders. The story unfolds with a confidence occasionally punctured by its own solemn self-consciousness. When Michael texts Denise: “Tell me you’re a slut”, we’re told: “To be clear: this was not a word Denise approved of in most contexts.” Here, we are being interrupted by the author’s anxiety; the need to spell out a political affiliation even when trying, mostly well, to evoke erotic dynamics that necessarily evade political positions. We’re being reassured that we’re entitled to enjoy this kinky story of domination and submission, through sentences such as: “It helped, certainly, that while Denise was a nationally recognised name in her field, Michael was just as happily tenured and well-published; no one could help anyone’s career here.” We can put out of our minds egregious stories of workplace harassment and coercion. This story, the writer insists, is ethically unproblematic. In a sense, the Bad Sex awards are not wrong: authors are often hampered in writing about sex. But what makes sex writing bad is what makes any writing bad: if it is evasive, if it is unsure about why it exists, if it doesn’t know what it’s doing, if it retreats into metaphor as a substitute for precision. The anthology’s editors are not wrong either: authors are fearful of being seen through the veil of fictions they write. And this can make fictional accounts of sex unbearably coy, or over-compensatory, moving between the desire to obfuscate and an impatient, defiant urge to be bold. What if the editors had, instead of conferring anonymity, encouraged the authors to write as much as possible without the censorious eye over the shoulder? “She was in a world that didn’t follow logic,” we’re clumsily told in History Lesson. Yes, sexuality is not rational, we’ve understood that much. But how much better this story would be if that sentence were left out, and we went straight to the following one: “She was on a distant moon.” Ah! • Anonymous Sex: 27 Authors, 27 Stories, No Names Attached, edited by Hillary Jordan and Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan, is published by Borough (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.30. A Billion Balconies Facing the Sun (2010) Manic Street Preachers were always Guns N’ Roses fans: on A Billion Balconies Facing the Sun, they collaborated with the band’s bassist Duff McKagan. Charmingly perverse as ever, they turned in one of their poppiest latterday melodies, liberally decorated with metal guitar. 29. The Masses Against the Classes (2000) The band’s conflicted attitude to mainstream acceptance is given full vent in this Chomsky and Camus-quoting blast of anger that alternately questions and celebrates their recent success in both lyrics and music. With a crowd-pleasing steal from Twist and Shout crashing against raw, dense punk rock, it entered the charts at No 1. 28. Sequels of Forgotten Wars (2018) A band surveying a vastly altered musical landscape and wondering where – if anywhere – they fit in after 30 years: “There will be no parades for the likes of us … the callous deception of never giving up.” It is so self-interrogating, it answers its own central question: none of their peers would write something like this. 27. Comfort Comes (1994) The Holy Bible’s oppressive racket appeared to come out of nowhere – unless you had noticed the B-side of Life Becoming a Landslide. It’s all there: a dark sound rooted in the angular guitars of post-punk years before the post-punk revival took hold, a claustrophobic atmosphere amplified by the effects that muffle and compress James Dean Bradfield’s voice during the verses; it breaks into a wounded roar at the chorus: lyrics that hint at anorexia and despair. 26. Divine Youth (2014) Recent Manics albums have contained a lot of duets – testament to Bradfield’s acknowledgement that his own voice has limitations – but this, featuring Welsh singer-songwriter Georgia Ruth Williams, may be the best: an icy-sounding, echo-swathed but tender meditation on ageing. 25. La Tristessa Durera (Scream to a Sigh) (1993) If you want to compare the Manics to the Clash – and the early Manics would clearly have been delighted if you did – then Gold Against the Soul is their Give ’Em Enough Rope: an overproduced second album that still contains a handful of potent songs, La Tristessa Durera’s sympathetic depiction of a war veteran among them. 24. Orwellian (2021) Last year’s The Ultra Vivid Lament – a far more focused album than its predecessor, Resistance Is Futile – was heralded by Orwellian, a despairing survey of 21st-century British life that still feels weirdly uplifting thanks to its tune, which perfectly fulfils the band’s stated remit of “the Clash meets Abba”. 23. Enola / Alone (1996) A song provoked by Nicky Wire looking at his wedding photos and seeing both Richey Edwards and the band’s late manager Philip Hall, Enola / Alone sums up Everything Must Go’s winning sound – melodically rich, “uplifting but melancholy” as Wire put it, plus Wire’s glum brand of post-Edwards positivity: “All I want to do is live, no matter how miserable it is.” 22. Judge Yr’self (1995) Intended for Sylvester Stallone’s disastrous Judge Dredd movie, but rejected – perhaps understandably, given that Edwards’s minimal lyrics are clearly about self-harm – Judge Yr’self is the great lost Holy Bible-era Manics track: powerful, taut, relentless, punishing in a way that Mega City One’s chief law enforcer might appreciate. It eventually surfaced on the 2003 compilation Lipstick Traces. 21. Solitude Sometimes Is (2004) Synthesiser-heavy, death-fixated, described by Nicky Wire as “a withdrawal”, 2004’s Lifeblood – a relative flop on release – has not been given the deluxe reissue treatment afforded most Manics albums. But it deserves reconsidering: beneath its smooth sheen lurk some fabulous songs, as evidenced by the utterly downcast loveliness of Solitude Sometimes Is. 20. Spectators of Suicide (1991) At a time when the Manics seemed so anomalous to prevailing alt-rock trends that some observers concluded they must be a joke, this song, according to Martin Kelly of the band’s early label, Heavenly, “showed us, early doors, just how great this band were”. Subdued and subtle, the version on the B-side of You Love Us trumps the flat re-recording on their 1992 debut album, Generation Terrorists. 19. Rewind the Film (2013) The title track of the (largely) acoustic album the Manic Street Preachers had been discussing making for 20 years is exquisitely lugubrious, making perfect use of guest Richard Hawley’s careworn vocals. The moment when Bradfield’s voice finally appears, backed by soaring strings, is really spectacular. 18. Archives of Pain (1994) Shocking even 30 years ago, Archives of Pain is a song that’s almost impossible to imagine a mainstream rock band releasing in the current climate. Inspired by Michel Foucault, it argues for the death penalty in visceral terms: “Don’t be ashamed to slaughter … there is never redemption”. The scourging post-punk-meets-metal accompaniment fits perfectly. 17. Sleepflower (1993) According to Manics biographer Simon Price, Sleepflower has “almost become a standing joke”: die-hard fans call for it at every gig, but the band usually declines to oblige, reflecting their ambivalence about Gold Against the Soul. But it’s a fan favourite for a reason, its stark drawing of depression set to a killer riff and an arena-sized chorus. 16. Kevin Carter (1996) Wire has often remarked on the pleasing disjuncture caused by the Manics’ vast success following Edwards’s disappearance, especially the sound of stadium audiences singing along to his agonisingly bleak lyrics. A Top 10 hit, Kevin Carter carries a hint of Holy Bible spikiness in its sound, its Edwards-penned lyrics dark and disturbing. 15. William’s Last Words (2009) There’s no getting around the fact that William’s Last Words, found among Edwards’s last set of lyrics, reads like a suicide note. The song his bandmates constructed around his words – stately, subtly orchestrated, the sad resignation of the lyrics compounded by Wire’s wavering, untutored voice – is beautiful. 14. Ocean Spray (2001) In which singer-guitarist Bradfield takes over the job of Manics lyricist, with brave and startling results: a portrait of his mother dying of cancer. Its chorus – a childlike plea for his mum to “stay awake” so they can drink cranberry juice together – perfectly encapsulates desperately clinging to anything in the face of crushing hopelessness. 13. This Is Yesterday (1994) In the context of The Holy Bible, This Is Yesterday almost counts as a mellow moment of respite: Wire’s ambiguous meditation on memory and regret (“The only way to gain approval is by exploiting the very thing that cheapens me,” offers the Manics’ inflammatory quote-machine, ruefully), set to music that deals in subdued yearning. 12. Motown Junk (1991) As attention-grabbing early statements go, Motown Junk’s ferocious iconoclasm takes some beating: “All your slut heroes offer is a fear of the future … I laughed when Lennon got shot.” Whether they really meant it is debatable – they dropped the Lennon line from live performances long ago – but as Motown Junk rages along, it hardly matters. 11. Your Love Alone Is Not Enough (2007) In a more straightforward story, 2007’s Send Away the Tigers might have been the follow-up to This Is My Truth Tell Me Yours – harder-edged but still commercial, another multi-platinum smash – and its hook-laden single would have been No 1. But the Manics’ story is never straightforward, which doesn’t stop Your Love Alone, a duet with the Cardigans’ Nina Persson, being a fantastic example of their pop smarts. 10. You Stole the Sun From My Heart (1998) The Manics Street Preachers’ most commercial phase has been retrospectively reproached, sometimes by the band themselves, but as You Stole the Sun proves, they were genuinely skilled at being a straightforward rock band. It’s a great song: whether the Manics were ever supposed to be a straightforward rock band is another matter. 9. Let’s Go to War (2014) Recorded in tandem with the largely acoustic Rewind the Film album, Futurology was its polar opposite: jagged, electronic, influenced by Krautrock and post-punk’s flirtations with the dancefloor. Let’s Go to War is audibly inspired by both PiL’s Death Disco and John Barry: it sounds both unmistakably like the Manics and like nothing they’d done before. 8. Of Walking Abortion (1994) The Holy Bible’s dark, terrifying centre, and the sound, as journalist Dorian Lynskey noted, of guitarist-lyricist Edwards’s “brilliant mind burning itself out”, Of Walking Abortion is an unsparing explosion of moral disgust, in which humanity is deemed worthless, “no one cares and everyone is guilty”. It’s incredibly bold, utterly gripping and desperately sad. 7. Peeled Apples (2009) Journal for Plague Lovers was a risky project – new songs based on lyrics Edwards had penned before his 1995 disappearance – but it turned out a triumph, a perfect companion piece to The Holy Bible. There is nothing watered-down or middle-aged about Peeled Apples’ broiling din, which one critic compared to being kicked in the head. 6. If You Tolerate This Your Children Will Be Next (1998) Originally intended as a B-side, If You Tolerate This … provoked perhaps the most polarised No 1 battle in chart history: the Manic Street Preachers singing about Welsh volunteers in the International Brigades during the Spanish civil war versus Steps’ One for Sorrow. The former won: testament to its infectiously sad sigh of a melody. 5. You Love Us (1991) A rash of wilfully inflammatory music press interviews swiftly made the Manics arguably the most reviled band in Britain. You Love Us is their irresistibly cocky response: amid a string of further provocations, the lyrics brilliantly fix the thorny, symbiotic relationship between artist and music press, set to air-punch-inducing, glam-punk anthemics. 4. Prologue to History (1998) Not just the greatest Manics B-side, but one of the greatest Manics songs full stop, Prologue to History sets Wire’s furious torrent of words – an unsparing, accusatory self-portrait that ponders the impact of the Manics mainstream success on “the boy who once had a mission” – to an uncharacteristically piano-led, incredibly potent sound. 3. Motorcycle Emptiness (1992) Motorcycle Emptiness began life as a shambolic 80s indie-inspired track called Go Buzz Baby Go – audibly indebted to the June Brides’ B-side Josef’s Gone – and wound up as the first evidence the Manics could succeed on the kind of scale they kept talking about in interviews: an ambitious, widescreen rock ballad that works perfectly. 2. A Design for Life (1996) The Manics’ post-Richey return chimed with the Britpop era: A Design for Life was unashamedly anthemic, ruthlessly effective commercial guitar rock. But in another sense, they were as out of step as ever with the Cool Britannia party: the strings and singalong chorus conceal a righteously furious examination of the British class system’s strictures. 1. Faster (1994) From its unyielding, monotone opening to its conclusion – a guitar solo where the notes jut out at odd, discordant angles from the tune, and a chant of “so damn easy to cave in, man kills everything”, Faster is a single that immediately lunges for the throat and refuses to let go. If its lyrics are nowhere near as disturbing as those elsewhere on The Holy Bible, they still inhabit an unsettling space between preaching a particularly ascetic self-reliance and bullishly defending self-harm, with one of Edwards’ most celebrated lines along the way: “I know I believe in nothing, but it’s my nothing”. Furious, shocking, and yet equipped with a singalong chorus: a genuinely extraordinary single.You know the feeling when you’ve waited ages for a bus, then two come along at once? It seems like only yesterday that I reviewed Jimmy McGovern’s prison drama, Time, and referenced it as a rare example of authenticity – one of the few works that gave me a feeling of being back in prison. Then along comes Screw (Channel 4), which is every bit as good. When I started writing about prisons – as a change from committing the crimes that occasionally landed me in them – a press officer at the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) asked me if I would stop referring to prison officers as “screws”, as it was somewhat demeaning. My dictionary agreed; it defines the word as: “informal, derogatory, a prison warder”. I wonder if the MoJ have complained to Rob Williams, Screw’s creator? In fact, the relationship between prison officers and those they lock up is, by far, the most important factor of the prison experience. Yes, of course, major policy decisions are taken at MoJ level, and governors have some degree of autonomy – although by no means as much as they used to (and should still have). But, in a nutshell, good screws make for decent prisons, bad ones turn them into hate factories. Long Marsh, the setting for Screw, appears to be an OK jail, largely, perhaps, because it has a higher than average number of female officers in a male establishment. I remember when this came into being in our penal system, in the early 90s. The women’s presence lowered the temperature on the wings and landings. The central character, Leigh (Nina Sosanya), a senior officer, who runs C wing, hooked me immediately. She is efficient, firm and fair, but married to the job to the extent of requisitioning a vacant cell in order to sleep. She believes her charges are “not bad people, they have just done bad things”. One sardonic sage of an inmate remarks that “she knows we are here for revenge, not rehabilitation”. As true a line as ever was. And the accuracy of the dialogue continues to shine when new recruit Rose delivers a gem to a patronising male colleague who asks her why she’s in the job. “Because I’m good at shutting up dickheads,” she retorts. Screw also shows how our jails reflect the serious issues that exist outside their walls. In a scene familiar to me, a prisoner objects to being served halal meat. I challenged a fellow inmate who did the same, some 25 years ago, long before the current wave of anti-Muslim feeling swept into society. I imagine it to be commonplace in these darker days. The two biggest problems in the system right now are mental health and drugs – related, of course. As much as I praised Time, I had issues with the plot, where villains went to great lengths to force Stephen Graham’s prison officer character, Eric McNally, to smuggle drugs into his place of work. Taking drugs into prisons is more tempting for prison officers than you might think, and Screw nails this truth. A male officer asks Rose how she thinks most of the drugs get into the prison. She suggests they are smuggled in on visits, or chucked over the wall. Dismissively, he replies: “Officers. Not everyone in charge keeps on the straight and narrow.” Spot on the money. The profit margins soar way above street prices. Bringing a small amount of drugs into their workplace – particularly class A drugs – could earn them a couple of thousand pounds, for a relatively small risk. How do I know? Because although drug dealing was never my game, I know plenty who played it and know where and with whom they placed their trust and money. From the other side, I have the word of a former prison governor, John Podmore – a good pal. He tells me his staff often seized hauls of drugs in his establishments, but his biggest find, by far, was discovered “strapped to the leg of an officer”. Screw’s look at mental health in prisons also rings incredibly true. There’s a short flash of Long Marsh inmates receiving their daily liquid cosh. This is the slang for meds that, usually, leave those taking them spaced out – and not a threat to anyone. The way the inmates queued up like zombies to get their drugs reminded me of the medication scenes in the brilliant One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest. But I think the line that best sums up the mental health problems in jails comes when a health worker is struggling to assess the number of prisoners who are on the Assessment, Care in Custody and Teamwork (ACCT) register – the care-planning process for prisoners identified as being at risk of suicide or self-harm. Leigh asks her to urgently see a potential suicide risk. The woman says she has too much on that day – and we see the bundle of ACCT files she is carrying – but will try and see the new guy “some time this week”. Leigh says: “Remind me why we closed the asylums?” Reply: “Nobody liked locking up people with mental health problems.” Anyone wishing to know the facts behind the story should look at the latest MoJ figures on deaths and self-harm in prisons, published last week. It’s this persistent parade of truths about jails that makes Screw one of the best fictional prison tales. It’s rammed with issues and scenes that should shame those responsible for running this failing system. Back in my bad old prison days, we used to say that we wouldn’t piss on a screw if he was burning to death – coined before women entered the male system. Not particularly edifying, but it summed up our feelings. In fairness, though, on my last sentence, a seven stretch that ended just before the millennium, I came across more decent prison officers than I had encountered in the previous four decades. Nowadays, they feel unloved, an officer in Screw laments, claiming that the public “love the police [questionable!], firefighters and NHS staff, but not us”. Did I love those who treated me with decency? I always started off being polite to screws – and everybody in jail. If they returned the compliment, we all did easy time. But there is one thing that I am very near to adoring – and that is Screw.Maybe the hardest trick in rock music is to do what John Peel credited as the singular ability of the Fall – to sound always different, but always the same. Plenty of groups have flourished by always being the same; plenty more artists see it as their duty to make sure each album sounds utterly unlike the one before. But to sustain a career without ever completely repeating yourself, yet never leave anyone wondering what the heck you’ve done to the group they loved, is something few manage to pull off. Ten albums and nearly 30 years into their career, Spoon still sound like Spoon: fresh, timeless and wholly in control of their work. The Spoon sound – spacious, uncluttered but powerful, both scratchy and crystalline – is so distinct that even the fact no individual element sounds even remotely unusual makes no odds. Britt Daniel’s voice – not powerful, but a soulful yowl – has character, but his guitar playing isn’t going to have putative axe heroes trying to work out his technique. The single most notable element – the drumming of the band’s other pole, Jim Eno – is marked by restraint, rather than flashiness. Bass, keyboards and any other elements (horns, electronics) are there to colour the songs, rather than dominate. Spoon can be a bit funky, a bit poppy, a bit rocky, but always them. The result is a career that has rather defied the expectations levied on bands who spend virtually all their career on indie labels (Spoon had a very brief and very miserable spell with Elektra early on). Though never more than a cult concern in the UK – on their last visit to London, they didn’t fill the 2,300-capacity Forum – they’ve become a significant act back home in the US, with top 10 albums and big gigs: a few years back, Daniel characterised their level of success as the kind that enables him to get tables in good restaurants without being hassled while he eats. The advantage of sounding only like yourself, rather than part of a wave of like-minded groups, is that your sound tends to remain current, rather than being an aid to carbon-dating past pop-cultural sounds. Aside from their debut album, Telephono – a superior but generic piece of 90s alt-rock – every Spoon record sounds like it could be their current one. When the past is plundered on Lucifer on the Sofa, it is brought into Spoon’s world – so the bluesy, Stones-y piano chords of Wild’s chorus are overlaid not on to Keith’n’Ronnie riffing, but a nervous, twitching guitar pattern that has a little of the air of U2, and they are held back until 80 seconds in for maximum impact, before the guitars ramp up further. The album opens with a cover of Smog’s Held, so Spoonified that you really wouldn’t know it was a cover unless you knew the original, but without rendering it anywhere near unrecognisable. Within the constraints of their music not being intended to smash down new sonic barriers, Spoon introduce dynamism by means of structure: nothing on Lucifer on the Sofa sounds like it was bashed out at the last minute; everything sounds in its place, considered. But that doesn’t make the resultant songs arid. If you think of it like architecture, that kind of attention to detail can sometimes make records sound like the lobbies of boutique hotels – elegant and tasteful and stylish and utterly characterless – whereas this sounds like a place in which you want to spend time soaking up the details. My Babe, for example, builds so gently and naturally from its opening acoustic guitar and piano, Eno’s drums introducing propulsion before the addition of those embellishments – the shivery piano trill around 80 seconds in. When the electric guitars enter, after more than two minutes, it’s like sluice gates opening, a flood of power. It sounds triumphant, so much so you can forgive it being called My Babe. Just 10 songs long, and without a single surplus inch around its narrow waist, Lucifer on the Sofa simply refuses to countenance the notion of having a single dull second. Production is by Mark Rankin, whose work with Queens of the Stone Age had attracted Daniel’s attention, and he adds oomph and weight but without ever overwhelming the songs: there’s as much importance in the space as there is in the chords. Truthfully, though, Spoon are so completely their own band that any producer only adds shading in the margins. There aren’t really bad Spoon albums. There are really good Spoon albums and there are excellent Spoon albums. Lucifer on the Sofa is one of the latter. What a delight.Harry Winks says that he is determined to repay the faith of Antonio Conte after admitting he feared his Tottenham career was “dead and buried”. The midfielder was marginalised under the previous manager, Nuno Espírito Santo, who started him only once in the Premier League this season before being replaced by Conte in early November. Winks had also fallen from favour under Nuno’s predecessor José Mourinho and was expected to seek a transfer during the January window. But Conte was impressed with Winks’s performances in the league games against Liverpool and Southampton in December, after starting him, and he said at the end of the month that the player would stay after proving “reliable”. Winks, who won the last of his 10 England caps against Iceland in November 2020, drove the team in the 3-1 FA Cup win over Morecambe on 9 January, showing a good attitude on a day when Conte substituted Tanguy Ndombele, Bryan Gil and Dele Alli as Spurs trailed 1-0. All three would be moved on in January – together with a fourth player, Giovani Lo Celso. Winks has started in all five of Spurs’s games since, most recently the 3-2 home loss to Southampton on Wednesday night, when they threw away a 2-1 lead late on. “The manager’s come in and given me a chance, given me confidence again,” Winks said. “Every game I play and every training session, I have that hunger to impress him and do everything I can to improve. “My career at Tottenham was probably dead and buried but he’s come in and given me an opportunity to prove myself. And for that, every time I get an opportunity, I really want to impress the manager and repay that faith he’s shown in me.” Winks rowed back slightly on his “dead and buried” comment but the sense did not change. “I wouldn’t say it was completely dead and buried but my chances at Tottenham were looking slim,” he said. “I wasn’t getting opportunities and it might have looked like I would need to leave the club. I don’t know. “As I said, the new manager’s come in and given everyone an equal opportunity, which is all I wanted under the last two managers. Now it’s down to me to take that.” Winks can feel the competition from the January signing Rodrigo Bentancur but it was interesting that Conte introduced the Uruguayan as a substitute for Pierre-Emile Højbjerg against Southampton – rather than Winks. Oliver Skipp, who is out with a groin injury, is Conte’s other option in central midfield. Conte hopes to have Skipp back for the trip to Manchester City on Saturday week. “It was a poor performance and result against Southampton,” Winks said. “When we’re not playing well but leading we need to find a way of not conceding. We were too passive, too easy to play against and defensively as a team it wasn’t solid enough. We let them play. We let them suffocate us.”Carlos Acosta doesn’t currently perform with the company that bears his name, but it embodies everything he hoped to put out into the world with its launch in 2016: taking Cuban choreography around the globe with a set of gifted dancers whose versatile bodies speak in multiple languages of ballet, contemporary, urban, African and Latin dance. Their hybrid abilities and Cuban pride are seen most overtly in De Punta a Cabo, created by Alexis Fernández and Yaday Ponce. The execution is primary coloured, dancing on pointe along Havana’s sea wall, but there’s something intoxicating about these dancers and you’re gradually absorbed into their night-out vibes. Their talents are more dexterously demonstrated in Pontus Lidberg’s Paysage, Soudain, la Nuit, where the Swedish choreographer soaks up some Cuban influences with minimal cliche. You can see the classicism in the precision of placings, Raul Reinoso’s leg beautifully extended a la seconde, but also their facility in contemporary language, especially Mario Sergio Elías’s easy elasticity; then there’s Latin footwork sewn into the fabric of the choreography. It’s well crafted and quietly mesmerising. Talking of mesmerising, there’s Zeleidy Crespo, dancing Impronta, a solo by Spanish choreographer María Rovira. You can see her taking pleasure in her rich physicality in the moment and yet channelling something bigger; she is the percussive beat of the music as well as perfectly calibrated architectural angles. Crespo’s long limbs carve some finessed shapes in the opener Liberto, choreographed by Reinoso. It draws on Cuba’s history of slavery, but really focuses on the dynamic between the two dancers, Crespo and Elías, the pair folding their forms in complex origami. It’s the first of two new pieces in the programme, both of which feel underdeveloped compared with a more established dance-maker like Lidberg. The second is Hybrid, by Norge Cedeno and Thais Suárez, which picks up on some similar themes to Liberto: struggle and uprising, subjugation and freedom, with 12 solider-like dancers on a red-drenched stage. Still, choreographers cannot grow if their work doesn’t get a chance to see the light. The identity of the company is strong and the dancers are well worth watching. At Sadler’s Wells, London, until 12 February, then touring.David, 31, near Norwich Occupation Anti-abortion campaigner Voting record Originally voted Conservative, then abstained; stood as a candidate for the Christian Peoples Alliance in 2019, but lost his deposit Amuse bouche Made it to the semi-finals of Britain’s Got Talent as part of an all-male a cappella group Josie, 31, Norwich Occupation Housing officer for Norwich city council Voting record Green in local elections, Labour in general elections, remain in the EU referendum Amuse bouche Her calf, Heidi, won best in show in the 1997 Essex county show For starters David Josie arrived first. I wouldn’t say anything particularly struck me. Doing the work we do, we speak with all sorts of people. Josie He looked exactly like Phil Rosenthal, the presenter of the Netflix series Somebody Feed Phil. David I ate prawns and steak. I would have been prepared to forgo the steak if she was a vegan, but thankfully that wasn’t necessary. Josie I had venison and steak. David We were there for four and a half hours, it was amazing. We’ve both said we’d love to do it again. Josie Maybe I’m very privileged – I’ve moved through my life without much homophobia. I’ve been out all my life. And, as a woman, you don’t face as much. But it felt like such a direct attack at points. The big beef David We got on to the subject of abortion pretty quickly because of my work. The Centre for Bio-Ethical Reform exists to challenge society’s thinking about abortion. We place a heavy emphasis on video evidence about when life begins. We show life in the womb, and what actually happens to the unborn child when it’s aborted, then ask people what they think, using the Socratic method to question their assumptions. Josie You’d have to work flipping hard to change my views on this. I’m pro-choice. I’m still “your pussy, your rules”. David She’d thought of it purely in a bodily autonomy, women’s rights perspective, and hadn’t really appreciated, “What about the baby?” Josie He has two daughters, I asked what he would do if one of them got pregnant at 15 – would he really not support her choice? David I’ve thought through those things in the past, but to sit down with a stranger and honestly think them through was interesting. However, my position didn’t change. Josie He said: “She’d be robbing me of my grandchild.” The big beef, second helping Josie I thought, “I bet he doesn’t like gay people.” I could feel it. And I knew that if I didn’t ask, I would regret it. So I said: “How do you feel about the LGBT community?” He said: “As people, we have to draw the line somewhere as to what’s normal and what’s not. We have to draw a moral line.” Me being with a woman, he sees as the same as me having sex with my sister. We’re all under the same umbrella – incest, bestiality. I’m allowed to stay with my partner, but we have to stop having sex. Because God doesn’t like it. David I don’t believe that bestiality and incest are equivalent to homosexuality – I was just making the point that everyone draws a line somewhere. Josie I actually started crying at this point. I said: “I’m not crying for me, I love myself, I’m comfortable in who I am. I’m crying because of the queer youth who’ve been made to feel this way by their church.” Think of all the queer suicides that happen because people have been made to feel disgusting. For afters David I can respect people’s choices. We’ve got a lady in our team, a vegan, and when she’s in the canteen, I don’t have milk in my coffee. But I wouldn’t agree with this idea that we’re meant to affirm everything that someone feels. Josie I said: “If you were sitting here with a trans woman, what pronouns would you use?” And he said: “I’d use the pronouns he was born with.” I said: “What difference does it make to you to address someone the way they want to be addressed?” Takeaways David We could have gone on longer. It was fascinating. Josie I felt very conflicted about what actually happened. That night, I was lying in bed with my partner, telling her all these things, and, at the end of it, she said: “Why are you saying he’s a really nice person?” And I said: “Because he said it all with a smile on his face.” Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • David and Josie ate at the Ivy Norwich Brasserie Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreRyusuke Hamaguchi is a Japanese film-maker whose work I first encountered in 2018 with his doppelgänger romance Asako I &amp; II and indirectly via last year’s experimental chamber-piece Domains, whose screenwriter Tomoyuki Takahashi has worked with Hamaguchi. Now he has unveiled this ingenious, playful, sparklingly acted and thoroughly entertaining portmanteau collection of three movie tales. Their themes and ideas are emerging as keynotes for this director: fate and coincidence, identity and role-play, and the mysteries of erotic pleasure and desire. There is a rather European flavour in the mix – one of its characters is a specialist in French literature – and I found myself thinking of Emmanuel Carrère and Milan Kundera. And although there is no formal connection between the stories (other than the thematic echoes) the simple act of juxtaposition creates something pleasingly cohesive. In the first, Magic (Or Something Less Reassuring), we see a model called Meiko (Kotone Furukawa) going home in a cab after a photoshoot with her friend, an art director called Gumi (Hyunri Lee), and gossiping excitedly about the man that Gumi has started seeing. This marvellous-sounding individual really opened up about his own feelings on their date, talking about the ex who broke his heart. Something about this description makes Meiko very thoughtful, and she goes to see her own ex, a successful young businessman called Kaz (Ayumu Nakajima). In the second story, Door Wide Open, a mature student called Nao (Katsuki Mori), married with a child, is having a passionate affair with a young undergraduate, Sasaki (Shouma Kai), who has just been humiliatingly flunked by his professor Segawa (Kiyohiko Shubukawa), an award-winning scholar and novelist. Angry and vengeful, Sasaki asks Nao to try seducing this man, so that he will be disgraced. And in the third story, Once Again, Moka (Fusako Urabe) is a thirtysomething woman who goes to a dismal high-school reunion and only afterwards at the train station runs into the person that she really wanted to see: the woman who was her first love. Nana (Aoba Kawai), though apparently flustered and bewildered, is delighted to see her. But it isn’t until halfway through their halting conversation that both women make an alarming discovery. Hamaguchi shows how each situation is redeemed, or at any rate altered, by a kind of miracle. In the first, Meiko has the magic power to stop and rewind time so that she can play out a certain situation, or conversation, differently. In the second, the dignified thoughtfulness of Segawa means that Nao is deeply moved and this complicates her erotic designs on him. Throughout their conversation he asks for his office door to be kept open to prevent any suggestion of impropriety, but this is also emblematic of his own openness. And in the third, Moka and Nana use role-play to ease their painful emotional burdens. This trio of stories is elegant and amusing, with a delicacy of touch and real imaginative warmth. The narratives saunter along lightly but fundamentally seriously, asking us to consider how the paths we take in life – the wrong turnings, the right turnings – can be governed by the merest chance. It’s a really pleasurable and invigorating experience. Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy screened at the Berlin film festival and is released on 11 February in the UK.Astronomers have found evidence for a new planet circling Proxima Centauri, the nearest star to the sun. The alien world is only a quarter of the mass of Earth and orbits extremely close to its parent star, at one tenth of the distance between the sun and Mercury, the solar system’s innermost planet. Researchers spotted the new planet after studying tiny wobbles in the motion of Proxima Centauri caused by the gravitational pull it exerts as it swings around the star. Observations taken with the European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope (VLT) in Chile suggest the planet completes a full orbit of the star every five days. The discovery shows that our closest stellar neighbour is “packed with interesting new worlds” within reach of further study and future exploration, said João Faria, a researcher at the Institute of Astrophysics and Space Sciences in Portugal and lead author on the study. Scientists believe the planet orbits about 2.4m miles (4m km) from Proxima Centauri, meaning it is closer to the star than its habitable zone where the temperature range is just right for water to run freely. Details are published in the journal Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics. Named Proxima d, the planet is the third – and the lightest – to be spotted around Proxima Centauri, which at four light years away is the closest star to the solar system. It joins Proxima b, a planet with a mass comparable to that of Earth, which completes an orbit every 11 days, and Proxima c, which is believed to take about five years to circle the star. The first hints of the planet came in 2020 when astronomers were observing Proxima Centauri to confirm the existence of Proxima b. The measurements revealed a weak signal in the star’s motion that had the hallmarks of being caused by a planet orbiting every five days. Further observations taken with an instrument on ESO’s telescope called Espresso confirmed astronomers’ suspicions that a planet was the cause and not changes in the star itself. “This is a very low mass planet, and is the third candidate around the star closest to us,” Faria said. “It shows that these planets, similar to the Earth, may be common in our galaxy, and just close by. And it makes us wonder about the possible conditions for habitability in these planet systems and if it’s possible for life to appear in other places in the universe.”The constituency office of the environment secretary, George Eustice, has been bought by supporters of Insulate Britain, who have donated his rent to a legal fund for activists. Supporters of the group, which made headlines last year by obstructing major roads and calling on the government to retrofit all British homes to make them energy efficient, formed a coalition of investors. They acquired the property at 13 Commercial Street, Camborne, Cornwall, last October for £51,000. Since then their company, Cawton Ltd, has received £2,820 in rent from the House of Commons, which has been donated to help pay the legal costs of Insulate Britain defendants in court cases. Cawton Ltd is an anagram of Act Now – one of the Extinction Rebellion protest group’s three key demands. Sally Wright, from St Day, in the MP’s Camborne, Redruth and Hayle constituency, said: “I invested because I am sick and tired of [the environment secretary’s] complete refusal to make any decisions which deviate from ‘business as usual’ when we are facing a devastating climate crisis that will lead to the death of millions if we don’t take immediate action. “I’m glad we are using his rent to pay the fines of the people who are risking their livelihoods, reputations and personal safety to give the rest of us hope that change is possible.” Insulate Britain said Eustice had taken many actions recently that they disagreed with, including authorising the use of a bee-killing pesticide, and encouraging MPs to vote against an amendment to the environment bill that would have forced water companies to end the practice of dumping untreated sewage into rivers and seas. The government was later forced to U-turn on this after public outrage. Eustice has previously spoken out against the activists, calling them “highly irresponsible”, and welcomed the powers sought by the Home Office to allow police to act pre-emptively to stop the protests happening. Since November last year, Insulate Britain says, 28 supporters have been charged with contempt of court for defying injunctions banning their protest blockades during a campaign of civil disobedience last autumn, according to the campaign group. Of these, 25 have been found guilty and 13 have been jailed, with 12 receiving suspended prison sentences. So far, they say, the courts have awarded costs of £84,000 against Insulate Britain defendants, with a further claim of £159,216 from lawyers acting for the government due to be decided next week. Another investor, Brenda Shrewsbury, 65, from Budock Water, Cornwall, said: “The rent from George’s gaff is tiny compared with the costs faced by the individuals that have been persecuted by the government for demanding action on home insulation, but I hope that this move will inspire others to do what they can. We need to come together and act now on the climate emergency.” The group has decided to donate future rent money to local food banks and community initiatives to help people hit by the cost of living crisis and facing the choice of whether to heat their homes or eat. A spokesperson for Eustice said: “We live in a free country and investors are free to invest in property irrespective of their political views. There is no law that requires a landlord and tenant to share the same political opinions.”The ghosts of Winter Olympics past are starting to rattle for Britain’s campaign in Beijing. After missing out on medals in the mixed curling and snowboard cross earlier in the week, there was more disappointment on Thursday as Team GB’s men proved to be way off the pace in the skeleton. Traditionally Britain have rarely won more than the odd medal at Winter Games, but in Sochi in 2014 and Pyeongchang four years ago they made a record-equalling five trips to the podium. That haul was significantly helped by the skeleton, which has provided the backbone of Team GB’s success in recent Games. However the tech superiority over their rivals, which propelled them to golds in Vancouver, Sochi and Pyeongchang, did not appear evident at the Yanqing National Sliding Centre. Halfway through the event, which concludes on Friday lunchtime in the UK, Matt Weston and Marcus Wyatt sit 13th and 17th respectively, well over a second off the pace set by the world champion, Christopher Grotheer of Germany. Afterwards Weston was admirably honest as he admitted that he made “10 or 12 mistakes” on a track he described as really tough. “Normally if you make a mistake on a track you might lose a couple of hundredths, maybe a tenth of a second,” he added. “You make a mistake here and it’s like half a second here, half a second there, so it’s really punishing.” Meanwhile Wyatt remained upbeat despite being nearly two seconds back. “I was pretty happy with the run quality, two fairly consistent runs,” he said. “They weren’t the greatest I’ve ever done but not the worst.” Nonetheless questions are bound to be raised if no one in the skeleton, which has received more than £6m in funding from UK Sport in the build up to these Beijing Games, comes close to the podium. And the signs are not encouraging in the women’s event either, with neither 2018 bronze medallist Laura Dees or Brogan Crowley having troubled the top 10 in their training runs. Elsewhere there was also frustration for Britain’s sole representative in the men’s snowboard cross, Huw Nightingale, after he went out in the first round. The 20-year-old, who will compete with Charlotte Bankes in the mixed team competition on Saturday, admitted: “It was not what I had planned, but sometimes it goes well and sometimes it goes not go so well. I was too far off the pack, they were drafting each other and I just couldn’t get behind them.” However, at least Team GB men’s curlers were able to raise the spirits as Bruce Mouat led the team to a 7-5 victory over Italy in the first match of the group stage. In a high-quality match, Mouat and teammates Grant Hardie, Bobby Lammie and Hammy McMillan were behind early before coming through. “It was a wee bit of a slow start and they got a good two in the first end. That kind of put us on the back foot early, but we stuck together and played a lot of really good shots,” said Mouat. Earlier in the day GB’s women curlers missed the chance to win a tight match against Switzerland, losing 6-5 when Eve Muirhead’s attempt to draw the winning shot slid just past the button. But they bounced back beat Olympic champions Sweden 8-2 later in the evening.The International Olympic Committee has refused to comment on whether the athlete at the centre of a doping controversy at Beijing 2022 is the 15-year-old Russian figure skater Kamila Valieva, despite the teenager being named in multiple reports around the world. Multiple sources have told the Guardian that Valieva, who captured the world’s attention when she became the first female skater to perform a quad at the Olympics, may be the athlete who tested positive for trimetazidine, a metabolic agent that helps prevent angina attacks. There has been no official confirmation that Valieva is the subject of the positive test and alongside the IOC, the Russian Olympic Committee and the International Skating Union are also refusing to confirm or deny if it was her. Sources have suggested the test happened several weeks ago, raising questions about why it emerged only after the Russians won their figure skating team gold medal on Monday. The Guardian understands that Valieva’s case is being heard at an emergency hearing at the court of arbitration for sport in Beijing. If the speculation is correct, and it is Valieva who tested positive, then the Russian Olympic Committee will lose their team gold and she will not be able to compete at the individual event next week. Valieva continued to train in Beijing on Thursday, but did not talk to the world’s media. However her training partner, Anastasia Gubanova, a Russian-born skater who represents Georgia, told reporters: “It would be very unfortunate for her if something bad happens because of this.” A Russian skating official refused to comment when asked by the Guardian about Valieva’s case. The three Russian skaters in the men’s figure skating final also took a similar approach. However, the prominent journalist Vasily Konov, the deputy general producer at Russian sports channel Match-TV, did appear to link Valieva to the reports, saying, without citing sources, that the sample in question had been taken two months ago. “The drug trimetazidine does not help an athlete in any way. At all. It was found in one single sample in December. A minuscule amount. Nothing in her samples before or since,” he wrote on social media. “There is no doping in the conventional sense. No! This cardiac drug has no impact on ... performance. Now leave Kamila in peace.” Trimetazidine, or TMZ, works by increasing blood flow to the heart and limiting rapid swings in blood pressure. It has been on Wada’s list of prohibited substances since 2014. “It is not a drug that you would take accidentally, not something you would ordinarily be prescribed, and not something that you would expect a 15-year-old to be prescribed,” said the former Wada director general, David Howman. Under Wada’s code, the body is not required to name athletes under the age of 18 who commit doping violations. The medal ceremony for the figure skating team event was due to be held on Tuesday evening local time but was delayed with the IOC saying it was due to “legal consultation”. When repeatedly asked about the reports naming Valieva on Thursday, the International Olympic Committee spokesperson Mark Adams said it would be wrong to comment on an ongoing case. “I’m not going to comment on all sorts of speculation that I have also seen,” he said at the IOC’s daily press conference in Beijing. “We had a situation arise on Wednesday at short notice that has legal implications. I’m not going to comment on a legal case because it wouldn’t be appropriate.” However the chair of the US Olympic and Paralympic Committee board of directors has warned the IOC that the future of the Games depends on them upholding the integrity of sport. “Clearly what’s on my mind today is it is so important to the athletes of the world that the values of this movement be upheld, and one of the most important values is integrity of sport,” said Susanne Lyons. Lyons said World Anti-Doping Agency rules must not only be observed, “but that when something does go wrong that the sanctions are even-handed across the world – that they are all treated fairly. “The whole credibility of the Olympic movement and the Paralympic movement stands teetering on the edge of us saying that we really believe and live the values that we say we stand for,” she added. The United States finished in silver medal position behind the Russian Olympic Committee team in Monday’s team final with Japan taking bronze and Canada in fourth. Meanwhile a statement from the International Skating Union said it could not disclose any information about any possible anti-doping rule violation involving a skater. “This is in line with the ISU Anti-Doping Rules and IOC Anti-Doping Rules for Beijing 2022,” it added. Russia was banned from the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang after an investigation ruled there had been state-sponsored doping on a huge scale when it hosted the 2014 Games in Sochi. However it was allowed by the IOC to send a 168-strong team under the name Olympic Athletes from Russia. In December 2019 Russia got in further trouble when the fact they had deliberately manipulated thousands of doping records at a Moscow laboratory was confirmed. As a result it has to compete at these Games as the Russian Olympic Committee.AstraZeneca forecast higher 2022 sales and lifted its annual dividend for the first time in a decade after record revenues last year, but warned the boost from its Covid-19 products would decline. The Anglo-Swedish drugmaker said it made almost $4bn (£2.9bn) last year from the Covid jab it developed with Oxford University. It moved away from its not-for-profit pricing in November, when it signed new contracts in Latin America, the Middle East and Asia. The shot, called Vaxzevria, has not yet been approved by the US regulator. Sir John Bell, the Oxford professor who worked on the jab, this week accused scientists and politicians of damaging the reputation of the vaccine, potentially costing hundreds of thousands of lives. Billed as the vaccine to deliver the world from Covid, it became a political football last year when AstraZeneca faced accusations over its efficacy, supply and side-effects. Asked on Thursday whether the company could have managed the process better, the chief executive, Pascal Soriot, said he had no regrets. “It’s really hard to regret anything when you have delivered 2.6bn doses of the vaccine and you have saved 1 million lives around the world and of course enabled the economies in many countries to restart.” Together with the Chinese vaccines, the AstraZeneca shot is the most widely used in the world. The drugmaker’s total revenues increased by 41% to a record $37.4bn last year, boosted by cancer drugs. In the final quarter, sales rose 62% to $12bn, a quarterly record. AstraZeneca raised its dividend for the first time in 10 years, paying out $2.87 per share for 2021, with plans to pay $2.90 in future years. Soriot said the company would reach its target of $40bn sales, outlined in 2014 when it fended off a hostile takeover attempt from Pfizer, in 2022, a year earlier than expected. It is now expecting a high-teens percentage increase in revenues and a mid- to high-twenties percentage increase in core earnings per share. Despite the jump in sales, the drugmaker made an annual loss before tax of $265m, compared with a profit of $3.9bn the year before, after spending more on product launches, research and development, and the acquisition of the rare diseases specialist Alexion. Its research spending rose by 62% to $9.7bn. AstraZeneca’s Covid vaccine is far cheaper than those made by its US rivals Pfizer and Moderna. Pfizer raked in almost $37bn from the jab it developed with Germany’s BioNTech last year, prompting accusations of “pandemic profiteering” from campaigners. Soriot said the company was still offering affordable and tiered pricing for Vaxzevria to lower-income countries. Sales from the vaccine are expected to decline this year, partially offset by growth in sales from its new Covid-19 drug, Evusheld. Evusheld, an antibody treatment for immunocompromised people who can’t be vaccinated received, emergency use authorisation in the US and France in early December. Since taking the helm almost a decade ago, Soriot has successfully rebuilt AstraZeneca’s drugs pipeline. Among its 13 blockbuster medicines – those generating more than $1bn in a sales a year – several have become multibillion-pound sellers, including the lung cancer drug Tagrisso, the ovarian cancer drug Lynparza and the diabetes and heart drug Farxiga. He also pulled off the company’s largest ever deal, buying Alexion for $39bn, which completed in mid-July. Analysts say it should underpin future growth, along with recent drugs pipeline successes. Rare diseases medicines contributed $3.1bn of revenues last year.After decades lurking in the shadows, inflation is back. On Amazon, you can find fridge magnets printed with words spoken 40 years ago by Ronald Reagan, before the election that swept him into the White House. “Inflation is as violent as a mugger, as frightening as an armed robber and as deadly as a hit man.” Price spirals remain a real fear for many Americans, particularly those who lived through the double-digit inflation suffered under Reagan’s predecessor Jimmy Carter. What was a painful but distant memory is now a new reality. And it is global. The Bureau of Labor Statistics announced on Thursday that the consumer price index rose year on year by 7.5% in January, a level not seen since the 1980s. Britain is not far behind, with prices rising by 5.4% at the end of last year. In the eurozone – the 19 countries using the euro – it hit 5.1% in January, the highest level since records began in 1997. Here, the Guardian’s foreign correspondents report on how inflation is denting living standards around the world. US For years New Yorkers looking for a cheap eat have been able to rely on a $1 slice of pizza. Not for long. As inflation soars even the cheap slice is under pressure and many of the city’s famous pizza shops are imposing price hikes to combat rising costs for everything from tomato sauce and pepperoni to labour and cardboard pizza boxes. US inflation hit its fastest pace since 1982 in January, pushing prices up at a 7.5% annual rate, the third straight month in which inflation exceeded an annualised rate of 6%. Supply chain issues coupled with rising demand continue to inflate the price of fuel, rent, food, and other essentials. The average price of a used car in the US was $28,205 (£20,782) at the end of December, according to Cox Automotive, the first time the median price of a second-hand vehicle has surpassed $28,000. Price rises have hit everyone but inflation hits poorer Americans hardest. The lowest-earning fifth of Americans already spend 83% of their income on housing, according to the labor department’s Consumer Expenditure Survey, and can ill-afford increases in rents, let alone fuel, food, and other essentials. The Federal Reserve is now preparing to raise interest rates in the hope of taming soaring prices. But with inflation surging worldwide it remains to be seen how soon, or whether, the central bank will succeed. Dominic Rushe in New York Italy Italians have been feeling the knock-on effects of inflation mostly in their utilities bills, with gas and electricity costs rising by more than 50% this winter. In turn, the high energy costs have made it more expensive to run factories and transport goods, hence price rises have also been felt in other areas, such as food and manufactured goods. Preliminary data from Istat, Italy’s statistics agency, earlier this month showed inflation rose by 3.9% during 2021, hitting 4.2% in December – the highest rise in over a decade. The Bank of Italy predicts inflation at 2.8% this year, although businesses are forecasting higher price rises at 3.2%. Italy has not produced nuclear energy for more than three decades and is extremely dependent on energy imports. “We are highly dependent on imported energy, hence why from this point of view Italy is more vulnerable than other countries,” said Marcello Messori, an economics professor at Luiss University in Rome. “In the short term, there will be a great impact on utilities’ bills,” he added, while forecasting that Europe’s green and digital transition plan could impact prices further down the line. “I am in favour of the two transitions but in Europe we are under-assessing the possible medium-term impact.” Angela Giuffrida in Rome Germany Inflation in Germany is currently around 4.9%, down on December’s 5.3% – which was only the second time it has exceeded 5% since reunification in 1990 – and is expected to remain high at least until the middle of the year. The Bundesbank referred to a ‘consistent extremely high price pressure’ in its January monthly report. There are multiple reasons behind the inflation rate, including supply chain issues, price rises to reflect losses linked to the pandemic, high demand for specific goods and services coupled with a labour shortage, as well as a rise in the VAT rate, after it was temporarily reduced to help businesses last year. The most shocking hikes are for heating, petrol, diesel, electricity, and oil – which according to the consumer price index have increased on average by 18.3%, butin some cases by as much as 50%. On the grocery bill, consumers are paying around 6% more, but with big differences between goods. Potatoes are the big surprise, having risen by around 43% year on year, mainly due to bad weather conditions. Other food stuffs such as tomatoes, salad, milk, salad, onions and eggs have recorded considerable price rises of between 5% and 20%. In general, imports to Germany have increased in price by around 21% – the steepest rise since 1980 – mainly due to supply chain issues linked to the pandemic. While wages are expected to rise too, with trade unions insisting on appropriate increases , lower-income families are being hardest hit. Despite a 20% rise in the minimum wage, many are not expected to feel enough of a lift to be able to make up for the higher cost of living. Kate Connolly in Berlin Australia For a commodity-based economy, Australia faces more of an uphill battle to keep a lid on prices than most. Consumer inflation accelerated at the end of 2021 to 3.5%, while the underlying rate watched by the central bank – Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) – rose to its highest level since mid-2014 at 2.6%. Record high fuel prices were one factor. The RBA’s monk-like forbearance to resist lifting the official cash rate from its record low 0.1% until wages start to rise at least 3% annually will be under the spotlight with financial markets already pricing in the first hike in rates by June. By next February, the rate could be as high as 1.25%, futures indicate. A rate-rise delay until June, though, would at least avoid embarrassing the federal government, which must hold a national election on or before 21 May. Private economists are less hawkish but doubt the RBA can hold off beyond August. One issue to watch is whether the jobless rate dips below 4% which would be the lowest since 1974 although there are many reasons why wages growth may remain restrained including the relatively weak bargaining position of labour. Peter Hannam in Sydney Pakistan The global wave of inflation has brought Pakistan to its knees. The rate soared to 13% in January, just as the national currency, the rupee, is rapidly devaluing. Food prices have skyrocketed by 17%, leaving lower- and middle-income families, who already spent half their income on food, struggling to cope. The country has recorded a recent 5% rise in the price of potatoes, a 4.5% rise in the price of chicken and a 2.5% rise in the cost of bananas. The price of cooking oil has risen by 27% in the past three years and sugar now costs more than fuel. In January, for the first time in Pakistan’s history, petrol hit 150 rupees a litre (63 pence), a hike of around 40%. Local policy decisions have aggravated global pressures. The government has agreed cost-cutting measures with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in order to secure a $6bn bailout, which includes levies on petrol and higher energy tariffs and higher taxes. The cost of electricity in Pakistan is already double that of its neighbours India and Bangladesh. Amid mass discontent and anger at the now unaffordable cost of living, Prime Minister Imran Khan recently said that the impact of inflation “kept me up at night” but insisted it was a “global phenomenon”. An anti-inflation protest march is now being planned by the political opposition. Hannah Ellis-Petersen in DelhiInflation in the US climbed to its highest level in 40 years in January, with prices rising by 7.5% from a year ago, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported on Thursday. The rise in the consumer price index (CPI) survey – which measures the costs of a wide variety of goods – was the largest since February 1982. CPI rose 0.6% from December, higher than expected but still down significantly from last October when inflation rose 0.9% on a monthly basis. Inflation in America has been driven higher by soaring demand and a lack of supply caused by Covid-19’s global impact on trade. Price rises for food, electricity, and shelter were the largest contributors to the increase. The food index rose 0.9% in January following a 0.5% increase in December. The energy index also increased 0.9% over the month. After stripping out food and fuel – whose prices are volatile – inflation still climbed 6% on an annual basis. A nationwide shortage of used cars also continued to drive the rise. Used cars prices were 40.5% higher in January compared to a year ago. Housing costs rose 4.4% from a year ago. The Federal Reserve has signaled that it intends to raise interest rates at its meeting in March in an effort to dampen spending and bring down prices. In a note to investors, Oxford Economics argues the latest CPI news was likely to mean rate rises in the months ahead. “The Fed sees its top priority as taming inflation. These strong price data raise the prospect of the Fed starting its tightening cycle with a 50bps [basis points] rate hike at its March policy meeting, followed by consecutive rate hikes at the subsequent meetings,” it wrote. Rising prices have battered Joe Biden’s approval ratings even as the jobs market has roared back from its pandemic slump. The US economy grew at 5.5% last year, the strongest growth rate since 1984, and more than 1.6m new jobs have been added in the last three months. But with gas prices, food and housing prices still rising, just 37% of Americans approve of how he is handling the economy, according to a poll conducted by Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research. Speaking in Virginia, Biden acknowledged the price hike news: “I know food prices are up. We’re working to bring them down. I’m going to work like the devil to bring gas prices down,” he said. On Wednesday ahead of the latest CPI release, the White House warned the latest consumer prices snapshot could be high. “We expect a high yearly inflation reading in tomorrow’s data,” said Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary. “Above 7%, as I think some are predicting, would not be a surprise.” “What we’re looking at is recent trends … the inflationary increases are decreasing month to month,” Psaki said.Boris Johnson “broke lockdown laws” and has made the government “look distinctly shifty”, Sir John Major has said in a scathing attack on the prime minister’s character. In a wide-ranging speech in London, the former Conservative prime minister also condemned Johnson for eroding public trust in British democracy, showing contempt for ministerial standards, damaging the UK’s international reputation, and attempted assaults on civil rights. Below are Major’s main charges against the prime minister and his government. Johnson and his No 10 officials ‘broke lockdown law’ “Brazen excuses were dreamed up. Day after day the public was asked to believe the unbelievable. Ministers were sent out to defend the indefensible, making themselves look gullible or foolish. “Collectively this has made the government look distinctly shifty, which has consequences that go far beyond political popularity. No government can function properly if its every word is treated with suspicion. “The charge that there is one law for the government, and one for everyone else is politically deadly – and it has struck home.” Johnson appeared to have contempt for ministerial standards “He chose to ignore critical reports on his ministers; rejected advice from his independent adviser on ministerial standards – who resigned; and attempted – but failed – to overturn a unanimous standards select committee report that condemned the behaviour of a parliamentary colleague and friend. “It may be possible to find excuses for each of these lapses – and others – but all of them, taken together, tell a different tale.” Johnson has eroded public trust in politics “Trust in politics is at a low ebb, eroded by foolish behaviour, leaving a sense of unease about how our politics is being conducted. Too often, ministers have been evasive, and the truth has been optional.” Ministers have damaged the UK’s international reputation “If trust in our word is lost overseas, we may no longer be able to work effectively with friends and partners for mutual benefit – or even security. Unfortunately, that trust is being lost, and our reputation overseas has fallen because of our conduct.” Proposals to stop protests risk undermining civil liberties “Although they may be uncomfortable for any government (…) protest marches are a safety valve for free speech. Democracy should treat them with care. Such a denial of civil rights is wrong in principle, and in practice.”“ Proposals to criminalise migrants are ‘immoral’ “Can it really be a crime to be frightened, homeless, desperate, destitute, fleeing from persecution, or war, or famine, or hardship; and to cross half the world on foot and dangerous waters in an unsafe boat, in the hope of finding a better life? (…) Surely, to seek sanctuary from an unbearable life cannot – morally – be treated as a crime? The government should stop attacks on the judiciary “When a leading tabloid labelled judges ‘enemies of the people’ the justice secretary did not leap to their defence. Other cabinet ministers publicly disparaged ‘lefty lawyers’, ‘activist lawyers’, and attacked judges for ‘exceeding their authority’. “Public denunciation of judges and lawyers gives credence to the belief that the government wishes to usher in a compliant judiciary. It should back off.”Africa is transitioning out of the pandemic phase of its Covid-19 outbreak and moving towards a situation where it will be managing the virus long term, the World Health Organization’s regional head for Africa has said. “The pandemic is moving into a different phase,” Dr Matshidiso Moeti said. “We think that we’re moving now, especially with the vaccination expected to increase, into what might become a kind of endemic living with the virus.” Moeti also said the number of Covid infections in Africa could be seven times higher than official data suggests, and deaths from the virus two to three times higher. “We’re very much aware that our surveillance systems problems that we had on the continent, with access to testing supplies, for example, have led to an underestimation of the cases,” Moeti told a briefing. Moeti’s comments confirm what has increasingly been suspected by a number of researchers who have been working to understand the so-called “Africa paradox” - why official reporting from African countries had failed to capture the same distribution of infections and deaths as elsewhere in the world. Some have suggested that the much younger age profile across countries on the continent may have contributed, but a consensus is coalescing around significant undercounting in countries with weak health surveillance systems that have failed to pick up both infections and deaths over the past two years. According to a tally by Johns Hopkins University, recorded infections across Africa stood at more than 11 million as of 10 February and deaths at 250,000. If the WHO’s estimates are correct the real figures could be nearer 70 million and 750,000 respectively. Concern about undercounting have been driven by a number of studies and serological surveys – not least in South Africa, which has one of the continent’s most sophisticated disease surveillance – that suggest higher rates of infection than previously thought. African is the latest region that the WHO has suggested may be transitioning out of the pandemic phase and moving towards a more stable situation. The WHO’s European regional director, Hans Kluge, said last week that the continent could soon enter a “long period of tranquillity” that amounted to a “ceasefire” in the pandemic thanks to the less severe Omicron variant, high levels of immunity and the arrival of warmer spring weather. His upbeat assessment said the 53-country region, which includes the UK, was in a position of higher protection that could “bring us enduring peace”, even if a new, more virulent variant than Omicron should emerge. He said Europe had recorded 12 million new cases in a week, the highest single weekly total of the pandemic, with about 22% of all tests returning a positive result.I was 14 when my mother and grandmother announced that I was going to have my clitoris, my labia majora and my labia minora cut out. They said that if I resisted I was a coward. In my culture, the worst thing you can be called is a coward. I was never naive. I grew up as a Maasai girl in Kenya in the 60s and 70s. At some point in my childhood, I became aware that there was a rite of passage into womanhood. I was to have my vulva mutilated by an elderly woman using a blunt instrument. But I was also part of the first generation of Maasai girls to be sent to school, where I met girls from communities who didn’t practise female genital mutilation (FGM). I learned from them that you can grow to be an adult with your vulva intact. That was what I wanted. I went back to my family and explained I would not be mutilated. My father sided with me: he said it was not necessary. But the village taunted me and said they did not know what to call me if I was not cut: “Would we call you a girl or a woman? Do you want to remain a child all your life? Whom will you marry?” On the day I was mutilated, I was woken up at three in the morning and taken outside, naked, because the villagers believed that if I felt the morning breeze on my body it would cool me and I would bleed less. I saw that the object they would cut me with was not sharp. I was not offered any anaesthesia, but I was told not to cry – your father is in the house, they said, and he should never hear you cry. I was determined to show I was not a coward, so I tried very hard not to show any emotion. As a result, I was cut deeper and I could not stop bleeding. I drifted in and out of consciousness and I was extremely dizzy when I woke up. What replaces your vulva after FGM is extreme scar tissue. I was forbidden from putting my legs together, since the scar tissue could fuse. They tied my legs apart with rope so that they would not touch, even when I slept. I had to remain like that for days as I healed. After being mutilated, I made myself a promise: I would do everything I could to stop this ever happening to another girl. My daughters, and all the daughters of the Maasai, would not be cut. In 1975, the overwhelming majority of women in Narok county in Kenya were genitally mutilated. So, when I and some others decided to act, we knew we had to approach this fight carefully. Usually, a girl is mutilated as preparation for an early marriage, so we went from village to village explaining that, if girls went to school and were not married (and mutilated) at a young age, they would be able to earn money and support their family. We explained that vaginas are sufficiently elastic to squeeze out a baby – but scar tissue cannot stretch in the same way. When a woman tries to push a baby through this scarring, the baby often becomes trapped and is deprived of oxygen. As a result, a disproportionate number of children from communities that practise FGM are brain damaged. We told people that this would be much less likely to happen if we stopped FGM. We continue to run education programmes and workshops, talking not only to women, but also men. If we do not persuade men – and teach them to love their women and their bodies – we cannot win. V-Day, the precursor organisation to One Billion Rising, helped me to set up a safe house for girls and young women who refused to be mutilated. I have run it for almost 20 years. When I began this work, some people reacted with fury. There were times when I was afraid for my safety. Not long ago, I got a call from a woman who told me of a young girl who wanted to resist cutting, but was being forced by her parents. By the time I arrived, she had been buried in a shallow grave after bleeding to death. I made sure the police investigated. Her father is now serving nine years in prison for manslaughter – but I know we need to do more. When women stand up and defend themselves, it works. According to the 2014 Kenya Demographic Health Survey, 21% of women continue to experience FGM – a huge drop over the past 50 years, but still far too many. No woman is free until all women are free. I am one part of a global struggle – one that unites the 1 billion women across the planet who have been beaten, raped or mutilated. I invite you to join us. Agnes Pareyio is an activist for One Billion Rising and V-Day, the founder of the Tasaru Ntomonok Initiative and V-Day Safe Houses for the Girls. She is the head of the Anti-FGM Board in Kenya and is running for the Kenyan parliamentHow long ago the Abortion Act of 1967 seems now, and yet the struggle for a woman’s right to control her own body never ends. Time and again this basic principle comes under attack from rightwing and religious lobbies forever seeking to limit and reverse it. Now they are at it yet again. As the prime minister dashes to roll back all coronavirus legislation a month early to mollify his rebels, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, and his junior minister, Maggie Throup, will decide whether to maintain the abortion laws that were introduced as part of emergency Covid laws, allowing women to request earlier and easier terminations at home. If Javid and Throup instead return to the old abortion laws that were in place before Covid, where women had to have an in-person clinic visit in order to get an abortion, thousands of women will have to chase scarce clinical appointments, forcing many to wait beyond the time limit for medical abortions. Amid the horror of Covid, some good has come out of the experience of coping with the pandemic. The NHS found imaginative ways to reach more patients despite its desperately overstretched resources. One of the great successes was ensuring that women locked down at home had easy access to abortion. Part of the 2020 Coronavirus Act suspended the old 1967 abortion rules and allowed women within their first 10 weeks of pregnancy to telephone a clinician to request the two pills for a medical abortion to take at home. Women using this service were asked if they were sure of their dates, certain of their decision and had no other medical problems. To obey the law, the usual two signatures from doctors were later added to the form. The pills were sent to most women by post, but women seeking an abortion could still opt to visit a clinic to talk to someone in person. Professor Lesley Regan, former head of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and chair of its abortion taskforce, says the at-home system has been “hugely successful, with shorter waiting times, when every week of pregnancy brings a greater risk.” She talks of how it helps deprived women at home with little access to transport, those living in isolated rural areas and those without childcare. The British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) says telemedicine helps women on zero-hours contracts who risk losing work if forced to visit a clinic. Home abortion also protects “women threatened with domestic violence who fear attending treatment will alert their abuser to their pregnancy”. Around 100,000 women a year in England and Wales are now using this quicker route to an early abortion. If the law reverts in just two weeks time, Prof Regan, BPAS and all the abortion providers are horrified that thousands will suddenly need non-existent clinic appointments. “We couldn’t do it. It’s impossible,” Regan says. The main abortion providers, writing to warn the health minister, say the delays caused will mean “a significant increase in the numbers of women needing surgical procedures at later gestations”, with an impossible strain on NHS theatre capacity. These concerns are backed by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, the Royal College of Midwives, the BMA and the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare. They warn it will cost millions to reopen clinics pointlessly – and there are no extra staff available. Telemedicine has exposed the absurdity of the 1967 rule that requires two doctors to sign a form. BPAS says, “We have doctors, who are in short supply, sitting in rooms all day just signing forms for women they haven’t seen, instead of treating patients in need.” If waiting times for abortion rise, Nice, the NHS value-for-money arbiter, finds every day of delay in providing abortions costs another £1.6m. But the impact on women matters most. Abortions rose slightly during 2020, the first year of the pandemic, most among those suffering financially, according to official figures. Most women seeking abortions already have children: teen pregnancies have been falling this century. Women who lost income in the pandemic often seek an abortion because of a lack of money. The BPAS says many are avoiding this government’s draconian two-child benefit limit from harming their existing family. Jacob Rees-Mogg and Nadine Dorries are among the anti-abortion MPs who eagerly voted for those anti-natalist benefit cuts that ironically pushed more women into choosing abortions. Sad research findings across the developed western world show growing numbers of women having fewer children than they hoped to have: those countries with the best maternity leave and easiest childcare have the smallest gap between the number of children born and the number women wanted. This country, with among the highest childcare costs in the world and among the lowest benefits, doesn’t welcome babies. Neither Javid nor Throup have ever voted in favour of abortion rights, the BPAS notes. Javid voted against an amendment brought by Stella Creasy on the lack of progress on abortion rights in Northern Ireland, in favour of an anti-abortion amendment that would have criminalised women seeking abortions on the grounds of foetal sex, and in favour of Dorries’ amendment to stop abortion providers providing counselling to women. Meanwhile, Throup has voted against regulations introducing abortion to Northern Ireland. Women deserve better. Now Javid has just two weeks to decide whether to put extra pressure on the NHS by returning to the bad old abortion law, or free women to go on choosing earlier and easier terminations at home. A public consultation on the matter closed in the summer, but its findings remain secret. Ask the Department of Health and all they say, even at this 11th hour, is “We will keep the future of these provisions under review.” What of the vanished consultation? “It will be published in due course.” The fear is that abortion will become yet another victim of the prime minister’s culture war. The idea of a government headed by a philanderer presiding over abortion rights is beyond obscene. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistHas performance capture affected your physical condition? ajyates33 It’s kept me fit, especially the more physical roles like Caesar [in the Planet of the Apes films], who goes from an infant chimpanzee right through into adulthood. I’ve always been quite a physical person and enjoy mountaineering, climbing and cycling. But those roles take it out of you, for sure. How did your fellow actors react the first time you went “full Gollum”? chriskilby Gollum drives so many of the scenes. Peter Jackson was like: “How can we get an actor on set to give all that dramatic interaction?” It was a very different process to Elijah Wood and Sean Astin acting against a tennis ball on a stick. Now, performance capture has evolved into an industry standard. Actors who didn’t understand are getting excited about being able to transform into pretty much anything. Mowgli: Legend of the Jungle [2018, directed by Serkis] was a prime example of when the actors thought: I can really use my acting chops. It was great watching Benedict Cumberbatch, Cate Blanchett, Christian Bale and Naomie Harris capturing their movements and facial expressions on set to really make the animals come alive. Do you keep your spotty wetsuit on under your clothes at all times, just in case? Alex42 One of the great moments of wearing the magic suit is looking into the screen and seeing the avatar character move in real time. Wearing something you can move around in so easily is very liberating. It is a bit of a pain to get in and out of, but of course I take it off to wash it, otherwise it would be very smelly. If you had to live the rest your life with one of your performance-captured characters, who would make the best housemate? reddonkeyham Captain Haddock [from 2011’s The Adventures of Tintin] would be pretty hard to live with. Caesar would be more interesting to hang around. He’s constantly evolving to become more honourable and humanlike, but keeping his ape intelligence to try to make the world a better place. Living with Gollum would be a nightmare. You’d never be able to leave anything around because he’d steal it, he’d leave a mess everywhere and there would be lots of arguments. Plus, Gollum lives in a cave. You’ve got my vote in the next general election. Who’d do the best job in a post-Boris No 10 – Gollum, Caesar or Ian Dury? GuyEdweezil Any of them would do a better job! You were fantastic in 2002’s 24 Hour Party People. How does working with someone like Michael Winterbottom compare with big-budget Hollywood performance capture ape/wizard things? dylan37 Oh man, it was fantastically chaotic and messy, reliving the Haçienda days. Michael Winterbottom brought together this extraordinary cast and everybody really went for it: Sean Harris as Ian Curtis, John Simm as Bernard Sumner and Steve Coogan as Tony Wilson was an absolute triumph. Martin Hannett, who produced Joy Division and Happy Mondays, was the most brilliantly inspirational out-there character to play. Your portrayal of Ian Brady in 2006’s Longford was chilling and powerful. How do you prepare for such a challenging role? Jalmaak That was one of my most difficult roles. You have to find whatever shred of humanity you can, rather than just presenting them as an all-round awful human being. I read The Gates of Janus, the book Brady wrote in prison; his treatise on moral relativism. Psychopaths find ways of justifying their existence because they lack empathy, so they create their own moral reality. Brady said that one of the most beautiful things in his life was standing on the moors with Myra Hindley after committing those murders. The sense of being together made him feel truly validated and alive. So I had to think: what in my life has made me feel the most validated and alive? And that was witnessing my birth of my children. So you find ways of transcribing and translating your own emotional experiences to make these sorts of unpleasant characters real. You played opposite David Bowie in 2006’s The Prestige. Can you share any stories of the great man? questionforthekeeper He was one of the funniest human beings I’ve ever met. Plus he was a terrible corpser, so we spent a lot of time trying not to laugh. His portrayal of [inventor] Nikola Tesla was a joy to behold. He said: “My God, my Serbian accent sounds like I’m in ’Allo ’Allo!” He was very self-deprecating, but he was such an awesome human being, a wonderful artist and very inspirational. Have you done a sneaky Hitchcock-style, uncredited cameo in any of the films you’ve directed? HeseltinesEyebrows There’s a scene in 2021’s Venom: Let There Be Carnage where Woody Harrelson’s character steals a red Mustang in San Francisco that I decided would be my Hitchcockian moment. I was on crutches after breaking my hip skiing and I thought: “I could play a man on crutches crossing a road as a Mustang speeds towards him.” But because I was directing, I also had the luxury of looking at it afterwards and thinking: “That wasn’t a very good performance.” So I cut myself out of my own cameo. Given that your parental background is Iraqi and of Armenian descent, do you foresee a role that could bring your mixed culture to the fore? Alexxe Absolutely. One of my great ambitions is to create an autobiographical exploration of my father. He was from Iraq and, around about the time I was born in the mid-60s, helped build the Ibn Sina hospital in Baghdad with three other people. My mother brought my three older sisters – who’d all grown up in Baghdad – and me to live in England, but we would go back to Baghdad every year. During the Gulf war, there was a big diaspora of Iraqi people who escaped, so I have a lot of relatives and cousins who ended up in New Zealand, Canada, Los Angeles and Europe. I’m very much searching to tell a story about the existence of the Ibn Sina hospital. It was taken over by the Ba’ath party under Saddam Hussein’s regime and ended up being in the Green Zone used by the American military. I first saw you in the amazing 1999 BBC series Shooting the Past. Who would you be most star-struck by and why? allworthy My heroes are jazz musicians. The late-50s jazz, bebop, modal-jazz era is really magical for me. If I’d got to meet Miles Davis or John Coltrane it would have blown my mind. Plus, I think Anthony Hopkins is the most incredible actor, so I would love to meet and work with him. I really enjoyed your full read-through of The Hobbit during lockdown. What was it like to sit there for all those hours, reading for an audience you couldn’t see, at such a bleak time? JallenDM I did a Hobbitathon – a complete reading of The Hobbit in one sitting – to raise money for the NHS and another charity, Best Beginnings, who I am ambassador for. I wanted to tell a story that would take people on a great adventure, to keep their heads, minds and souls together. I thought it would be amazing for parents to sit their kids down, have some of peace of mind and let someone do a bit of Jackanory storytelling – for 11 hours. I had four two-minute breaks. I went through moments of hallucinations … there are whole passages that I don’t even remember reading because you just get into the zone. I’d get to the end of a paragraph and realise that it had been Gandalf speaking and I’d been reading it as Bilbo. But for people who were trapped indoors, Tolkien had written this incredible journey, so I wanted to take people along. My dad was wondering if you still play the saxophone? He played double bass with you on a Channel 4 programme, and also at one of your parties in Shoreditch back in the day when you were at the Lyric Theatre in Hammersmith. gemmcross My wife, Lorraine, and I lived in Shoreditch around the late 80s, when I was doing a CITV series called Streetwise about cycle dispatch couriers. We ended up living in – and having a number of parties at – one of the locations from the shoot; this great Victorian warehouse, in pre-hipster Shoreditch, when there was one sandwich shop and nothing else. Going back to my jazz fascination, I do love playing both tenor and alto sax. It’s a great way to escape. My children have started learning piano, so it’s nice to jam with them. In the first film that I directed, 2017’s Breathe, I actually played on the soundtrack, composed by Nitin Sawhney. Nitin and I are still great friends and jam together. After 2010’s Sex &amp; Drugs &amp; Rock &amp; Roll, I became very good friends with Chaz Jankel, the piano player from the Blockheads, and did a few gigs with him. So I’m always looking for an excuse to play. I take you for a beer drinker. Which is your favourite and do prefer dark or light? Mr_Righteous I’m a more of a lager person. If I’m walking in the Chiltern hills on a Sunday, I may stop in at the pub for a local ale. But, on the whole, I’m mostly a wine drinker. Has anyone asked you for Michael Sheen’s autograph? TeeDubyaBee Ha! No. But a funny thing did once happen … I got off a plane coming back from LA and the child of Kate Beckinsale [who was once married to Sheen] ran up to me, thinking I was her dad. I’d love to do something with Michael. There’s a Man United manager too – Ole Gunnar Solskjær – who people have said I look like. What’s your favourite sandwich? reddonkeyham I’m very happy with a smoked salmon and cream cheese panini. Where do you keep the Bafta you won for Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema in 2020? What advice can you give aspiring young actors? TurangaLeela2 I’ve got it in the basement where I sit and work. My three children are at the beginning of their acting careers. I say to them: know why you act. What do you want to bring to the world with your craft? Have a direction and a mission. Make it not about fame and celebrity. Be in a position where you can create your own stories. You can make movies on your iPhone to get your story out there, so see yourself as a storyteller. Don’t just wait for the phone to ring and be cast in someone else’s work. Is all the world a Serkis? GuardIAm I feel very lucky to have worked with Peter Jackson, because he opened up a whole new arena with the technology of performance capture. It’s 20 years since we did The Lord of the Rings. Performance capture is one of the most exciting tools for an actor. It means that you can become anything regardless of your physicality, shape, size, skin colour, sex … Anyone can become anything. So, yes, in that respect, all the world is a Serkis! • Public voting for the 2022 EE Rising Star award at this year’s Baftas is now openThis is a short book about a big subject, with a thorny history stretching from the Spartans and Plato’s Republic, all the way to present-day science and policymaking. A glance at the index gives some idea of its scope. Ancient Greece rubs shoulders with Avengers: Infinity War and the “Do Not Resuscitate” notices of the Covid-19 pandemic with the doctors’ trial at Nuremberg. It takes patience to trace the complicated web linking these ideas, and Rutherford does so with much-needed nuance and an absence of alarmism. “For just over a century, we have referred to the deliberate crafting of society specifically by biological design with a word which was for half of its existence regarded as desirable, and for the other half, poisonous,” he writes. As a geneticist and author of books such as How to Argue with a Racist, Rutherford aims to distil a rounded, scientific analysis from the deeply tainted and overheated subject of eugenics. He begins with a potentially controversial admission: “All science is political.” His own undergraduate study took place at the Galton Laboratory at University College London, an institution with a unique perspective on how scientific endeavour can be sullied by political ideology. Francis Galton was the father of modern eugenics. He gave a name – from the Greek, roughly meaning “well born” – to a discipline that aimed to improve humanity at the population level. It was an intention shared by many, but Galton’s name was formally removed from UCL premises in 2020 because of the role he’d played. “Galton’s racism was deep, consistent and robust, even for his era,” Rutherford writes. “It was explicitly White supremacist.” Like so many before and after him, Galton’s idea of improving humanity meant removing people who were different from him. And, after just a few decades, “the pathway of eugenics led directly to the gates of Auschwitz”. It’s worth remembering how many great men and women of history held such views. Charles Darwin resented the propagation of “the weak”. Marie Stopes once advocated sterilisation of the “hopelessly rotten and racially diseased”. DH Lawrence daydreamed about leading “the sick, the halt and the maimed” into a “lethal chamber”. There’s a page on Winston Churchill’s publicly stated views, and they are eye-watering. It shouldn’t need saying, but does, against a babble of “cancel culture” and “erasing history”, that historical “heroes” are complicated. It might also help to explain why some communities are slow to trust science. So, what about the “troubling present” of the subtitle? Rutherford offers an excellent brief explanation of the young science of genetics, from the gene editing technology CRISPR-Cas9 and embryo selection to IQ, heritability and complex polygenic traits. He is interested in the potential for gene therapy to eradicate specific diseases with roots in a single gene, such as cystic fibrosis, but deeply cynical about the idea that “screening” for intelligence will ever be possible, or desirable, and passionate about the waste of resources involved in pursuing it “when we already know how to improve the intelligence of populations with better education, healthcare and access to physical exercise”. Given that, it’s frustrating that he tiptoes around some of the more difficult questions involved in genetic medicine. For example: “Every potential mother now has a choice to decide if a life is worth living,” he writes. “It’s an irreducibly difficult and human one, and although science can furnish us with a context, it doesn’t provide a means for making a decision about the value of something as rich as a human life.” If all science is political, should scientists be forced to consider the potential consequences of their work? If we agree to eradicate conditions caused by genetic differences, what happens when somebody powerful decides to get rid of autism? Or deafness? Will today’s genetics pioneers be tomorrow’s heroes or villains? Control is persuasive, sensible and ultimately reassuring, but it is not complacent. We shouldn’t worry about a genetically modified master race, it seems to say, but we must pay attention to the 19th-century-style eugenics happening in our times: from sex-selective abortion in countries such as India and China to reports of the involuntary sterilisation of women in US immigration detention centres. To know history is “to inoculate ourselves against its being repeated”, Rutherford argues. From that perspective, this book is a shot worth having. • Control: The Dark History and Troubling Present of Eugenics by Adam Rutherford is published by W&amp;N (£12.99) in the UK and by Hachette ($36.99) in Australia in June. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply“Cinema is about change,” says Hope Dickson Leach. “We watch people transform. That’s the heart of the Jekyll and Hyde story.” In February, Dickson Leach’s hybrid production of Robert Louis Stevenson’s gothic classic Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde is taking over Edinburgh’s Leith theatre. In an ambitious crisscrossing of media, her team will be simultaneously creating a live theatrical event and a livestreamed cinema screening. The combined footage from the live shows will later be edited into a feature film. “Our hunger for storytelling is different now,” the director says of the colossal project. “Audiences want an event.” Dickson Leach is in her office in Leith theatre, bundled up in a coat, scarf and bright bobble hat. “Half of the theatre has no heating,” she says, her breath visible over Zoom. “I do have three heaters going, but it normally doesn’t warm up until lunchtime. Then at least I can take my hat off.” The winter sun is blinding through the large windows behind her. As she talks animatedly, she flits in and out of shadow and silhouette. More than 120 film adaptations have been made of the Scottish author’s 1886 novella about an experimental scientist attempting to separate his good and wicked sides. But no version has been handled quite like this. With her unique blend of theatre and film, Dickson Leach is using the story to interrogate masculinity and control. “It’s a brilliant vehicle for looking at some of our most contemporary villains,” she says, “these enormous men in power. These monsters.” For the audience at the live event in Leith, the experience should be fairly simple: they sit down and watch a movie in the auditorium. What makes it unique is that the movie is being made around them. “The whole building is the set,” says Dickson Leach. The audience will walk through the set on their way in and get glimpses of the cast and crew as they move about the building, using the nooks and crannies of the theatre as offices, laboratories and gentlemen’s clubs. As it happens, the action will be live vision-mixed on screen. “It’s being performed, shot and edited right in front of them.” The following weekend, the footage will be shown as-live in Scottish cinemas. After that, the team will edit it into a feature film to be broadcast on Sky Arts, which will be scored by electronic artist Hudson Mohawke – who is also creating some tracks for the live show. At that point, Dickson Leach says, they’ll have footage from all three nights, as well as some rehearsal material. “It means we get to preview it,” she says, “like a theatre does. When we watch it with a live audience, we’ll see which bits lag, which scenes we need to cut. All of that stuff will have been tested.” In rewriting the story, alongside Glasgow-based writer Vlad Butucea, Dickson Leach has moved the setting from London to Edinburgh. Many critics have suggested that the Scottish capital is the actual backdrop depicted in Stevenson’s book. “If you read it, you just do see Edinburgh,” Dickson Leach says. “It didn’t feel like a leap.” By setting the piece in the Scottish capital she is injecting the story with the history of the city, particularly the ideas of inequality and hidden darkness that cascade through the book. “Edinburgh is the city of kings and rulers,” she says, “but this is a city where people lived underground for centuries, under the Royal Mile.” On her lockdown walks, she learned more deeply about the city’s past. “I kept going to Warriston cemetery. It’s completely overgrown and the graves are falling down, and there’s also this flat bit of grass in the middle where we’d go and have picnics. Then we discovered it’s a plague pit.” And the beautiful gardens next to Princes Street, she says, used to be a lock where they’d dunk women accused of witchcraft. Echoing the duality of the book, Edinburgh is a city of contrasts. “Monuments are built on dead bodies. Scars of horrific behaviour are built into the city itself.” Around her in the theatre, the film set is being built. She switches from a laptop to her phone and shows me around, pointing out which scenes are going to take place where. “This is being made to look like it’s all falling apart,” she says, picking at a peeling wall. “They’re building a set of stairs there.” We wave to the builders. “Then down here,” she says, “that’s going to be the lab.” At the moment, everything’s covered in dust and plywood. Only small details give away what it will really look like. She approaches an ornately carved door. “That’s for the gentleman’s club,” she says, zooming in. “It’s going to be shot in black and white so that gives us a nice licence. You don’t have to worry about colour and you can really look into texture.” She walks past a few metres of maroon wallpaper. “When you put this in black and white, it looks a bit like lace.” Once the show is over, the people who run the theatre have said they can leave up a lot of their additions to the space. “The building carries all the stories of the productions that have been here before.” The process of picking out various rooms for the right scenes seems fun, but also incredibly complicated. “We have cameras for one scene here,” she says, pointing down a corridor on the left, “and then the next scene is two floors up on the other side of the building.” They’ve got six cameras to travel around with, sometimes changing lenses between scenes. “We’ve built in intervals to give us a chance to pull it off.” When she was younger, Dickson Leach was part of the National Youth Theatre, and at Edinburgh University she made theatre in her spare time. Then film took over. Her thesis film The Dawn Chorus (2007) premiered at Sundance festival, and her debut feature The Levelling debuted at Toronto 10 years later, winning universal acclaim and a Bafta Scotland award for best screenplay. So when the National Theatre of Scotland, who are also behind Jekyll and Hyde, asked her to work with them on a piece during lockdown, she embraced the chance to work again with the stage. Called Ghost Light, and shown as part of the Edinburgh international festival, it was a love letter to theatres, leaping off the idea of the lights left on when a theatre goes dark. It was wonderful, she says, “working with them and falling back in love with theatre and the way it’s constructed”. Her interest in the creation of theatre and film, and what makes them distinct from one another, is inspired in part by previous work she’s seen that breaks convention and genre. She describes watching the Wooster Group’s Hamlet, in which the experimental New York theatre company performs alongside a projection of the 1964 stage production starring Richard Burton. “It triggered something in my brain,” she says, “this interrogation between the forms.” Over the lockdowns, her interest grew, but nothing she saw got as deep into the amalgamation as she wanted. “Filmed theatre has been being made for years,” she says. “But a hybrid has to be a conversation. Is there a place in the middle of film and theatre that is neither or both? That is the tension you have to embrace. And that is the central question of Jekyll and Hyde: how can you be two things at once?” The word “hybrid” may have Frankensteinian connotations of something abhorrent, but when considering the blend of storytelling forms, it carries a sense of elevation. Does she see it as one or the other: good or bad? “I think a hybrid is a good thing,” she says with certainty. “If you’re positioning it as a monstrous thing, doesn’t that belong to a school of thought where purity is good? Isn’t that the Boris Johnson kind of 100% British thinking? The idea that hybridity is to be feared?” Instead, she argues, this liminal space is something to be both celebrated and investigated. It seems her view aligns with Stevenson’s. When the author was asked if the duality within the book was really an allegory for one thing or another, he refused to clarify. “Everything is true,” he wrote, “only the opposite is true, too; you must believe both equally or be damned.” The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde screens as-live in select cinemas across the UK from 27 February.Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, has accused Boris Johnson of announcing an end to England’s Covid restrictions as a blatant attempt to “distract and deflect” attention from the partygate crisis. Yousaf said the policy appeared to have been cooked up at Downing Street with little scientific or expert support. The prime minister had failed to notify the UK’s devolved governments about the move, a signal it was a hasty political decision. “This wasn’t a thought-out policy backed up by public health expert advice, it was a dead cat thrown on the dispatch box of the House of Commons in order to distract and deflect,” Yousaf told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. He said the Scottish government, which sets its own policies on Covid restrictions, had asked for clarification about the basis of Johnson’s decision but had not yet had any. It had no plans to follow suit, he added. “Since this decision was made – and it was a unilateral decision, one that wasn’t discussed with any of the other three nations of the UK – we’ve asked for that public health advice and none has been forthcoming. “And I think we should just be frank … This was clearly an attempt to deflect scrutiny away from the prime minister’s behaviour.” Johnson told MPs he expected to end England’s self-isolation rules for those infected with, or exposed to, Covid this month, a full month earlier than the 24 March date currently set out in the regulations. A legal requirement to self-isolate will be replaced by unenforceable advice to do so. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, is due to publish a comprehensive plan on a phased end to Covid restrictions on 22 February. She announced on Thursday that pupils and teachers in secondary schools in Scotland would no longer need to wear face coverings in classrooms from 28 February. Face masks in schools and physical distancing rules in enclosed spaces have been mandatory in Scotland. Prof Andrew Watterson, a public health expert at Stirling University, said Johnson’s proposals were a “leap in the dark” and were out of step with policy across Europe. It would be unwise for Scotland to follow the prime minister’s lead, he said. “It’s almost a big-bang approach by the UK government, a leap in the dark,” he told BBC Radio Scotland on Thursday. “It’s not measured in terms of gradually relaxing the controls, it’s a big leap. But there’s also confusion because it’s quite clear that what’s being called for, and even the prime minister has said this, is not an end to self-isolation, it’s an end to the regulation about it.” The Scottish Conservatives have argued that Sturgeon’s government needs to lift its restrictions sooner, to help businesses recover and allow life to return to normal. They argued it was contradictory for children to wear face coverings for seven hours a day in school while their parents could sit in a pub or office in close proximity to others without face masks. The conflict between the two parties escalated after the Tories complained that Scotland’s chief medical officer, Prof Sir Gregor Smith, had retweeted a political attack by Yousaf on Johnson, in breach of civil service rules on impartiality. In that tweet, Yousaf made the allegation that the prime minister wanted to “distract and deflect”. Smith apologised on Thursday lunchtime, and withdrew his retweet after acknowledging Yousaf’s was political. Russell Findlay, a Scottish Tory MSP, said Sweden was moving in the same direction as Johnson. “Nobody wants to cling on to being under these restrictions for any longer than is necessary,” he said. “Thanks to the booster [vaccination] we are now in a position to move forward and try to live with the pandemic and manage it in a more measured way.”Dame Cressida Dick has “absolutely no intention” of standing down, she said on Wednesday, and maintains that she has been leading the Metropolitan police “very well”. The commissioner denied she was “complacent” or “arrogant” on Thursday, insisting she had transformed the force which has been hit by a series of scandals. Dick is under intense pressure from London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, since last week’s revelations of officers at Charing Cross police station sending a barrage of messages that were racist and Islamophobic, and bragged aboutviolence toward women. On Wednesday, he insisted Dick must produce a compelling new plan to turn Scotland Yard around. Otherwise, he will publicly declare he has lost confidence in her – which government sources say should lead to her resignation. Dick used a phone-in show on BBC Radio London to launch what could be either her fightback or a swan song for her tenure, which has been dogged by scandals and controversy since she started the role in 2017. She said: “I have absolutely no intention of going and I believe that I am, and have been actually for the last five years, leading a real transformation in the Met. “We have a service now, which is I’m absolutely certain, more professional, fairer, more transparent, more accountable, and closer to its communities and more effective in, for example, reducing violent crime, which has been going down year on year on year in almost every category.” She added: “I have been leading the Met very well.” She claimed she had sent the mayor the plan he wanted last Friday, with Khan launching a barrage of criticism in media interviews days after. City Hall said he was studying the letter and expected to hear more at their next meeting, which is expected within days. Dick also claimed Khan had expressed glowing confidence in the Met just a few weeks ago. Crucially, she accepted she needed the confidence of both the home secretary and London mayor to continue. “My role depends absolutely on those two role holders, the mayor of London and the home secretary … having trust and confidence in me,” she said. “They extended my contract just a few months ago. I sat at a meeting with them just three weeks ago at which the mayor said he had never had more confidence in the Met’s ability to deliver.” She added: “My ability to do a good job depends on having an effective working relationship and a trusting relationship with them.” The mayor of London is also the police and crime commissioner for the capital. The home secretary appoints the commissioner and has to have due regard for the mayor’s views. Dick said she was “laying down the law” to the Met, telling officers “enough is enough” and that those with discriminatory attitudes should leave. She assured whistleblowers they were safe to report wrongdoing without fear of reprisal. “We’ve got a problem of too much very bad behaviour and I’m determined with my team to sort that out,” she said. She added: “I think about my leadership all the time. I am not an arrogant person, I do adapt, I do change. I have absolutely done my very, very, very best and I will continue to do so until the day I finish as commissioner.” Dick’s five-year term finishes in April and she is then scheduled to start a two-year extension, granted by the home secretary and agreed by Khan last September. Dick said the revelations about hate messages at Charing Cross between 2016 and 2018 angered her. Nine of those investigated are still in the Met and two were promoted, one of whom, Dick said, had no finding of wrongdoing against them. The commissioner said: “I am seething angry about the whole thing. I’m very glad that the four individuals have left. “There is no place in the Met for sexism or racism or homophobia, for abuse [of] trust or for bullying, and in the last few days I have gone out extremely strongly to my colleagues and told them enough is enough.” Dick said a review set up under Lady Casey – after a Met officer kidnapped, raped and murdered Sarah Everard – would also help further transform the Met.A “charming” fraudster who conned a millionaire he met on Tinder into handing him almost £150,000 has been jailed for four-and-a-half years. Richard Dexter, 38, boasted to his victim, Amrita Sebastian, that he was worth almost £7m, owned private jets, was involved in Hollywood studios and had bought a hot air balloon on a whim. Dexter, a father-of-two from Southsea in Hampshire, told Sebastian he was on the verge of a big windfall due to investments in biopharmaceutical technology. He convinced the Middle East-based executive he needed capital for a piece of equipment and duped her into sending him £141,500 in a series of payments, even spinning her lies while she was seriously ill in hospital. Robert Bryan, prosecuting, told Portsmouth crown court: “He claimed he was a successful businessman. He alluded to his immense wealth and private jets, expensive cars, and said he had more by way of interest in his investments than a doctor’s salary.” In one message to Sebastian, Dexter said: “Hey! Most of my friends did uni and have debts and worries and all earn £40,000 to £60,000. I bought a hot air balloon yesterday just because I could.” Sebastian, who travels to the UK twice a year from Dubai, met Dexter in August 2015 and he persuaded her he needed capital to start production of a piece of scientific equipment called a bioreactor paddle. He promised Sebastian he would pay her £100,000 as interest and over the course of 15 months, she made a series of payments as large as £68,000. She began to realise Dexter was not all he made out but felt “trapped” into keep on giving him money in the hope this would protect her cash. Finally she went to the police. Dexter’s grandmother also told the court he would regularly ask her to transfer him £10 because his “card wasn’t working”. One businessman Dexter had contact with, Roy Maunder, said: “His stories came across as fanciful ... He was a liar but a likeable character, he was a charmer.” Dexter was convicted of fraud, forging patent documents and perverting the course of justice. John Lucas, defending, said Sebastian’s money went on “general every day living” and to cover debts. But it also came out in court that he had paid £15,000 to a classic car company. Lucas added: “He had debts to close friends. He got himself into a pickle and was investing Bitcoin unsuccessfully. He’s a well-educated young man who made a big error of judgment.” Dexter, who sobbed during the hearing, told the court: “I haven’t been able to put into words what I would say to [Miss Sebastian] if she was here. “[I have not] had any courage to contact her or put it onto paper, but I’m very, very sorry to the point that I think about it every day, from the minute I wake up until I go to sleep. I can’t justify what I did.” Dexter’s partner, Hayley Jones, 37, wept and told the court her boyfriend of three-and-half years was a good father. Sentencing Dexter, Judge Timothy Mousley QC said: “I’m left in no doubt that dishonesty is a feature of your character and it is profound. What you did affected [Sebastian’s] mental health and you have never spared a thought for her.” A hearing to determine how money is paid back has been set for 7 April.A historic housing association is facing a revolt from tenants who are tired of living in cramped, damp and mouldy homes that some say are damaging children’s health. Residents of Evelyn Court estate in east London are calling on the Industrial Dwellings Society (IDS) to fix their homes after years of complaints about mouldy walls, and damaged furniture and clothes. The first Lord Rothschild was among philanthropists who founded IDS in 1885. The society built the estate of 320 flats in 1934 to ease overcrowding and offer affordable rents. But some of the flats are now overcrowded, say tenants, who include care workers, cleaners and security guards. About 120 have signed a petition demanding better conditions and improved responsiveness from their landlord, after the London Renters Union helped them to organise. They staged a protest on Wednesday outside the landlord’s offices. They complained that the landlord and its contractors usually offered only temporary fixes of washing and repainting walls and sills, which left fungus to reappear. Romaine Murray, 42, a healthcare assistant, said she had struggled with mould for over a decade and described the fungus as “a monster”. She said her eight-year-old son had breathing difficulties throughout his infancy and she had also developed breathing problems. “I feel not even an animal should live like this,” she said. “I come into the house and smell damp and mould. My clothes smell of mould. I work nine to five, I don’t depend on the government to pay my rent, and this is not liveable for a human being.” She said she felt let down by IDS. “The chairman of the board should come out and see what is happening. These are hardworking people on the estate. Our money has value. We mean something.” IDS is a community benefit society whose declared purpose is to “provide social housing for people who would not be able to afford commercial rent levels or who cannot afford to purchase outright their own homes”. The Rothschild family is understood to have ended its connection with IDS at least 20 years ago. Tenants described rents of between £600 and £800 a month for two-bedroom flats, which is less than half the market rates in the area. IDS’s latest annual report for 2020 shows a turnover of £10m and an operating surplus of more than £2m. It had cash balances of more than £1.8m and net assets of nearly £36m. Fatima, 43, a single mother of six who has lived on the estate for 19 years, has mould regrowing around her windows after recently cleaning it up. She said her 14-month-old daughter had a wheezy cough and had been diagnosed with bronchitis, and two of her sons had previously had the same diagnosis. “I give up,” she said. “IDS don’t help.” IDS said it was “incredibly sorry” to hear of residents’ concerns and it would “investigate and respond to each and every one”. It said: “The damp and mould issue is mainly due to the age and construction of the estate. While we have been proactively repairing individual cases as they were reported to us, we have been concentrating our already constrained budgets towards upgrading the fire safety features in the block, which can save lives on a large scale.” It said its spending had been restricted by loan covenants and it was “in discussions with lenders to release more money for us to use on improving our properties”. After the protest, it said: “We have now had our minds focused by our residents and vow to instil within our teams an ongoing culture of prompt and positive action towards repairs requests and complaints.” Social housing providers are facing growing pressure over unfit homes, and soaring energy prices have raised fears of worsening mould and damp problems as low-income tenants turn off heating and keep windows closed to save money. According to government figures, 13% of dwellings in the social rented sector failed to meet the decent homes standard. Last summer the government said unsafe conditions including mould and vermin exposed by ITV at housing run by the UK’s largest social landlord, Clarion, was “completely unacceptable”. Clarion apologised to residents at the Eastfields estate in south London. The Housing Ombudsman, which investigates tenants’ complaints to determine maladministration by landlords, told a House of Commons select committee that inquiries and complaints had “increased substantially”. The most common complaint was landlords’ failure to respond to requests for repairs. It said landlords were “fatalistic” about damp and mould and must stop blaming tenants’ “lifestyle choices”.On Tuesday, the US supreme court in its Merrill v Milligan decision, upheld Alabama’s racially gerrymandered congressional map, which see Black people represented in only 14% of congressional districts, despite making up about 27% of Alabama’s population. This ruling is reminiscent of the holding in the supreme court’s 1857 Dred Scott decision that Black people “had no rights which the white man was bound to respect”. Even though the two cases addressed two different situations, the overall disregard of the rights of Black people in America by the highest court in the country is the same. And just as the Dred Scott decision laid the groundwork for similar rulings that led to the continuation of white political power at the expense of Black political power, so too does the Miller case lay the groundwork for ending voting rights and political power for Black people in this country and a path towards white political power at all levels of government. Some reading this will gasp and accuse us of misusing an explosive pre-reconstruction case to make a racially charged argument. But the reality is that the conservative gang of justices, under the leadership of Chief Justice John Roberts, had already joined its pre-1954 brethren who had indoctrinated Jim Crow policies and the disenfranchisement of Black voters. First through the supreme court’s abolition of section 5 of the Voting Rights Act (VRA) in the 2013 Shelby v Holder, another Alabama case, they empowered every Republican-controlled state to enact a series of voter suppression laws targeting Black people with surgical precision. Next, through the 2018 Abbott v Perez case, the court took its first stab at the second protective tool in the VRA, section 2 by ruling to keep in place a blatantly racially gerrymandered map in Texas through what Justice Sonia Sotomayor called “a disregard of both precedent and facts at the cost of democracy”. Then again, in 2021, in the Brnovich v DNC case, the court finally took the knockout punch to the remaining power left in the VRA’s Section 2, by leaving two Arizona bills in place, which, as noted by Justice Elena Kagan in her dissent, “disproportionally affect minority citizens’ opportunity to vote”. So, Tuesday’s Merrill case is just a link in a chain of US supreme court decisions meant to end Black voting protections and political power in this country. Even though Chief Justice Roberts did not join his usual comrades, he signaled in his dissent that he intends to shred what is left of Section 2 when the full case reaches the supreme court. Moreover, by using the court’s shadow docket, the court has shown a greater sin in operation. While the conservative gang of six argue that they are simply staying the case because of the lower court’s ruling proximity to upcoming elections and not ruling on the merits of the case, Justice Kagan in her dissent makes it clear that the case “is one more in a disconcertingly long line of cases in which this court uses its shadow docket to signal or make changes in the law”. The conservative majority inappropriately stretched the meaning of “close election” to force the usage of a preliminary injunction standard found in Purcell v Gonzalez to create this unnecessary and hurtful outcome. In using the shadow docket in this manner, the conservative gang are not operating as judges evaluating the constitutionality of laws in a neutral manner, but have ignored legal precedent and become a partisan weapon of the Republican party. By allowing Alabama to use its racially gerrymandered congressional map to dilute Black voting power, the Republican party will continue to send six representatives to Congress next year instead of the five that would have probably resulted from fair maps. At a time when the Republican party is trying to take back power in the House of Representatives, it could not afford to lose a congressional seat in Alabama, and the conservative gang ensured this would not happen. In this regard, the current court is continuing a trend last seen when another conservative majority essentially decided the results of the 2000 presidential election, an election in which Florida’s results were affected by racially disproportionate challenges to voting rights on the basis of inaccurate accusations of criminal convictions. But just as history of the post-Reconstruction and segregation era supreme court shows the motivation and pathway of this current supreme court, history also shows the pathway to victory, and we believe the following three recommendations are critical, even if just a beginning. First, President Biden must appoint an attorney to the supreme court who has been a champion for civil and voting rights. When nominating an appointment to the supreme court, Lyndon B Johnson boldly chose a champion of civil rights to carry that legacy forward to the court without fear of reprisal. In doing so he was not being expedient but doing what the moment required. The moment requires President Biden to be unapologetically bold in the same manner and nominate a justice like Sherrilyn Ifill, Barbara Arnwine, Kristen Clarke or Judith Browne Dianis who all have great legal scholarship and have been defenders of democracy. Second, Democrats must expand the court. Article 3 of the US constitution does not specify how many justices are required on the supreme court. The Democrats in Congress should use their power given to them by Black voters and increase the number of justices from nine to 11. Third, we must have a serious discussion around and advocate for structural solutions which extend beyond which shape a gerrymandered map takes or which entities are entrusted to create those maps. We must immediately begin to rethink what majority rule means for historically attacked racial and ethnic groups, and how do we create mechanisms that address these limitations in ways that make majority rule and this entire democracy more fair and effective. Concepts such as those advocated by the civil rights giant Lani Guinier, such as proportional representation, should receive full debate. Roberts has always been hostile to such mechanisms, and in doing so is serving as an impediment not only to Black voting rights but to a more inclusive democracy that would benefit all voters. To make these recommendations a reality, Black people, other marginalized groups and allies must continue to organize at the local level, state level and national level to make clear our demands. History shows that through organizing, major court victories such as Brown v Board of Education, which ended segregation in schools, were won. In doing so, Black people in America can build political power that protects voting rights beyond an act that requires reauthorization every 20 years or so, and we can take our destinies out of the hands of people in power who still believe that a Black man – and woman – has no rights that a white man has to respect. April England-Albright is an attorney and the Black Voters Matter Fund (BVMF) legal director. Cliff Albright and LaTosha Brown are BVMF cofoundersSting has sold his back catalogue, featuring hits including Roxanne, Every Breath You Take and Englishman in New York, to Universal Music in a deal thought to be worth up to $300m (£221m). The 70-year old, who found global fame as a member of the Police in the late 1970s and early 80s before going solo, becomes the latest big name musician to cash in on a long and successful career. While the details of the deal were not disclosed, the volume and popularity of Sting’s work makes it one of the most valuable back catalogue transactions. “It felt natural to unite everything in one trusted home,” said the musician, real name Gordon Sumner. “It is absolutely essential to me that my career’s body of work has a home where it is valued and respected. Not only to connect with longtime fans in new ways but also to introduce my songs to new audiences, musicians and generations.” The deal unites Sting’s back catalogue, which had been with rival Sony Music Publishing, and his recorded music at Universal Music Publishing, part of the world’s biggest music group, where he has been signed at various labels for his entire career. “We are honoured that by choosing Universal for his music publishing, Sting’s entire body of work as a songwriter and recording artist – from the Police to his solo work – will all be within the Universal family,” said Sir Lucian Grainge, chairman and chief executive of the Amsterdam-listed music group. “It is a responsibility we don’t take lightly.” The streaming-fuelled recovery in the music industry has resulted in a gold rush for artists with global and evergreen hits, as music companies, private equity and publicly listed firms such as Hipgnosis seek to strike deals to control song rights. In December, Bruce Springsteen sold his entire song catalogue to Sony Music in a deal worth $500m, while David Bowie’s estate struck a $250m deal with Warner Music. In 2020, Bob Dylan sold his entire catalogue of 600 songs, including Blowin’ in the Wind and Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door, to Universal for almost $400m, seting an industry benchmark for future deals. Last January, Neil Young sold 50% of his catalogue to London-listed Hipgnosis for approximately $150m.Downing Street has pledged to reveal if Boris Johnson is fined by police for attending any parties while Covid restrictions were in force, but the prime minister refused to rule out staying on even he is found to have broken the law. It comes after Scotland Yard announced officers were sending a questionnaire to more than 50 people believed to have attended social events in Downing Street and Whitehall despite the curbs on gatherings. Johnson has managed to so far avoid a wave of anger among his own MPs reaching the threshold at which a no-confidence vote is called, but some backbenchers are still waiting for the outcome of the Met’s inquiry to decide whether to try to oust him. There are 54 letters of no confidence needed for a ballot to be triggered, but Johnson’s opponents want to ensure that they would then win the subsequent vote by getting 181 colleagues to vote against him. With the Commons about to go into recess for 10 days, Johnson’s spokesperson said on Thursday that he had not yet received an official communication from Scotland Yard. Asked if Downing Street would say if Johnson got a £100 fixed penalty notice, he confirmed: “We would look to confirm contact of this as relates to the prime minister given the significant public interest.” Pressed on whether Johnson considered deliberately misleading parliament to be a resigning matter, the spokesperson said: “That is an element of the ministerial code and the prime minister fully supports that.” Johnson himself refused to say whether he would resign as prime minister if he was fined by the police for breaking the law. Speaking at a press conference during a trip to Nato headquarters in Brussels, Johnson said the Met police probe “must be completed and I’m looking forward to it being completed and that’s the time to say more on that”. Asked again if he would quit or try to stay on, the prime minister repeated: “I understand, but we’re going to wait for the process to be completed.” Despite some MPs’ concerns Scotland Yard’s inquiry could drag on, the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, confirmed questionnaires were being sent out to people believed to have been at some of the dozen events under investigation. “Some but probably not all may very well end up with a fixed penalty notice,” she told BBC Radio London. Dick added many people had been left “hugely disgusted” by reports of the parties, and suggested part of the investigation – known as Operation Hillman – involved speaking to officers who were on duty in Downing Street at the time. “It would be quite wrong for me to comment on whether anyone who works for the Met did or did not know what you describe as what’s going on, because that is part of the investigation,” she said. The Guardian revealed last week that civil servants who had given evidence to the official civil service inquiry run by Sue Gray were told the government may never know who was fined for attending parties across Whitehall in breach of Covid rules. Johnson was defended by his attorney general, Suella Braverman, in the Commons on Monday. Asked by Labour MP Rupa Huq if breaches of the ministerial code would lead to resignations, Braverman said: “I would just say that fundamental to the rule of law is also democracy. And I’m very proud to be supporting this prime minister – a prime minister who has honoured democracy by delivering Brexit.”Unilever has signalled further price rises are ahead for shoppers as the company behind brands from Marmite to Dove forecast its own input costs would rise by as much as €3.5bn (£3bn) this year. The FTSE 100 consumer goods company said that after significant supply chain cost inflation last year it expected a further increase in the price of raw materials, freight and packaging in 2022, which was ultimately likely to result in consumers paying more for its products in supermarkets and other retail outlets. “The major challenge of 2021 has been the dramatic rise of input costs,” said Alan Jope, the Unilever chief executive. “We responded with pricing actions. In 2022 we will manage a significant input cost inflation cycle.” Also known for brands such as Hellmann’s mayonnaise and Ben &amp; Jerry’s ice-cream, the company expects “very high” cost inflation of €2bn in the first half of this year although it said that may moderate to €1.5bn in the second half. “There is currently a wide range for this that reflects market uncertainty on the outlook for commodity, freight and packaging costs,” the company said. Jope described the surge in costs this year as “unprecedented”, an ominous sign for shoppers. “We are managing the inflationary shock 2022 brings,” he said. “The biggest challenge is navigating the unprecedented input cost inflation.” Unilever also ruled out pursuing any more big deals after the failed £50bn offer for GSK’s consumer healthcare division, as it beat expectations in the fourth quarter with sales revenue growth boosted by price rises. The embattled consumer products company, which is facing increasing pressure from shareholders to restructure, including potentially splitting its businesses or shaking up its board, also announced a €3bn (£2.5bn) share buyback scheme. “We have engaged extensively with our shareholders in recent weeks and received a strong message that the evolution of our portfolio needs to be measured,” said Jope. “We therefore do not intend to pursue major acquisitions in the foreseeable future.” However, Jope said the company would continue to seek smaller, “bolt-on” acquisitions to build its luxury beauty, health and wellbeing sectors. The company, which has already announced a structural overhaul to give five business divisions more control, reported a 4.9% rise in underlying sales growth in the fourth quarter – well ahead of the 3.8% City consensus. Full-year sales grew by 4.5% to €52.4bn, the fastest underlying growth in nine years, with 2.9 percentage points of that attributable to price increases, and 1.6 percentage points to growing sales. “The acceleration of Unilever’s operating performance continues,” said Jope. Earlier this week, a top 10 shareholder, the asset manager Flossbach von Storch, said Unilever should seriously consider splitting the company, which operates three divisions for beauty, food and household products. Jope ruled out selling its nutrition and ice-cream businesses after speculation about a potential deal. “Both are great businesses,” he said. “They have some of the strongest brands that can thrive within Unilever. I see a bright future ahead for both the nutrition and ice-cream businesses inside Unilever.” The leading Unilever shareholder Terry Smith, the founder of Fundsmith, has described the failed attempt to takeover the GSK business as a “near death experience” and said management should focus on improving the core operation – or step down. Last month, Unilever announced plans to cut 1,500 management jobs globally – a move Jope said would result in the loss of a “handful of jobs in most countries” – as the company tried to respond to calls for an improvement in operating performance. “We have a lot more we can do with the portfolio we have,” said Jope. “I am impatient to see that starting to come through. There was a moment in time we felt, still feel, a transaction around GSK could have created value. However, our shareholders, while supporting the general strategic direction, felt it was too much at the wrong time.” Last month, it emerged the US activist investor Nelson Peltz had built a stake in the company, although he has not as yet said publicly what changes he is pushing for. The share price fell as much as 3% in early trading as analysts focused on a forecast that its operating margin would be down between 1.4% and 2.4% to between 16% and 17%. Last year the company abandoned its operating margin target of 20%.The European parliament is preparing to launch a committee of inquiry into the Pegasus spyware scandal after evidence emerged of government critics in Poland and Hungary being targeted with the surveillance software. The cross-party body will seek testimony from member states’ intelligence services, elected politicians and senior officials, with a previous inquiry into alleged European facilitation of CIA “black sites” providing a model. The move is the most significant yet from Brussels since a group of media organisations including the Guardian revealed that Pegasus software was being used against journalists, activists and politicians in numerous countries across the world including in Europe. It follows the announcement from the Israeli government this week that it would investigate reports of Israeli police using Pegasus against its citizens. Local media reports claimed the list of targets included people involved in the corruption trial of the former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Pegasus allows an operator to take control of a target’s mobile device, access all data even from encrypted messaging apps and turn on audio or video recording. The investigation by the Guardian and 16 other media organisations had been based on forensic analysis of phones and a leaked database of 50,000 numbers, including that of the French president, Emmanuel Macron, the European Council president, Charles Michel, and other heads of state and senior government, diplomatic and military officials in 34 countries. The Israeli company that manufactures the software, NSO Group, has previously said the figure of 50,000 was “exaggerated” and that the list could not be a list of numbers “targeted by governments using Pegasus”. The analysis of phones in Europe showed that journalists, activists and lawyers in Hungary had been targeted with Pegasus. A senior Hungarian government official appeared to confirm in November that the software had been purchased by the state, but it was later denied and ministers have since declined to comment. Hungarian journalists are planning to take legal action against the state and NSO. In Poland, a senate commission saw documents in January that suggested that country’s Central Anti-Corruption Bureau (CBA) had bought Pegasus in 2017 using funds from the justice ministry. Law and Justice, the lead party in the governing coalition, has boycotted the commission in the opposition-led senate. The European parliament has launched a committee of inquiry on only a handful of occasions, and the proposal has already received the required political backing of a quarter of MEPs and the endorsement of the heads of political groups. It has been pushed by the Renew Europe political group in the parliament in which Macron’s La République en Marche MEPs sit, and is expected to be formally approved in a plenary session in Strasbourg next week. Assuming that happens, the committee is expected to sit for 12 months from April, during which it will hold public sessions and call for relevant documents and oral and written testimony. NSO Group did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the inquiry, but in previous answers to the Guardian it has said it could not confirm or deny whether particular countries were clients. It also insisted its tools were only meant for use against criminals and terrorists, and should not be used on dissidents, activists or journalists. The president of the Renew Europe group, Stéphane Séjourné, said: “The Pegasus scandal is not just an assault on individual freedoms. It is an attack by autocratic regimes on the essence of our European democracies. “When software developed to target terrorists is used against opposition politicians by European governments, this is very serious indeed. “The scale of the allegations show why we need a European response and this is why we have led calls for the European parliament to launch an inquiry committee with teeth, that can consult experts and call witnesses from across Europe.” Once the committee has completed its investigation it will file a report for national governments and the European Commission. “Nothing should be off the table and no stone should be left unturned,” Séjourné said. “We don’t just want information about the scale of the scandal, we want recommendations put on the table of the European Commission and national governments, so this can never happen again.” The EU’s justice commissioner, Didier Reynders, told MEPs in September that the European Commission “totally condemned” alleged attempts by national security services to illegally access information on political opponents through their phones. He said it was already the case, as confirmed by the European court of justice, that governments could not “restrict the confidentiality and integrity of communications” except in “very strictly limited” scenarios. He also said a pending EU privacy regulation would tighten the rules further, and called for MEPs and member states to urgently agree on the details of the new law in light of the spyware scandal.And that’s day six! Thanks for reading along during another brilliant night session from Beijing. In closing, do check out the best of the photos - always a treat. Let’s do it all again tomorrow. Bye! As I start to wrap up for the day, a nice story. Father and son Jeff and Liam Mather were reunited in the Beijing Winter Olympic village after not being able to see each other for two-and-a-half years due to the pandemic. Liam lives and works in Beijing, his father in their native Canada. Liam is working with his father’s broadcasting team, meaning the pair can work and enjoy the Games together inside the closed-loop system in the Chinese capital. As expected, Germany are back on top. Six gold medals so far, four in the sliding centre with their clear sweep in the luge complete. Curling: final results in the four women’s games tonight. Canada 12 - Korea 7 GB 8 - Sweden 2 USA 7 - Denmark 5 Switzerland 7 - China 5 More from the Water Cube tomorrow. Curling: I’ve tuned into China v Switzerland at the right time. Final stone in regulation, China need to thread the perfect shot to square it up 6-6 and take it to an extra end but miss out by an inch! The Swiss get up in their second nail-biter in as many days, winning 7-5. Ice Hockey: Nearing the end of the second period in the men’s Group A games, USA lead China 4-0 and Canada are up 4-1 over Germany. Luge: Never write off a champion and that’s what these German sliders are. To think that three of the four have won every event they have entered across three consecutive Olympics - remarkable. As for Johannes Ludwig, he’s done the double and has three gold medals to his name after saluting in the team relay four years ago as well. Nine thousandths of a second is the margin halfway down the track... Arlt and Wendl do it! A wobble at the bottom but they hold their nerve. The 34-year-old champions get it done by 8 hundredths of a second! Natalie Geisenberg, Arlt and Wendl all have six gold medals! Some of the greatest Olympians of all time. And it is a clean sweep for Germany in the luge; they’ve won all four events. Luge: Ludwig stays in the red but only just. They’re behind by 0.101 as the Tobys take over! This would be a massive update! Luge: Natalie Geisenberger to start, more gold medals than she knows what to do with, but she’s made an early error - they’re playing catch-up! But the pace is on and she gets the deficit back to 0.036 as Johannes Ludwig takes the tag. Go, go, go! Luge: Madeleine Engle gets the Austrians a half-second lead after the first leg - perfect start. Wolfgang Kindle now, losing control a touch but not hitting a wall - the lead swells to 0.633 through him. Thomas Steu and Lorenz Koller won the bronze yesterday, they have plenty of room to work with - they’re going to be leading but by how far? 0.868! Austria into the gold medal position with one team to go. It just happens to be a team with some of the greatest sliders in the history of the sport but pressure is pressure. Here we go! Luge: Bang! Not the perfect start for Latvia with Eliza Tiruma clipping a wall. Over to Kristers Aparjods, an emerging star of the sport winning a silver in this team event at the 2020 world championships. He’s done enough - he’s got in front! To the doubles pair, Bots and Plume - who did so well yesterday to earn this start - and they’ve got a medal! They hit the lead by 0.3. And what a response - they’re giving it big! The first Latvians onto the podium at these Games. Over to Austria and Germany - here we go, strap in. Luge: Italy now, who aren’t fielding their best team here due to Covid but have snuck into second; 18 hundredths of a second behind the ROC. Solid. Now to the big three: Latvia, Austria and Germany. Luge: Here come Not Russia, the fifth team last to jump - the business end of this event. Roman Repilov has given them every chance to take the lead and maybe a medal, the best solo run of the competition so far. Do the doubles pair hold on? They do! We have a new leader, the ROC, 0.568 ahead of Canada with four teams to go. Luge: The American women’s slider, Ashley Farquharson, has glitter on her face - “this event is a celebration of their sport,” the expert commentator explains on telly. They don’t get ahead of Canada, half a second in arrears, but they hug it out in that celebratory spirit. Luge: Class from Canada, all three sliders doing the job and going well ahead of Poland - with six teams to go, they lead by 1.9 seconds. Luge: Heartbreak for Slovakia! It’s unlikely they were going to overtake Poland for the lead but their doubles pair fell off at the final turn, number 13, which has been such a challenge throughout. Canada are up next on the sleds, team eight of 14 to compete. What a lovely story this is Just like his father did more than three decades ago, Austrian skier Johannes Strolz on Thursday won Olympic gold in the Alpine combined race. Luge: Right, five of these mixed relay teams have made it down without any major drama, which is not for nothing given the nature of the race with the button they have to hit at the end - doesn’t look easy. Timing is everything. Romania currently lead the Czech Republic with Poland on the way now. We’re about 20 minutes away from the major action when the final few teams take to the track. Curling: Sweden get a point back but GB lead 6-2 in the seventh end. Curling: Team GB’s women have extended their to 6-1 after five ends. Sweden have the hammer for the sixth and need to get busy. Ice Hockey: We’re deep into the first period of the Group A opening matches in the men’s competition. At the National Indoor Stadium the USA scored an early goal against China and Canada have popped three into the German net before the first interval. Luge: Right, the Czech team is the first of 14 to go and they’ve hit the wall a number of times in the doubles leg. Ah well. Looking to the other end of the competition, the Latvians, who had a good day yesterday in the men’s singles, are third last, then the Austrians then the might of Germany. A reminder that Johannes Ludwig and Natalie Geisenberger (three gold medals in a row) won the singles and the Tobys – Wendl and Arlt – won a third gold in the doubles. Luge: Now, this is going to be fun. A luge relay. Yes, that’s right. A woman, a man, a doubles pair, a touch pad. It’s going to be wild. Germany won both singles and the doubles; they should do the same again. But there’s a degree of chaos. Embrace it. Watch it. Curling: All the women’s scores as they read at the Water Cube. GB 5 - Sweden 1 Canada 6 - Korea 1 USA 3 - Denmark 3 Switzerland 3 - China 2 Curling: Team GB are going it easily, by the way - they lead Sweden 5-1 in the fifth end. More progress scores before we hit the luge. Speed skating: I’m not too big on bagging TV networks for what they choose to go live with on the main channel at the Olympics but a Team GB round-robin curling outing getting the nod on the BBC ahead of Irene Schouten at the end there, one of the most supreme performances in speed skating history? Not sure about that. Four gold medals for the Dutch, all won at The Oval. There’s one event still to be decided tonight - the team luge relay, where Germany are raging hot favourites. That begins in ten minutes. Irene Schouten has done it! 6:43:51 - there goes the Olympic Record! It lasted for 20 years, set at altitude in Salt Lake City! She’s won the race by a mile in the end, 4.67 seconds over Isabelle Weidemann (CAN) with Martina Sáblíková (CZE) earning bronze - what a career. Schouten does the 3000m/5000m double - very special stuff. Speed skating: All eyes on Irene Schouten as she clocks in for two laps to go; two seconds to the good! Can she break the Olympic Record as well? She’s three seconds up when taking the bell! Speed skating: Four laps to go, the Dutch superstar is in the gold medal position by 0.84 seconds. Three laps to go... make that 1.19! Speed skating: That margin has narrowed, Schoulten ahead by 0.58 of a second after 3000m with Lollobrigida falling behind the marker. Speed skating: One of the five kilometres down and both skaters are around 1.5 seconds ahead of where Weidemann was at the same time. Find a telly: there’s a grandstand finish coming up! Speed skating: The Canadians are roaring Weidemann home... and she’s into the gold medal position with one pair to skate! She won the bronze in the 3000m and will earn another medal here. Over to Irene Schouten (NED), the winner of the 3000m, and Francesca Lollobrigida (ITA), who was runner-up in that event. And they’re off! Speed skating: Make that 2.14 seconds ahead as she takes the bell! Speed skating: Weidemann is 1.86 seconds ahead of Sáblíková’s with a couple of laps to go! “This is spectacular!” roars the TV caller. Speed skating: Weidemann (CAN) and Ragne Wiklund (NOR) are both tracking very nicely indeed, the former just taking the lead - compared to where Sáblíková was at - with six laps to go! Game on! Speed skating: I’ve been talking up Irene Schouten (NED) jumping last, but let’s not forget Isabelle Weidemann (CAN), the bronze medallist in the 3000m in Beijing. The penultimate pair are away! Speed skating: What strength to the end, Sáblíková (CZE) banks a 6:50.09! That’s a lead of 6.9 seconds with two pairs to go. Wow. Speed skating: We’re away in the second half of the women’s 5000m and, what do you know, the 34-year-old Martina Sáblíková is putting in a blinder. She’s 4.45 seconds ahead of Voronina with two laps to go! If she can win this 12 years after her first gold it’d be legendary. Curling: Sweden earn their first point in the third end; it’s 1-1 with Team GB holding with hammer in the fourth. Expect a long night there. Curling: It is Team GB v Sweden in the second day of women’s action. Eve Muirhead’s team lost in an extra end to the Swiss yesterday so they need to bounce back here. The Swedish skip, Anna Hasselborg, has the final stone of the end and doesn’t get it right! Too much heat - it’s GB with a steal and the first point of the clash. Speed skating: Natalya Voronina (ROC) has finished in thrilling style, taking the lead by six seconds, over the line in 6:56. The Olympic record of 6:46 has stood since Salt Lake City, the commentator tells us. Over to Martina Sáblíková in about 20 minutes after they tidy up the ice - can she deliver on the big stage one final time at age 34? Then it’s Irene Schouten’s turn. Lots of fun to come at The Oval. Speed skating: Perfect timing, to The Oval in time for the third of six pairs in the women’s 5000m with world record holder Natalya Voronina right into her groove, well on track to overtake the lead of Belarusian Maryna Zuyeva. Martina Sáblíková, the Czech legend who won in 2010 and 2014, races in the fourth pair. Then to finish, Irene Schouten, who won the 3000m earlier in the week and is the fastest in 5000m major competitions since the pandemic. Freestyle skiing: What. An. Event. Some mindboggling jumps when it mattered most, especially from Christopher Lillis, who took on a back double full-full-double full at a 5.0 degree of difficulty, putting it all on the line for the USA at the vital time. His 135 won this gold. Freestyle skiing: Whoa! Perfect! The highest score we’ve seen tonight was a 135. Does Qi Guangpu top that to win the gold? 136.29 is the magic number... it’s 122! Gold for America! They’re won the first ever mixed aerial freestyle skiiing Olympic Gold Medal! Freestyle skiing: The most important jump of Justin Schoenfeld’s career so far and the 23-year-old is right on the money with his 4.525. If he’s into the 120s it will almost be out of range for China... but it isn’t quite that, 114.48 the assessment of the judges. It leaves Qi Guanpu 136 to win the gold with the final jump of the night! Freestyle skiiing: There are two competitions going on here, the battle for bronze then the jumps for gold. Five full spins with three flips from Noe Roth and the Swiss jumper earns a 110, roughly 97 ahead of Canada, who are next to go with Lewis Irving, who hit a 119 in the qualifier. Back double full-full-full... that will surely be enough for bronze at worst! And so it is, easily - 111.76. And they’re into the gold medal position if the USA and China botch it. Freestyle skiing: Jia Zongyang hits the deck! It was beautiful until it wasn’t, overbalancing at the end and going A over T! China can’t retain the lead after that - how badly will he be penalised? Significantly - it’s a 96.02! They’re still in it but the USA lead by 21 points as we move to the final jumpers. Drama at Genting Park! USA 223.86 China 202.05 Canada 179.22 Switzerland 166.01 Freestyle skiiing: Here comes Christopher Lillis, going for the 5.0 back double full-full-double full... and that might be the jump of the night! Art! He’s gone huge, taken it on, blimey! And it’s the score of the night as well, it’s 135! “One of the best tricks we’ve ever seen in an Olympic competition,” says the OBS commentator. China have a healthy buffer after the women’s section but the pressure is on. Freestyle skiing: Big but not huge, Primin Werner (SWI) takes on a 5.0 and walks away with 109. Canada next and Miha Fontaine goes BANG for the second time tonight! A lower degree of difficulty, so it had to be good, and it was - 116.48 for him, they take lead. Freestyle skiiing: The pressure is on and it shows. The four women jump first and it is a fresh competition; the scores from earlier do not count to this final. Alexander Baer doesn’t get the landing right, tallying just 57.01 for the Swiss, then Marion Thenault (CAN) ends up on the snow, albeit with a higher degree of difficulty, sneaking ahead of 62.74. Ashley Caldwell’s turn, who landed the first big score of the night for the USA earlier, and she doesn’t quite get the landing right either but 88.86 is a score they will take in context. Last for the women is Xu Mengtao, an Olympic medallist from 2014 in Sochi. She banked a 94.01 in the qualifying round, which will be enough for the lead here... and sticks it! She’s pumped! China will move into the gold medal position going into the eight male jumpers, the question is what sort of gap has she put between her and the USA in second... an 18 point gap! That’s a mighty blow: 106.03, the judges say. China 106.03 USA 88.86 Canada 62.74 Switzerland 57.01 Over to the men. A reminder: two fellas jump for each country. While we wait for the final of the aerials, catch up with what you’ve missed and work out what’s coming up next - the Daily Briefing has landed! This is Martin Belam’s essential Olympic newsletter, sign up for it to arrive every day of these Beijing Games. Figure skating: Plenty going on in the figure skating doping story. I better hand over to Sean Ingle on that one - he’s just filed an update. The International Olympic Committee has refused to comment on whether the athlete at the centre of a doping controversy at Beijing 2022 is the 15-year-old Russian figure skater Kamila Valieva, despite the teenager being named in multiple reports around the world. Multiple sources have told the Guardian that Valieva, who captured the world’s attention when she became the first female skater to perform a quad at the Olympics, may be the athlete who tested positive for trimetazidine, a metabolic agent that helps prevent angina attacks. There has been no official confirmation that Valieva is the subject of the positive test and alongside the IOC, the Russian Olympic Committee and the International Skating Union are also refusing to confirm or deny if it was her. Freestyle skiiing: Qui Guanpu for China, a former double world champion, stands at the top of his mark and makes no mistake! He requires 82 to get China to the final but the real question is whether he’s done enough to overtake the Americans. And he has, 118.10 takes them six points clear with 336.89. When we return shortly it will be China, USA, Canada and Switzerland all jumping for gold. Freestyle skiing: Two of the six teams are eliminated after this round of jumps so this is high-stakes stuff. And Noe Roth from Switzerland has done enough to get them into the Olympic final by four points, earning a 106.79. They’re there with Canada. Over to the USA and China to join them. The Americans only require an 88 to overtake the ROC and that’s no concern with Justin Schoenfeld, who pops them back into the lead with completely control, 124.43 it is. Freestyle skiing: Lewis Irving has a dart at a back-double-full-full-full (dizzy just writing it) at 4.525 and it’s so good, 119.91 for Canada to take them back to the top. What a brilliant comp this already is. Freestyle skiing: Christopher Lillis lands with a hand on the floor but it’s still impressive enough to get into triple figures and take the USA past the Swiss, with Canada just in front. China’s Jia Zongyang the final jump of the group and with a 4.425 difficulty mark he’s done it in style. Enough to take the lead? Better believe it, his 124.78 moves China to 218.79 ahead of Canada on 207.03 and the USA 206.12. Now to the second group of six men for their first jumps. Freestyle skiiing: Goodness me, Pirmin Werner has gone all-out with a 5.0 degree of difficulty - I can’t for the life of me explain every component of it, but he skis away with the highest score of the night, 128 on the dot! Wow. The Swiss are into second position. Freestyle skiing: Big from Miha Fontaine, the Canadian 18-year-old on Olympic debut landing a back-lay-double-full-full (watch me listen closely) which earns him 113.97 of the best to take the lead. Freestyle skiing: Spoiled for choice: BBC commentary or the Olympic Broadcasting Service? Looks like the latter is ahead, so with them we will stay. Alexander Baer from Switzerland is next and she’s got height and form right but the landing not quite, which counts for 30 per cent of the score. In turn, she ends up with 65.83, behind the other three teams to jump. No such concerns for Ashley Caldwell, a former world champion, who goes for the higher degree of difficulty, a 4.3, and it pays off big time with the judges giving her a 104.3 - the USA into top spot. To China and the world number one, Xu Mengtao... and she doesn’t sick the landing. The same degree of difficulty as Caldwell but ends up ten points off that, 94.01 her mark. So, over to the men with the USA and China leading the way. Freestyle skiiing: Right, we’re away in the mixed team aerials. A reminder that each competitor - three from each team; two men and one woman - will have two jumps. And the Canadians are elated with Marion Thénault’s first attempt, banking a 93.06. Nice. Nice one, Niall – thank you. Into the night session we go on the first Wednesday of these brilliant Winter Games at Beijing, where the clock has just struck 7pm in the Olympic city. We’ve seen the big names deliver after dark so far and there’s a chance for them to do so again tonight with three medals to be decided. The first of those will be over at the Genting Snow Park where the Mixed Team Aerials competition is about to begin – on Olympic debut, too. Each team will have three jumpers with two attempts, with six trios winning entry to the final. China is the team to beat on paper, having won this at the last couple of World Cups, but the USA and the ROC have been right there with them on the podium in the past. Freestyle aerial skiing is a beautiful thing; one to enjoy. Then in an hour from now at The Oval, the starters’ pistol will fire in the women’s 5000m speed skating final. Well, it’ll fire six times – there are 12 athletes in contention, in pairs, as always. Esmee Visser, who gold at Pyeongchang, isn’t there this time but Martina Sáblíková still is, the Czech great who saluted in 2010 and 2014, likewise the World Record holder is the ROC’s Natalya Voronina. However, nothing will be sorted out until the final pair though because that’s when Irene Schouter will take off, the Dutch star already with a gold in her pocket from the 3000m and the fastest in the world in 2021 over this journey. Just as that’s concluding, we’ll return to the National Sliding Centre to see whether the Germans can continue their domination of the luge in the team relay competition. In this, we’ll see a man, a woman and a pair go down for each competing country. In Germany’s case, their man, Johannes Ludwig, won the gold in the singles, and their woman, Natalie Geisenberger, has a claim to being the greatest slider of all time after winning that competition for the third time on the trot two days ago. Oh, and their pair? The Tobys – Wendl and Arlt – also took out their pet event for the third time in succession yesterday. To the rest of the field... good luck with that. Between times, we’ll nip in and out of the ice cube for the second session of the women’s curling. Team GB, who lost to the Swiss in their opener yesterday, are up against Sweden, who easily accounted for Japan. It’ll also be the first we’ll see of Team USA in the men’s ice hockey, up against hosts China at the National Indoor Centre. So then, all the fun of the fair ahead of us. I’m looking forward to your company – drop me a line at any time; twitter is also fine Time to hand over to my colleague, Adam Collins, who will guide you through a busy few hours of action. Thanks for joining me. Boom! Finland score a sixth, and it’s a peach. Miro Aaltonen gets it, driving a shot from distance off the upright and in. That’s the end of the scoring: Finland 6-2 Slovakia. A reminder that the NHL has not allowed players to travel for this tournament – a decision Beau Dure believes is short-sighted: Deep into the third and final period at the ice hockey, and Finland lead 5-2. They’ve just survived a Slovakian power play and are firmly on course to open their campaign with a win. It’s been a golden day for Austria, with Alessandro Hämmerle clinching snowboard cross gold and Johannes Strolz winning the Alpine combined race. Hämmerle held off Canada’s Eliot Grondin in a dramatic photo finish at Genting Snow Park. Grondin almost grabbed gold with a late dive for the line but it wasn’t enough; Omar Visintin of Italy took home the bronze. Earlier, Strolz won Olympic gold 34 years after his father did the same. The 29-year-old was fourth after the downhill run but completed the slalom half a second quicker than anyone else. Strolz edged first-run leader Aleksander Aamodt Kilde of Norway by 0.58 seconds, with Canada’s Jack Crawford in third. His father, Hubert, won combined gold in Calgary and also took silver in the giant slalom at the 1988 Winter Games. The International Olympic Committee has refused to comment on whether the athlete at the centre of a doping controversy at Beijing 2022 is the 15-year-old Russian figure skater, Kamila Valieva, despite the teenager being named in multiple reports around the world. Multiple sources have told the Guardian that Valieva, the first female skater to perform a quad at the Olympics, may be the athlete who tested positive for trimetazidine, a metabolic agent that helps prevent angina attacks. There has been no official confirmation that Valieva is the subject of the positive test and both the Russian Olympic Committee and International Skating Union are also refusing to confirm or deny if it was her. Mikaela Shiffrin will compete in Friday’s super-G event, the US skiing team has confirmed. Shiffrin, a two-time Olympic gold medallist, failed to finish either the giant slalom or slalom, missing an early gate on both runs. She has never raced in a super-G at an Olympics but did win it at the 2019 world championships. Italy’s Sofia Goggia has decided not to enter the super-G race and will focus on defending her downhill title on Tuesday. Federica Brignone, the current World Cup leader, heads up a powerhouse super-G team that also includes Marta Bassino, Elena Curtoni and Francesca Marsaglia. In the ice hockey, it’s Finland 4-2 Slovakia at the end of the second period. The men’s tournament is just getting under way but the women are already at the quarter-final stage. Friday sees Canada v Sweden and USA v Czech Republic, before ROC v Switzerland and Finland v Japan on Saturday. Plan all your viewing here: Plenty still to come on day six. Here’s what to look out for – all times GMT. 11am Freestyle skiing: mixed aerials team final 🥇 12pm Speed skating: women’s 5,000m final 🥇 12.05pm Curling: women’s round robin games including USA v Denmark, Sweden v GB 1.10pm Men’s ice hockey: Canada v Germany and US v China in Group A 1.30pm Luge mixed team relay 🥇 The two biggest stories of day six so far are tales of American gold: Chloe Kim defending her snowboard slopestyle title, and Nathan Chen making up for his disappointment in 2018 with a dominant performance to win the men’s figure skating. Read more: Finland saw two players sent to the sin-bin but did not concede, then scored a third goal as soon as they were back up to full strength. Miro Aaltonen got the goal, and Finland lead Slovakia 3-1 at the end of the first period. In the earlier Group C game, Sweden scored three early goals and held on to beat Latvia 3-2. In Group B yesterday, ROC beat Switzerland 1-0 in a match that featured an almighty brawl: In case you missed it overnight, Team GB’s women lost their first round-robin match 6-5 to Switzerland, with skip Eve Muirhead left frustrated after misjudging her final shot in the extra end. “They are never easy to judge,” Muirhead said of the crucial shot. “Unfortunately it didn’t come off. If I ever had a shot like that again, I’m confident I would make it.” The team GB flag bearer won bronze in Sochi back in 2014 but arrives here with an inexperienced squad. “I’m very glad I’ve got the opportunity to be here with four girls at their first Olympics,” Muirhead added. “I’m proud of them, how much they’ve come along and fought and they deserve their spot in the team.” Figure skating: IOC refuses to comment on legal case Officials are still refusing to comment on a legal case concerning the outcome of the team figure skating competition in Beijing. Medals for the event, which concluded on Monday, are yet to be awarded amid widespread reports of a doping issue that may yet affect the outcome. IOC spokesperson Mark Adams refused to elaborate on the situation during a media briefing on Thursday, saying only that the situation had “legal implications”. The Russian Olympic Committee team swept to an expected gold medal at the event, beating the US into silver with Japan taking bronze. Both the International Skating Union and the International Testing Agency (ITA) mirrored the IOC’s stance in short statements. An ITA spokesperson said: “The ITA is aware of the various reports circulating regarding the postponed medal ceremony for the figure skating team event. Any announcement connected to these events would always be publicly issued on the ITA’s website and not commented on otherwise.” PA Media Finland take the lead in the power play with Slovakia a man short, Harri Pesonen the scorer. We’re still in the first period of that match. The Finnish jerseys are excellent, by the way: The only live action going on now is a men’s ice hockey match – Finland v Slovakia in Group C. Qualifiers Slovakia took a surprise early lead but Finland, currently ranked second in the world, have just levelled through Sakari Manninen. So it’s victory in their first round-robin match for Bruce Mouat’s quartet. Their two matches on Friday will be against teams with one win and won loss from two matches – the USA and Norway. Norway won their opener against Switzerland 7-4, but have just lost 6-5 to Canada. The USA edged out ROC 6-5 before losing 7-4 to world champions Sweden, who also beat China 6-4 earlier on. Canada opened with a 10-5 win over Denmark, and ROC beat China 7-4 in their second match. British skip Bruce Mouat delivers on the penultimate stone, putting his side in front with a cannon shot. Italy send their final stone towards the button – the very centre of the target area – and go close, but there’s room for Mouat to get closer. He does – not by much, but it’s good enough – and Team GB win 7-5! Curling: Team GB 6-5 Italy (10th end) The first few stones are left short, just beyond the hog line before Italy send one into the house. With three stones left, the British team have a lengthy debate over what to do next. A high-speed delivery clears out some of those early stones, but pushes another Italian stone into the house ... Italy try to dislodge that trio of stones by force, but miss – and then find a gap with their final stone to take a single point. Team GB still lead 6-5 though, and will have the final stone in the deciding end. No live action just now beyond these curling round-robin matches. With their penultimate shot, GB dislodge the best-placed Italian stone, and have three of their own blocking the front of the house ... Johaug’s second gold is Norway’s fourth of these Games, helping them move up to third in the overall table behind Germany and Austria: As with her first success, Therese Johaug’s second gold of these Games will attract controversy – she missed the Pyeongchang Olympics in 2018 over a failed drugs test: Over in the curling, Team GB’s men lead Italy 5-4 in the eighth end, and have just played a three-stone cannon with their final shot. Italy have the last chance of the end though – but while it knocks GB’s best stone away, it deflects just beyond the next one. GB lead 6-4 heading into the ninth end. The Norwegian won the first medal of the Games and adds a second here, beating Finland’s Kerttu Niskanen by just 0.4 seconds. Niskanen’s compatriot, Krista Pärmäkoski, is 31 seconds behind her in third – and pips ROC’s Natalia Nepryaeva to bronze by 0.1 seconds! Third place currently in the cross-country is the other Finnish contender, Krista Parmakoski, who hit the deck immediately after completing the race, and took a long time to get up. Tough event. I’m tired just watching it. Time for a break, Niall McVeigh will have the reins next. Curling: Italy leading Great Britain 4-3 now, on the seventh end. Incredible finish from Kerttu Niskanen. The Finn was coming through the course a couple of minutes behind Johaug, and clocking faster times on all of the checkpoints. Coming into the final stretch she is racing Johaug’s time, all the way down the straight... and finishes 0.4 seconds behind! Over a 10 kilometre race. Johaug celebrates, knowing that no one else remaining has the form or record to challenge her time. Therese Johaug of Norway now goes top, at 28:06:30. Germany now sits first and second for finish times in the cross-country. Katherine Sauerbrey second, Katharina Hennig first. Some racers behind them closing fast though. Kerttu Niskanen, the Finnish cross-country champ, is burning through her race. She’s making up a lot of time on everybody else. She’s also the only one who doesn’t look absolutely shattered already. Cross-country: Some of the competitors have finished their 10km by now. Lilia Vasileva of ROC is currently leading in 29:32:04. Under half an hour to run 10 kilometres uphill in skis. Ow. Curling: Great Britain has come back to 3-3 against Italy in the men’s round robin. Photo finish! After a belting race between Haemmerle and Grondin all the way down. The other two racers are peripheral. The front two take the jumps together, fight on each turn, nearly collide a couple of times. Haemmerle comes off the final jump first, but Grondin has a better jump, catching him up in the air. Gets level on the final slope, but he just loses balance and twists his board as he crosses the line. The photo is decided on whose boot crosses first, and Haemmerle just has the advantage, having stayed balanced. Outstanding race. Silver for Canada. Visintin gets bronze for Italy. Jake Vedder benefited from a crash to make it into the semi-final, and another crash sees him finish second in the small final of the snowboard cross. He was a late replacement in the USA squad as an alternate, and has made the most of it. Sixth overall in his first Olympic Games. Merlin Surget finishes first in this race, fourth overall, for France. The women’s 10km cross-country skiing has started. This is a time-trial sort of situation, with competitors starting one at a time with a 30-second interval between them. But some racers will catch up to others, so there will be tactics around passing or slipstreams. The snowboard cross semifinals see four more racers knocked out into the small final: Merlin Surget, Lucas Eguibar, Jake Vedder and Tommaso Leoni. Vedder was leading his semi but his inexperience showed, pushed to the outside on a turn at which point the other racers pounced. Eliot Grondin, Alessandro Haemmerle, Julian Lueftner and Omar Visintin will contest the big final. Canada, Austria, Austria, Italy. In the curling, it’s the men’s round robin session two, and Great Britain are trailing Italy by 3-1 during the fourth end. Same score for China-ROC, while it’s 2-2 for USA-Sweden and Norway-Canada. The podium from earlier stays intact: Johannes Strolz wins the gold, something that his father did in the same event many years ago. Aleksander Kilde holds second for Norway, and Canada gets bronze via James Crawford. Strolz clocked 2:31:43 across his two runs: one downhill, one slalom. Nick Baumgartner, the 40-year-old American, misses out on qualifying in the snowboard cross. He was leading for a while but Austria’s Julian Lueftner caught him up and then fellow USA rider Jake Vedder got past him. Quick update: snowboard cross is sick. It’s a speed race, but on a long downhill course full of ramps and jumps and twists and turns. Nobody is doing tricks off the jumps, they’re just trying to get there. Four racers all go at the same time, the top two go to the next round, and there have been collisions aplenty while fighting for position. A couple of guys who have crashed have then allowed themselves to do some jumps on the way down after the chance to win has gone. The last few slalom skiers are a long way behind the leaders’ pace and so they’re having to go all out on attack. A lot of crashes or missed gates as a result. Seven of them haven’t finished the run now. Australia’s Adam Dickson misses out on a snowboard cross quarter-final. The quarters are all decided and are ready to go. A couple of crashes in the combined slalom: Pinturault of France and Zabystran of Czechia. That gets us halfway through the field of 24 with the podium unchanged. Bryan Graham was watching Nathan Chen at the venue for us. If you’re not familiar, the alpine combined event is one where the skiers do a downhill run and then a slalom run, adding their times together to see who wins. The downhill part is already done. Johannes Stroltz currently has top spot for Austria, with Norway’s Aleksander Kilde and Canada’s James Crawford next. Eight racers out of 24 are done. For the Australians in the snowboard cross, Cameron Bolton has already qualified for the quarters, while Adam Lambert and Jarryd Hughes have dropped out. Huw Nightingale has gone for Great Britain too. Right, what’s coming up? The men’s snowboard cross finals are underway, first the one-eighth round, then the quarters, the semis, and the final. And the men’s alpine combined slalom is about to start. The ceremony takes place, with Chen flanked by Uno and Kagiyama, each delivered a panda mascot. I didn’t actually see any medals handed out, but the panda is more important. There it is, the one bauble that Chen had not won. Three world championships since 2019, after coming in fifth at the 2018 Olympics. Only a mistake could have cost him this win. But as we’ve seen with someone like Mikaela Shiffrin, those mistakes can happen. Favourites stumble. Something goes wrong, something awry with the universe, and it’s over in a flash. So Chen had to survive the pressure of knowing that if he didn’t make a mistake, he would win. Nathan Chen brings the strut. Longer limbed than the others, somehow looser and more casual looking, he nonetheless nails every trick. He picks an Elton John medley as his backing - Goodbye Yellow Brick Road into Rocket Man into Benny and the Jets. Does the quad lutz twice, his signature. Gets a huge response from the crowd with each landing. He just exudes relief after getting his routine right. And there seems no doubt on anyone’s face about who is winning. The Japanese trio sitting in gold, silver and bronze get bumped down one spot each, as Chen records a mammoth 218.63 for his free skate score, more than 22 points ahead of Kagiyama across both rounds. Uno settles for tres, Hanyu comes in fourth. From Japan to Japan, with Kagiyama Uma. He goes much more dramatic, with the theme music from Gladiator. And it’s a big bombastic routine, lots of gesturing and arms flung wide. The technical side looks good, the commentators saying he could have turned a couple of double spins into triple for more points. But he lands every trick - and that’s enough to net him 201.93. He’s into the gold spot! Only Nathan Chen can take it from him. Hello all. I’ve just been watching Uno Shoma doing his solo routine. He has a stumble on one of his early quads, put a hand down but kept his balance. More impressively than that, he comes back from that error to put in a brilliant routine from then on. A classical music backing, and he’s appropriately fluent and classy in his routine. He gets the 1.00 deduction for the fall, but still clocks 187.1, and is ranked first with two competitors to come. Ouch. South Korea’s Cha Junhwan’s quad attempt results in a slide and a faceplant. He needs a second to get up and continue. Figure skaters are a tough, hardy bunch. Georgia’s Morisi Kvitelashvili preceded Cha with a competent free skate that lacks the pizzazz (or the technical elements) to hang around in the top five. Next up: with apologies to Hanyu, who can still get a medal if anyone falters, it’s the Big Three. Shoma Uno has 105.90 points from the short program. Yuma Kagiyama has 108.12. Then it’s Nathan Chen, trying to erase the disappointment of 2018. On that note, I’m passing the baton to the other side of the planet. Please welcome Geoff Lemon, and I’ll see you tomorrow. Who needs quads? Not Jason Brown, who puts the art of skating above all else. Brown’s quad-less program will never match the technical numbers of his peers. But he wrings out every Grade of Execution point available with flawless execution of every triple and every other element. And he’s so much fun to watch. The judges, thankfully, appreciate that. His component scores are through the roof, including a 9.75 in performance and 9.82 in interpretation of the music. He’s second behind Hanyu and may end up in seventh, but if we had a fan vote, he’d be in the top three. The crowd may be small, but the applause builds as he finishes the program. So here’s a question ... if the USA ends up with a gold in the figure skating team event, would they technically be the first competitors to win a gold for the country in these Olympics? Or would it still be Lindsey Jacobellis because she was the first to receive the medal? Catchup time The third group in the men’s free skate wraps with the ROC’s Evgeni Semenenko. He slots into third place. Elsewhere ... Men’s Alpine combined downhill: The leader is Norway’s Aleksander Aamodt Kilde (yes, Mikaela Shiffrin’s boyfriend) by 0.02 seconds over Canada’s James Crawford. Make it two for Canada in the top three, with Brodie Seger third. The slalom, though, can drastically change the standings. Men’s hockey: Sweden has notched a first-period goal against Latvia. And here’s Bryan Armen Graham on Chloe Kim’s halfpipe win: The quad axel. The hardest jump ever attempted in Olympic competition. Two-time defending champion Yuzuru Hanyu gave it a go. Didn’t happen. The impact on the ice was pretty hard, and maybe that explains why he fell on his next jump. But the rest of the program is stellar. He racks up points on one sequence with a quad toeloop-triple toeloop combo (17.51), quad toeloop-single euler-triple salchow (18.85) and a triple axel (12.00) that looks effortless. He moves into first, for now. He would need to see a couple of skaters stumble to reach the podium. “The ruggedness of flannel rarely finds its way onto figure skating ice,” says NBC’s always entertaining Johnny Weir as Canada’s Keegan Messing gets underway in the free skate to the acoustic tones of Mumford and Sons playing Home. (Not live, sadly. Wouldn’t that be cool?) His routine is tremendous. He won’t get on the podium with the jumps he’s attempting, but no one could complain about the showmanship. Near the end, he pulls out a trick I hadn’t seen before, going in an arc with his torso touching the ice. Messing fell hard during warmups. Not during his program. He finished 12th in 2018. He’s guaranteed a top-11 finish here. Next up: defending champion Yuzuru Hanyu. (This post has been updated with a photo of Messing’s flannel.) A well-played extra end leaves Eve Muirhead a draw to a small but reasonable space for the win. She thinks it’s on the mark, her sweepers think it’s on the mark, but it slides a little too far, and Switzerland takes the point and the game. Denmark beat China 7-6 on a 10th-end draw through a tight space by Madeleine Dupont, and Sweden closed out China 8-5. I won my doubles game 11-2 today. The day’s skeleton action is wrapping up with German sliders Christopher Grotheer and Axel Jungk sitting 1 and 2 ahead of China’s Yan Wengang. Two ROC sliders are next, then two-time silver medalist and six-time world champion Martins Dukurs of Latvia. Team GB’s Matt Weston is tied for 13th. The USA’s Andrew Blaser is 21st, and Australia’s Nicholas Timmings is buried in the basement (25th). Alina Paetz, who throws Switzerland’s last rocks even though Silvana Tirinzoni is the skip, nearly won the game ... for Team GB. A takeout attempt into a gaggle of rocks shook up the house and barely left a Swiss stone outcounting the best GB stone. Off to an extra end, and Team GB has hammer. Eve Muirhead is showing no ill effects from slipping and falling onto her rear end. The men’s free skate is crawling along. The third of four groups is just warming up now. At this rate, Nathan Chen won’t take the ice until after midnight Eastern time. (Which means someone else will be live-blogging it, which I know is a crushing disappointment to everyone.) This third group includes Canada’s Keegan Messing, who did his short program barely 24 hours after landing in Beijing, thanks to a positive Covid test. As I typed that sentence, he fell hard during warmups. It also includes defending gold medalist Yuzuru Hanyu, who took himself out of contention for a repeat with a less-than-stellar short program but could perhaps get enough points for the podium. Here’s your update on the ROC figure skating situation: The ROC’s men’s skaters, including team event gold medalist (for now) Mark Kondratiuk, are competing today as scheduled in the free skate. Meanwhile, the team event medals continue to sit, unawarded. Some erratic play in the ninth end forces Team GB to take one point, taking the lead but handing the hammer back to Switzerland for the last end. Sweden broke open its game against Japan by stealing three in the sixth and then scoring three more with hammer in the eighth. It’s 8-4, and Japan will likely concede it they don’t get a big number here. We may soon get an update on the ROC figure skating brouhaha. In the meantime, here’s a tweet about my former USA TODAY colleague Christine Brennan, one of the world’s top authorities on figure skating scandals. Spain’s first silver Snowboarder Queralt Castellet has made history. Bang-bang, bang-bang. Tabitha Peterson hits back-to-back runbacks (knocking one of her own stones into her opponent’s) to score three points in the seventh end, and the ROC concedes the game. Team GB is in a much closer game. They have the hammer in the ninth end after Switzerland tied it with two points in the eighth. We’ll stick with that on my big TV for now. The small monitor has figure skating. My phone has a cool disc golf game. My window has the darkness of night. Back to Australia’s Brendan Kerry -- he wound up doing three combinations for a free skate score of 160.01. That’s the best of the day so far, and he has the top overall score (244.80) as well. So if the next 16 skaters fall ... Back-to-back. First woman to do that in this event. You can’t take any of this for granted, of course. Olympic favorites can easily falter. Kim took care of business right away. She has the luxury of going for a truly massive final run with the gold already locked up. She goes for the 1260 again. And again, she doesn’t get it. No matter. Spain’s Queralt Castellet takes silver, her first Olympic medal in five tries. Japan’s Sena Tomita has bronze. Final halfpipe runs are up now. Sena Tomita falls and therefore won’t improve on her third-place standing. China’s Cai Xuetong just misses her top score and lands in fourth. That leaves one rider who can beat Chloe Kim. Can Mitsuki Ono pull it off? OK, Australia, let’s watch Brendan Kerry skate, shall we? The bulk of his jumps are early in the program, starting with a quad toeloop-triple toeloop combination, then a triple axel-triple toeloop. ... Could someone please start the music? Chloe Kim has clinched a medal, by the way. Kerry’s quad looks fine, but his landing is a little wobbly, and he opts out of the second half of the combo. He does the same with his second combo. Will he add some combos later? Indeed he does, putting one in his third jumping pass. As the music segues to Muse, all of his little technical boxes on the score bug are green. That’s good. We’ll resume in a bit. The halfpipe competition is wrapping up. In the halfpipe, everyone knows it’s time to go big or go home, and five riders have gone home. Well, crashed. The exception in the first six is China’s Liu Jiayu, who goes a little conservative to land a clean run at last. Like Liu, Japan’s Ruki Tomita hadn’t landed a clean run but does so here, and it’s not bad. She gets an 80.50 and will finish no worse than sixth. Her sister, Sena, is still on the podium bubble in third. Australia alert: In a few minutes, Brendan Kerry is due up in the men’s free skate. His music is listed as To the Lovers, Butterflies and Hurricanes, which seems like an eclectic bunch but is surely two different songs, the latter by Muse. Or a cover band, which reminds me that I need to work on Stockholm Syndrome on drums. Tricky stuff. Fellow Australian Nicholas Timmings is in last place (25th) after one run in the men’s skeleton. The USA’s Andrew Blaser is 20th. Team GB’s Matt Weston is 14th. They have two runs today and two tomorrow. For all the focus on figure skating’s technical scoring, it’s the component scores that seem mysterious. How does Nikolaj Majorov only get 7.50s on performance and composition, then 7.57 on “interpretation of the music”? Back at the halfpipe -- Chloe Kim is human. She goes for a 1080-1260 combination, but that seems a bit too ambitious. She simply didn’t have the momentum for the 1260, and she ends up taking a hard fall. Not as hard as Mitsuki Ono, who took a divot out of the lip of the pipe. China’s Cai Xuetong didn’t fall, but she needed both hands on the wall to stay upright. Second of three runs is complete. Reminder: Only the top score counts, so Kim’s fall doesn’t hurt. Well, it might hurt her backside a bit. Standings: 94.00 Kim (USA) 90.25 Castellet (ESP) 88.25 Tomita (JPN) That’s Sena Tomita. Ruki is 11th. Sena Tomita improved from the first run (86.00) to the second (88.25), which means she remains in first place among the Women’s Halfpipe Competitors Who Are Not Chloe Kim. But wait! Here’s 32-year-old Spanish snowboarder Queralt Castellet, whose best finish in her four previous Olympics is seventh four years ago. She’ll do better than that this time, finishing with back-to-back 900s for a 90.25. Castellet is in second, Tomita third. The awesomely expressive Nikolaj Majorov is bringing it once more in the free skate. He has some awkward landings on his jumps, but I’ll argue that’s intentional just to ramp up the drama. What a showman. Back to the halfpipe, because these programs in the men’s free skate take forever, we’re seeing China’s Liu Jiayu, who was in last place after the first run with a 11.25. She’ll stay in last place, skidding along the floor of the pipe early in her run for a 4.75. Through six riders, the only athlete to improve her position is Canada’s Elizabeth Hosking, who’s up from fifth to fourth. At this hour ... In curling, the USA leads the ROC 3-1, while Team GB trails Switzerland 2-1. Germany’s Christopher Grotheer is the early leader in skeleton with a time of one minute. Seriously: 1:00.00. But turn to figure skating. My new favorite skater, Sweden’s Nikolaj Majorov, is up next. He’s skating to music from The Man in the Iron Mask. And she’s in tears at the finish, knowing she may have already won gold. In lingo terms, she had a method air, a frontside 1080, a 900, a palate-cleansing 540 and then another 1080. But you don’t have to know what any of that means to see that she’s simply at another level. Stranger things have happened, of course, but good luck topping that. Big score from Sena Tomita. She finishes a smooth run with a 1080 and gets an 86.00. Queralt Castellet gets a 69.25, a score she’ll need to drop to get onto the podium. China’s Cai Xuetong adeptly alternates big rotations with big air, finishing with a switch 900 for an 81.25. The last rider to go before Chloe Kim is Japan’s Mitsuki Ono, who has a solid routine but not enough difficulty to move into the top three. Meanwhile, in figure skating, the ROC’s Andrei Mozalev has fallen a couple of times. Heeeeere’s Chloe ... How often do you see someone fall up the wall in the halfpipe? That’s what Japan’s Ruki Tomita just did, slipping as she approached the lip of the pipe. Her momentum carried her a few feet up before she slid back down. Her sister, Sena Tomita, is up next. Then it’s Spanish veteran Queralt Castellet. Back to curling -- Team GB skip Eve Muirhead tried to get a blank in the third end, but her stone simply wouldn’t roll out of the house. Translation for non-curling people: Team GB didn’t want that to happen. Why? Because when you score, the other team gets the hammer (last shot), so if the team with hammer doesn’t have a shot at getting two or more, it may opt to just remove any remaining rocks and leave both teams scoreless in that end, thereby retaining the hammer. But the tricky part is that you have to hit the opponent’s rock at an angle so your own rock also scoots out the rings. That’s the part Muirhead didn’t get done here. Anyway -- it’s tied 1-1 after three of 10 ends. Switzerland has the hammer now. Canada’s Brooke D’Hondt takes the way-too-early lead in the halfpipe with a 66.75. She’s 16. So if you need to motivate your kids to quit playing video games all day, call them in to watch this and put undue pressure on them. Parenting is hard. Fellow Canadian Elizabeth Hocking bests that score with a 73.00. Getting underway in women’s halfpipe with China’s Qiu Leng. The last of the 12 riders to go is the favorite and defending champion, the USA’s Chloe Kim. Qiu’s routine is indeed routine. That’s a 53.75. They’ll make three runs each, with only the best one counting. A lot of athletes in other sports surely envy the opportunity for second chances and third chances. One end is complete in USA-ROC women’s curling, with former skip Nina Roth throwing two solid takeouts and current skip Tabitha Peterson putting in two good draws for two points. Team GB and Switzerland blanked their first end. We’ll keep an eye on that, but now it’s time for sports that go twirling and flipping and lutzing and double-corking. Team GB today The country’s curlers will play in all three sessions. The women have just opened against Switzerland. The men play Italy in five hours. Then just after midnight in the UK, the women return against Sweden. That’s a brutal back-to-back schedule for Eve Muirhead. Switzerland’s Silvana Tirinzoni won the world championship in 2019 and again last year. Sweden’s Anna Hasselborg is the defending Olympic champion and leads what’s arguably the best team in the world since the current lineup came together several years ago. Matt Weston and Marcus Wyatt are up in skeleton, and Huw Nightingale is the snowboardcross representative. Australia today Brendan Kenny will be in the second group of skaters in the men’s free skate. Nicholas Timmings starts in skeleton. A quartet races in men’s snowboardcross. Jessica Yeaton and Casey Wright compete in women’s 10km classic cross-country skiing. Quick note on the men’s Alpine skiing combined, coming up in 85 minutes: There are no representatives from Team USA, Team GB or Team Australia. Ryan Cochran-Siegle, the surprise silver medalist in the super-G, was listed as “DNS” in yesterday’s practice and is not on the start list. You’re welcome to watch anyway, but in 25 minutes, we’ll be dividing our attention between the halfpipe and figure skating. The men’s free skate will extend longer than most operas, with the top skaters going last, so halfpipe will be higher priority at first. But first -- curling. The defending champion US men opened with a clutch win over Not Russia, and the same teams face off in women’s play right about now. I played doubles today, by the way. It’s hard. Especially when you haven’t spent most of your life on ice. Hello world. I’m Beau Dure, and I’ll be your conduit of Olympic news and commentary until midnight Eastern time. A question I’m pondering is what we expect from Olympic athletes. It’s a question worth considering when we wonder what has happened with Mikaela Shiffrin and whether she is suffering from the weight of expectations and no longer has her father to help her cope with it. Also consider Lindsey Jacobellis. In 2006, she was a national villain. She had lost a sure gold medal by showboating on the final jump of the snowboardcross final, and fans and pundits piled on the vitriol. Most of those people don’t know the rest of her career. Five individual world championships and one team. Ten X Games wins. I had interviewed her and bumped into her when we were on the same plane to Europe for the Games, and I couldn’t believe that she would ever be a national scapegoat. Yesterday, she gave a textbook example of shrugging off pressure. She flew through the final as if in a Zen state of complete control. Maybe it’s time for a few hundred people to apologize. Today, two more Americans grapple with expectations. Chloe Kim is up in the women’s halfpipe, and Nathan Chen goes in men’s figure skating. It’ll be exciting. But maybe we can give them a break if they don’t do exactly what everyone wants? Rant over. Let’s have some fun and see what surprises us today ... Coming up today Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – 12 matches spread across the men’s and women’s competitions 9.30am Figure skating – Nathan Chen goes for gold as the men perform free skating 🥇 9.30am – 3.15pm Snowboard – it starts with the women’s half-pipe, with the final scheduled for 10.25am, and then it is the men’s cross, with the final right at the end of the session 🥇 10.30am and 2.15pm Alpine skiing – it is the men’s combined event, they do the downhill in the morning, and the slalom in the afternoon 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – four matches in the men’s preliminaries, of which the pick is probably the US v hosts China in the evening slot. 3pm Cross-country skiing – the women race the 10km classic 🥇 7pm Freestyle skiing – tomorrow evening in Beijing it is the mixed team aerials 🥇 8pm Speed skating – the women’s 5,000m 🥇 9.30pm Luge – it is the team relay, which promises to be as wild as it sounds – do not miss it 🥇Hello and Happy Thursday, A few days ago, the US supreme court made a decision in a significant voting rights case that I find unusual and alarming. In an emergency 5-4 ruling on Monday, the court said Alabama did not have to redraw its seven congressional districts ahead of the 2022 midterm elections. This halted a decision from just weeks previously, when a three-judge panel issued an extensive ruling telling Alabama that it did in fact need to redraw the districts because they discriminated against Black people. African Americans comprise roughly a quarter of Alabama’s voting age population, but held a majority in just one of the state’s seven districts. The panel told Alabama its new plan had to have at least two districts where Black Alabamians made up a majority or near majority. The speed with which that lower court acted caught my attention, because the decision was based on Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act (which prohibits voting discrimination based on race) – and Section 2 redistricting cases are notoriously complex and can take years to wind through the court. But the judges said the question was not a close one, and other redistricting experts agreed. “Pretty much a textbook Section 2 case,” Nicholas Stephanopoulos, a law professor at Harvard tweeted. “If this doesn’t violate Section 2, nothing does.” We only have a glimpse into why the US supreme court reversed the lower court ruling. The court issued its decision on its “shadow docket” – an emergency procedure in which the justices don’t have to explain their reasoning. In this case, justices Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch and Amy Coney Barrett offered no explanation of their thinking. The insight we do have comes from justices Brett Kavanaugh and Samuel Alito. Writing for the pair, Kavanaugh said the case actually was “not clearcut in favor of the plaintiffs”. Requiring Alabama to redraw its districts now, he said, would result in confusion for voters and hardship for the state as it prepared for elections this year. It’s hard to take that argument seriously. Alabama’s primary election is not until 24 May, with mail-in ballot deadlines at the end of March. The state legislature completed the redistricting process in less than a week. Surely the state could put a new map in place with plenty of time ahead of the primary. Kavanaugh’s decision essentially tells states that even if their map is eventually found to be illegal, they can get a free pass to use it for one election. The plaintiffs in the Alabama case moved just about as quickly as they could in the case. They filed their case immediately after the maps went into effect and the lower court expedited the trial to issue a ruling four months ahead of the primary. I struggle to imagine a scenario in which they could have moved faster. Chief Justice John Roberts did not join Kavanaugh and Alito, but issued his own cryptic statement. He said that he would have required Alabama to redraw its maps, but said the law needed clarification. Many observers took that as a worrisome sign. In 2013 when the supreme court gutted a core piece of the Voting Rights Act, the section was one of the ways voting rights plaintiffs could challenge discriminatory laws. Now, Roberts is signaling he is open to narrowing the law. After the ruling, I wanted to better understand what the lack of representation would mean for Black voters in Alabama. I posed that question to Steven Reed, the mayor of Montgomery, Alabama. He pointed to the fact that all six Republicans in Alabama’s congressional delegation voted against a sweeping voting rights bill in Congress. The makeup of the congressional delegation also made it more difficult to advocate for expanding healthcare. “When you look at other disparities in the healthcare realm, that is a need that our congressional delegation has not supported,” said Reed, a Democrat and Montgomery’s first Black mayor. “Had our congressional delegation been more diverse and had another advocate that represents the Black population, it would have had a different effect.” Sheila Tyson, a Democratic county commissioner in Jefferson county, pointed to Republican opposition to raising the minimum wage and paid leave. “We don’t have people in these seats that represent us, that’s going to represent our beliefs.”Several outstanding recordings have opened up the world of Grażyna Bacewicz’s string music recently. Now Peter Jablonski adds to the momentum behind her piano music. Bacewicz was not only a renowned violinist, she was no mean pianist either – and, as with the violin, her writing for the piano is exhilarating and absolutely fitted to the instrument. In Jablonski’s selection, these qualities come across most obviously in the Ten Concert Etudes, written in 1956-67. These, especially the earliest ones of the set, take an irresistible joy in the mechanics of the piano, in the action of hammers hitting strings – they’ll appeal to fans of Kurtág, and to those who love the similarly playful Etudes by Ligeti, written three decades later. Mismatched scales and arpeggios dance up and down the keyboard, and a motoric energy underpins even the more sweeping, lyrical numbers. By the time she wrote these – and the contrasting Two Etudes on Double Notes, which Jablonski plays with a light touch and considerable charm – Bacewicz had survived a serious car accident that ended her performing career. But in 1953 she had been able to give the premiere of her own Piano Sonata No 2, a deceptively compact three-movement work that begins in expansive yet mercurial mood, ends with a big, restless toccata and centres on a slow movement built from a hypnotic, swaying figure – Jablonski makes this music sound magical when it returns at the end of the movement. Often, such as in that finale, the rhythms of Polish folk dance are in the background of Bacewicz’s writing; sometimes they are nearer the forefront, as in the brief, cheery Concert Krakowiak, based on snippets of folk melody. Her Piano Sonata No 1, written in 1949, was published only last year, in an edition by Jablonski himself. Catching its play between high and low sonorities in the early movements and the tricksy rhythms of its finale, he is as persuasive a performer of it as he is of everything else here. This week’s other pick Regards de Femmes from the pianist Marie-Catherine Girod (Mirare) is a nicely put-together whistle-stop survey of 17 composers. Some might already be on your radar – such as Ethel Smyth, represented gratifyingly by her Variations on an Original Theme (of an Exceedingly Dismal Nature) – but there are discoveries to be made too, including a lovely miniature by Norway’s Agathe Backer Grøndahl, two Provence-inspired pieces by Jeanne Barbillion and a minuet by Mozart’s British contemporary Maria Hester Park.The directors of a British firm producing tropical fish-themed coins for the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) are being threatened with prosecution by Mauritius as the net tightens around the UK’s claim to sovereignty over the Chagos Islands. The family-owned Pobjoy Mint, based in Kingswood, Surrey, has received a formal letter from Mauritius’s attorney general, Maneesh Gobin, telling its owners they are violating international law by manufacturing the currency without the correct legal permission. The colourful coins, dated 2021, display native aquatic species and bear the Queen’s head on the obverse. They are legal tender on BIOT, struck under licence from the UK government. One of the 50p pieces features an orange and white Chagos anemonefish - as popularised in the film Finding Nemo. The problem for the mint is that the United Nations’ highest court, the international court of justice, ruled in 2019 that the UK unlawfully detached the Chagos Islands from Mauritius before it gained its independence, and must return them. The Mauritian attorney general’s letter points out that the “issuing of currency is … an exercise of sovereign rights”. By doing so for BIOT, it states, the mint is “assisting in a serious violation of international law” and breaching the criminal code of Mauritius. The maximum penalties for such an offence in Mauritius are fines of up to 5 million rupees (£84,000) and a prison term “not exceeding 10 years”. There is no extradition treaty between the UK and Mauritius. The Pobjoy Mint has been contacted for comment. The legal move comes after a similar initiative by Mauritus at the UN’s Universal Postal Union last year. The UPU recognised the validity of international court rulings against the UK and recommended that its 192 member countries “cease the registration, distribution and forwarding of any and all postage stamps issued by the territory formerly known as the ‘British Indian Ocean Territory’”. As well as providing decorations for coins, the abundant natural life in the surrounding seas could bring great potential riches for the islands through either eco-tourism or intensive commercial fishing. In 2010, the UK government created a marine protected area (MPA) around the archipelago banning all catches. The Mauritian government is drafting a similar MPA regulation for when it eventually takes control of BIOT. It is expected to permit returned Chagossians to take fish for their own subsistence. This week’s expedition by the Bleu De Nîmes, a converted former British minesweeper, is the first organised by Mauritius into the waters of the disputed archipelago. Among the Chagossians on board was Marcel Humbert, 66. He is accompanying the survey to show Mauritian officials and scientists examining the outlying Blenheim Reef where Chagossians historically fished in their outrigger sailing canoes. “We used to catch red snapper, tuna, sharks, parrot fish and kingfish,” he explained. “But always with hooks – not nets. I would love to go back and fish in the Chagos Islands. We had a great knowledge of the sea.” One crustacean with alarming, predatory capabilities is the metre-wide coconut or robber crab. It has become dominant on some islands since the Chagossians were deported and has been observed hunting and killing seabirds. “You have to be careful,” Marcel added. “Their claws are very powerful. They can cut coconuts in two.” Traditionally, land crabs were cooked in coconut milk. The oldest surviving Chagossian, now 100 and living in Mauritius, has asked for one to be brought back so she can taste the dish one last time before she dies.Jimmy Kimmel “The Republican party is having a bit of an internal squabble right now,” said Jimmy Kimmel on Wednesday evening. “The party is divided over whether the violent insurrection of January 6 was a violent insurrection or just a lively sightseeing tour of the Capitol.” A week ago, the Republican National Committee voted to censure GOP legislators Adam Kinzinger and Liz Cheney for participating in the House inquiry into the insurrection, and in a statement called the attack “ordinary citizens engaged in legitimate political discourse”. “They’re just a group of ordinary citizens wearing bear skin and horns smearing feces on the wall of the Capitol,” Kimmel laughed. “Just ordinary citizens.” In a rebuke of his own party, the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, reaffirmed this week that the attack was “a violent insurrection” aimed at preventing the peaceful transfer of power. “Just to show you how far down the crazy hole we’ve gone, we’re now applauding Republicans who are willing to admit that what happened, happened,” Kimmel noted. “But there’s not just crazy, there’s some dumb going on, too,” he continued, pointing to deranged comments this week by Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene. Greene likened Congress to a gulag and said Nancy Pelosi deployed “gazpacho police”, instead of the Gestapo. “If you’ve got cold soup you’d better watch it, because Nancy Pelosi is coming for it,” said Kimmel. “These must be the soup Nazis Seinfeld warned us about so many years ago. And if the gazpacho police get ahold of you they’ll throw you right in the goulash.” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah looked into the racist foundations of America’s highway system, which Biden’s Build Back Better infrastructure plan seeks to address. “What you may not know is that when America first started building its highway system back in the 1950s, people were often forced to leave their homes to make room for all these fancy new roads,” Noah explained. “And guess which people were moved the most.” The Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956, one of the largest and most consequential infrastructure measures in American history, added 41,000 miles to the interstate system and cut through almost every major American city, displacing predominantly black and brown residents. The construction of I-94 in St Paul, Minnesota, for example, displaced one in seven of the city’s black residents. “Highway I-94 could’ve been anywhere in Minnesota, but it just happened to displace the very few black people living in Minnesota, more commonly known as the Minnesota Timberwolves,” Noah noted. “And look, don’t get me wrong: these highways had to go somewhere. I’m not saying no highways. But more often than not, that somewhere was right through a black neighborhood. “Black people are used to being displaced by gentrification, even today, but at least when that happens, they get to enjoy Shake Shack for a few months first,” he added. “These highways, on the other hand, they didn’t provide any improvement to the neighborhood. They slashed a hole through it. And whatever was left of that neighborhood just withered and died.” Highway construction not only displaced residents and permanently shut down black businesses, they also reinforced segregation at a time when new laws demanded the integration of schools. Highways in Atlanta, for example, “were laid down primarily with regard to keeping the races apart rather than keeping traffic moving efficiently”, said Professor Kevin Kruse of Princeton University. The city’s snarling traffic is in part due to design which winds around the city to cordon off black neighborhoods, rather than move cars. “Man, racism is a helluva drug,” said Noah. “Instead of designing the most efficient highway, they instead made it zigzag around the city like some kind of racist Mario Kart. “Highways might not be following black people around department stores or turning them down for loans,” he concluded, “but the way that highways were built in America was inarguably racist.”Nearly 60,000 bees have been stolen from a supermarket chain’s headquarters in Pennsylvania. The bees were stolen from the Giant Company’s corporate field on the Harrisburg Pike in Carlisle some time between 28 and 30 January. “Bees are an essential part of our food supply chain and having these beehives were one way we were helping to address the declining bee population here in our hometown community,” said Jessica Groves, community impact manager with Giant, in a press release. “We are extremely disappointed that this happened and are continuing to cooperate with Middlesex Township police department,” she went on to add. In 2020, the Giant Company introduced a seven-acre solar field at its corporate headquarters to support bees, along with birds and small wildlife. Bee populations have been dwindling in recent months, with beekeepers reporting an estimated loss of 45.5% of their colonies from April 2020 to April 2021, according to the nonprofit Bee Informed Partnership led by the University of Maryland. In Pennsylvania, beekeepers lost approximately 41% of their colonies between that time period, marking a slightly lower loss than the national average. Beekeepers in Iowa took the hardest hit from April 2020 to April 2021, losing 58.4% of their colonies. Associated Press contributed to this reportSitting in a cafe in an upmarket Moscow suburb, the former mercenary Marat Gabidullin looked a long way from the battlefields of Syria where he fought half a decade ago. Gripping his recently finished memoir, In the Same River Twice, the first published account of fighting for the secretive Russian mercenary outfit Wagner, Gabidullin said: “I wrote this because I realised it’s time for our country to face the truth: mercenaries exist.” At 55, he’s an imposing figure, with his face and muscular arms covered in scars. “We, in Russia, prefer not to discuss our mercenaries,” he added. “It doesn’t fit the official narrative.” In 2015, Gabidullin, a Russian airborne forces veteran and former bodyguard, joined Wagner, at the time a relatively unknown mercenary group. He was soon deployed to fight in Syria alongside the Russian army supporting President Bashar al-Assad, quickly rising to command one of Wagner’s five units there. Established in 2014 to support pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine, Wagner is allegedly funded by Yevgeny Prigozhin, a powerful businessman closely linked to Vladimir Putin who has faced western sanctions. From the company’s inception, it has been shrouded in mystery. On paper, the firm does not exist, with no company registration, tax returns or organisational chart to be found. Western governments and academics argue that Wagner is an unofficial foreign policy tool of the Kremlin, deployed where Russia wants to extend its influence or create upheaval. Prigozhin and Moscow have denied any knowledge of Wagner; officially, private military companies remain illegal in Russia. Representatives for Prigozhin have not responded to requests for comment. Gabidullin made no attempt to deny Wagner’s existence or its active role in Russian security interests. In contrast, he said one of his main motivations behind writing the book was to bring mercenary companies such as Wagner “out of the shadow”, highlighting their potential benefits for Russia’s foreign policy goals. “Mercenary groups are nothing to be ashamed of, they exist everywhere, but we lie about them,” he said. “We have specialised skills that a normal army lacks.” The memoir, based on events Gabidullin claims he witnessed, follows three years of Wagner’s Syrian campaign. It describes some of the mercenaries’ big battles, including two operations to liberate the ancient city of Palmyra. Scores of Wagner soldiers are believed to have fought and died in Syria since the conflict began in 2011. “The Russian army’s achievements in Syria were largely because of the mercenaries’ sacrifices. That fact is completely ignored by the military establishment and not known to the wider public,” Gabidullin complained, grumbling that “mediocre” Russian army generals received promotions based on Wagner’s successes. The memoir also describes mercenaries’ day-to-day lives, including occasional looting, and his commanders’ missteps. Gabidullin, whose hearing has suffered after years of fighting, also said he participated in the 2018 Battle of Khasham, where hundreds of Russian mercenaries were reportedly killed after US airstrikes against pro-regime forces, in what is believed to be the deadliest clash between Russia and the US since the cold war. “We should never have been there; our leadership messed up. The Americans knew exactly where we were,” he said, recalling those events. Post-Syria, Wagner’s notoriety has increased after reported operations in Central African Republic and Libya – resource-rich countries in which Russia has strategic interests. The group’s growing influence has also divided Mali and its European partners after the west African nation deployed Wagner fighters in December. And as tensions have escalated over Ukraine in recent months, Reuters reported that unnamed Russian mercenaries have been sent to separatist-controlled eastern Ukraine. Last week, the US-based Daily Beast claimed that Wagner soldiers are being moved from Africa, possibly towards Ukraine. Gabidullin said he had “vaguely heard” of mercenary deployments in Ukraine, quickly adding that a Russian invasion would be a “fatal” mistake. “I believe that war between Ukraine and Russia will be a complete disaster for Russia. Under no circumstances should this be allowed. Ukraine is our brother.” Throughout the conversation, Gabidullin looked somewhat agitated, his piercing blue eyes darting around the empty cafe. He said he worried about the consequences of publishing his book and was eager to avoid mentioning his alleged former boss, Prigozhin. “I suspect that there will be attempts by [Prigozhin] to discredit me. I am walking on a tightrope here,” he said. He first wanted to publish the memoir in 2020 but quickly withdrew his book after pressure from “certain people”. This time, however, he decided to not hold back and found a “brave” publisher in the city of Ekaterinburg. The Paris-based Michel Lafon publishing house is also planning to distribute a French version. “I thought to myself, ‘Enough, it’s time to get out of the shadows.’ I will not be dissuaded from publishing again. Because it is not just about me,” said Gabidullin. He pointed to how the ban on private military companies in Russia pressures family members of deceased mercenaries to remain quiet about their loved ones. Gabidullin hopes his book will help lift the veil of secrecy around his former profession. “This current situation does not suit many of my comrades. More importantly, it does not suit the dead mercenaries’ parents and relatives, who cannot even talk openly about how their son or brother died. They can only whisper it.” While Gabidullin’s memoir challenges the official narrative regarding the existence of mercenaries in Russia, a separate PR campaign also sprung up last year to promote the activities of groups like Wagner. Russian state television recently screened numerous patriotic action movies produced by Prigozhin-linked firms, depicting unnamed Russian “military instructors and volunteers” fighting in eastern Ukraine, Central African Republic and Mozambique – places where Wagner fighters have reportedly been active. The films, which Gabidullin dismissed as “trash”, portray heroic Russians saving local people from violent rebels. They stand in stark contrast to recent UN reports accusing Wagner operatives of raping civilians in Central African Republic or allegations that Wagner soldiers tortured and killed a prisoner in Syria. Confronted with these accusations, Gabidullin said he never saw his comrades engaged in such acts but added that such crimes were to be expected given the group’s current shadowy status. “The state puts mercenaries in a situation where they can act outside the law, and a soldier is forced to establish his own moral norms. But, of course, we should investigate that messed-up stuff.”It’s quite an entrance. Haley Bennett walks into the Soho hotel room flanked by publicists, then breaks theatrically into song, filling the air with lyrics from her new adaptation of Cyrano de Bergerac. The film is directed by her partner, Joe Wright; she plays Roxanne opposite Game of Thrones’ Peter Dinklage as Cyrano. It’s a fresh, modern and giddily romantic movie, and will probably do for Edmond Rostand’s classic play what Wright’s Pride &amp; Prejudice did for Austen. Bennett sits down and places a framed photograph on the coffee table between us, of a sunny little girl with pigtails. Having become slightly obsessed with Bennett’s Instagram account (more later), I assume this is her three-year-old, Virginia. But no, the photo is of Bennett herself, aged four. “I was just visiting my family in Ohio,” she says brightly. “I think it’s important that we nurture the four-year-old in all of us, so I brought her with me.” It’s the kind of opener to throw you. Afterwards, I wonder if she staged it to mask her nerves. Bennett, now 34, once suffered suchcrippling anxiety and shyness that it almost ended her career. Sitting down, she pulls a cushion protectively on to her lap, and absent-mindedly fidgets with the tassels for most of the 45 minutes we talk. In the flesh, she is exquisitely pretty, with porcelain skin she says lets her down when she blushes on talkshows: “I’m an open book. I have translucent skin.” Bennett seems dreamy, kooky, but sincerely and earnestly so, despite the incongruous uniform of black blazer and jeans. In Cyrano, she sports gorgeous bosom-bursting corsets in the style of Alexander McQueen; in her Instagram feed of life with Wright and their daughter in rural Somerset, her style is Hackney-cool-meets-Land-Girl – lots of wide-legged slacks and pretty headscarves. Cyrano marks a belated breakthrough. The movie gives us the classic love triangle: two men falling at Roxanne’s feet. But this is Cyrano without a big nose. Instead, Peter Dinklage’s size is what makes him feel like an outsider, and unworthy of Roxanne’s love – a treatment that feels 100 times more authentic than a hot actor wearing a colossal schnoz. Bennett and Dinklage appeared together in the original US stage version in summer 2018. Bennett was eight months pregnant; she’d been terrified to tell writer-director Erica Schmidt (who’s married to Dinklage), fearing she’d be fired. “Honestly, I think any other director probably would’ve recast me.” On stage she wore an empire-line dress to cover her bump; physically it got more challenging, harder to hit the notes. On opening night Wright sat in the audience, and he kept coming back, night after night. “I was like: You want to see it again?” Bennett is wide-eyed. “Joe just fell in love with it.” In the end he decided to turn the play into a movie. The funny thing is that, even with her other half directing, Bennett wasn’t a dead cert to play Roxanne in the film. “I never expected to be cast,” she says. “There’s a lot of boxes that need to be ticked when a studio makes a film. I knew Peter would be [in it]. I just wasn’t sure about my fate.” Because she wasn’t a bankable Hollywood name? Bennett nods wearily. She spent her 20s making the most of supporting parts. In The Girl on the Train she played the woman stalked by Emily Blunt; a vengeful widow in The Magnificent Seven. But she always seemed to miss out on leading roles. “I always felt like: what’s wrong with me?” She shrugs philosophically. “I guess the point is to do work you believe in. I may not ever be an A-list movie star, but I’ve kind of come to terms with that.” Bennett was born in Florida and raised in Ohio. Her parents divorced when she was six, and she lived with her father, Ron, a mechanic. They moved a lot when she was a kid. “It was a nomadic childhood; I never went to the same school for longer than two years. I was incredibly reserved and shy.” So, she wasn’t the kid in all the school plays? “No!” Bennett gasps. “Oh God, no. When I first started acting, I would just be covered in hives.” But on stage she could flick a switch, become someone else. When she was 19, Bennett moved from Ohio to Los Angeles. She enrolled in acting classes and gave herself three months. Was she ambitious? “No. I felt like an artist. But I’d been raised very working-class. No one in my family has left Ohio.” (There is talk of a wedding next summer – she and Wright getting hitched in Somerset. The problem is that no one on her side of the family has a passport.) Before her three months in LA were up, Bennett landed the role of a teen pop diva in Music and Lyrics opposite Hugh Grant and Drew Barrymore. At the screen test, performing a dance routine, she begged the casting director not to hire her. “I stopped mid-dance and started crying. I was so humiliated. I said: ‘You don’t want to cast me. I shouldn’t be here.’” But after Music and Lyrics, Bennett’s career stalled. In 2011, it looked like she caught a break when Terrence Malick cast her in Song to Song; she filmed off and on for a year, mostly with Christian Bale. But when Bale pulled out of the film, her part was cut. “That’s the way the cookie crumbles,” she shrugs with the air of a woman who has taken a knock or five. Still, being hired by Malick boosted her confidence. “It was validating. By that point I was feeling: maybe this isn’t what I was meant to do?” Malick reassured her: “He said, ‘Never give up.’ I needed that.” Bennett’s breakthrough finally came in the feminist indie drama Swallow. Bennett plays Hunter, a woman in full Stepford wife mode: beautiful house, rich husband. When she gets pregnant, she develops a freakish craving to eat objects that are not food (the condition is known as pica). For Hunter it begins when she pops a marble into her mouth. The film is pitch perfect: funny and subversive with a shiver of body horror. Producing and acting in Swallow was transformative, says Bennett. “I don’t think, before Swallow, I would have been able to have this conversation with you. I found my voice through the process of telling that story. Hunter didn’t have a voice and I felt that way in my life, I felt that way in my career. Like my voice didn’t matter.” Partly, she credits Wright with the change; they worked together on her character (he served as executive producer on the film). “It was a very significant collaboration with a creative partner, with Joe. How supportive he was and how different that relationship was to any relationship I’ve ever had in my life.” Listening back to the recording, I can hear the click-click of her nervously opening and shutting her gold locket. In 2018, the pair found themselves in the tabloid spotlight: papped at an airport together not long after Wright announced the end of his marriage to the musician Anoushka Shankar, with whom he shares two sons. The couple were at home in Somerset at the beginning of the first lockdown. Bennett’s face melts into a blissful smile at the mention of it. “I’ve fallen in love with the English countryside. We moved to Somerset a year before the pandemic, right in the nick of time.” Her lockdown Instagram feed is idyllic (Virginia in corduroy and bonnets, daffodils, dogs, countryside sunsets, puppet shows). “I’ve taken up gardening, growing our own food, chickens. I’ve really leaned into that slow pace of life.” Wright had been working on Cyrano for two years at the start of the pandemic; the producers were thinking that filming would be kicked back to 2022 or 2023. But in June 2020, Wright decided it was now or never. The cast and crew formed a production bubble in Noto, Sicily, in October 2020, constantly anxious about a Covid outbreak. “At one point it was proposed that Pete and I sing to each other with Plexiglass between us,” she giggles. Not very romantic. Bennett says that “dream work” helped her overcome anxiety at the prospect of playing Roxanne. This is the acting method that’s all the rage in Hollywood: picking apart dreams to unlock creativity. Bennett worked with the acting coach Greta Seacat (who helped Kirsten Dunst on The Power of the Dog). “I didn’t go to film school, I didn’t study theatre. So [it’s] being able to deep-dive into a technique rather than thinking about my own fear and feelings of inadequacy.” She looks up a little warily, conscious this can easily be mocked as actorly pretentiousness. The dream work helped her to silence the critical voice in her head on Cyrano, she says. What was it telling her? “Oh: You’re not worthy. You don’t have what it takes to portray a strong, powerful, bold and brave character.” Our time is nearly up. I look at the photo on the table: four-year-old Haley looks very happy, I say. Bennett nods. “She looks very happy and innocent and sweet. And then things get troublesome as you get older and need validation and love. It’s all about love. We all just want to be loved and seen.” • Cyrano is in cinemas on 25 FebruaryThe board of Kids Company has been criticised by a watchdog for failing to properly oversee the children’s charity – a year after the founder, Camila Batmanghelidjh, and her trustees were cleared of mismanagement and misconduct by the high court. The long-awaited report by the Charity Commission was forcefully rejected by Batmanghelidjh, who threatened to take legal action to overturn what she called a “travesty” and an attempt by the body to “rewrite history”. The former trustees said they were disappointed the report had ignored a judge’s clear findings. The report made a formal finding of “mismanagement in the administration of the charity” and of operating a “high-risk business model”. It raised questions about whether thousands of pounds spent by the charity on a small group of high-risk child clients was justified. However, it said there was no basis for regulatory action against Batmanghelidjh or the trustees, and confirmed there was “no dishonesty, bad faith, or inappropriate gain in the operation of the charity”. The former trustees are furious over what they regard as the report’s failure to properly acknowledge the years of media and public and political vilification unjustly experienced by the former board and staff of the charity since its closure in August 2016, and warned as a result people would be put off volunteering as trustees. In a statement it said: “After an investigation lasting over six years, the Charity Commission has not found anything that would warrant bringing regulatory action against anyone involved with Kids Company. “We are pleased with that conclusion but disappointed that the Commission, in criticising some decisions we took, has chosen to discount the clear findings of the high court that completely exonerated us.” The prospect of a further legal challenge raises the possibility that the long-running saga has further to go; it is nearly seven years since the charity closed, generating millions in legal costs, thousands of media articles and hundreds of hours of parliamentary and Whitehall time. Before its closure in 2015 amid allegations of financial mismanagement and child abuse, Kids Company was well known for its high-profile work providing practical and emotional support for children affected by trauma, violence and poverty. Its supporters included Coldplay and the then-prime minister David Cameron. In the report published on Thursday the commission highlighted shortcomings at Kids Company in a number of areas, from record-keeping to maintaining financial reserves, and failing to act quickly enough to improve the charity’s financial stability. Helen Stephenson, the chief executive of the Charity Commissionsaid: “We found that the charity’s operations and finances made the charity – and by extension its beneficiaries – more vulnerable to decisions of individual grant-makers and donors. The charity’s repeated failure to pay creditors, including its own workers, and HMRC, on time, was mismanagement.” Batmanghelidjh and the trustees said the report was based on untruths and allegations that had been comprehensively dismissed by a court ruling more than a year ago, which found no evidence of mismanagement or wrongdoing, and praised them as a “group of highly impressive and dedicated individuals”. Batmanghelidjh said: “Its report is a travesty. It ignores clear evidence that has been submitted and it amounts to nothing more than a corrupted attempt by the Charity Commission to justify its mistaken decision to conduct an investigation in the first place. Its processes lack any rigour and are riddled with unfairness.” She said the commission could not be trusted, and accused them of being “politically compliant” and lacking independence. “The report is an attempt to rewrite history. It presumptuously undermines the painstaking findings of the high court which found that neither I nor the trustees of Kids Company had committed any wrongdoing.” The former Kids Company trustees said the judge’s “findings as to the selflessness, skill, care and commitment shown by the trustees, made clear that there was no basis for concluding that there was mismanagement in the conduct of the charity’s affairs. We reject the commission’s finding to the contrary.” The trustees said that by largely discounting the court’s findings that they had acted appropriately and with dedication in “exercising honest judgment in difficult circumstances”, the commission would discourage other people from volunteering as charity trustees. The commission inquiry opened in August 2015, a fortnight after Kids Company went into voluntary liquidation after allegations of child abuse on sites owned by the charity. A six-month investigation by the Metropolitan police found no evidence of abuse, criminality or safeguarding failures. The court concluded the charity would have survived had it not been for the unfounded abuse allegations. Batmanghelidjh and the trustees became the target of relentless attacks in some sections of the media, including allegations they misspent charity funds providing clothes, healthcare and housing support for some of its child clients. A cross-party group of MPs accused the trustees of mismanaging the charity. In 2017, the official receiver launched legal proceedings to try to ban Batmanghelidjh and seven trustees from holding senior board roles in companies or charities, culminating in a 10-week court case in autumn 2020, and the judge’s ruling a year ago. The failed attempt cost the taxpayer £9.5m in legal costs. The commission inquiry – addressing the allegations of financial mismanagement and governance failure made at the time of the charity’s closure in 2015 and whether they “are found to be true” – was put on hold until after the court case was completed, and has taken a year to reach its conclusions. These include: The charity operated a high-risk business model, over-expanded its operations too rapidly, failed to strengthen its cashflow and failed to pay creditors and HMRC on time. It said the board was skilled but lacked specialist expertise in the field of psychotherapy. There was insufficient evidence to be sure that the charity’s expenditure of an average of £1,700 a month per child on a group of 25 high-needs children was justified. The trustees had the right to make these decisions, it said, but argued it could have helped more children had it reduced this spending. The charity’s reporting of the numbers of children who received its services could have been more transparent, it said. But it reported no evidence to back up allegations, made by an MPs’ committee in 2016, that Kids Company had overinflated its claim that it served 36,000 beneficiaries.The chief executive of Ben &amp; Jerry’s parent company, Unilever, has criticised the ice-cream maker’s controversial tweet about the Ukraine crisis, saying it should stay away from issues where it does not have “expertise or credibility”. The ice-cream company, which drew fire with a decision to stop selling its products in occupied Palestinian territories last year, caused a social media storm on Friday by calling on Biden to not send more troops to Europe, saying he risked “fanning the flames of war”. Unilever boss Alan Jope was asked about the company’s reaction to the tweet during a press call about his company’s annual results on Thursday. The consumer goods giant acquired Ben &amp; Jerry’s more than 20 years ago in a move that many predicted would dilute the counter-culture ethos of a company founded in 1970s Burlington, Vermont. But the ice-cream maker has continued to speak out on issues such as equality and the climate crisis. “It is a great brand, most of the time they get it right,” said Jope. “They have a great track record campaigning on important issues. But [on] subjects where Unilever brands don’t have expertise or credibility it is best to stay out of the debate.” Jope pointed out that the views held by subsidiaries are not those of the company. Unilever is unable to muzzle Ben &amp; Jerry’s, as under the terms of its takeover in 2000 the ice-cream company has its own independent board of directors free to take their own political stance. The company’s decision to stop selling ice-cream in occupied Palestinian territories last summer was highlighted by the leading Unilever shareholder, Terry Smith, the founder of Fundsmith, as the most obvious example of what he feels is Unilever’s obsession with public image and building environmental, social and governance credentials over business performance. Jope said that Ben &amp; Jerry’s showed strong 9% growth last year, becoming one of 13 Unilever brands to be worth 1bn-plus euros, and said that a new sales “arrangement” in Israel would come into force in 2023. He said that the Twitter posts on Israel and Ukraine were not responsible for driving ice-cream sales. “I definitely would not make a connection between those statements and sales growth,” he said. “Growth is driven much more by innovation.” Jope also reiterated that he believes the company is on the right track in pushing sustainability and purpose across its 400 brand portfolio. “Our brands that have sustainability as part of their proposition are growing faster,” he said. “I still believe it will be absolutely critical for successful businesses of the future. It is the icing on the cake, not the cake [itself]. It comes on top of getting the basics right.” Calls from investors to consider splitting the business, and a restructure of Unilever’s business units, has raised questions of a potential sale of operations including its ice-cream and nutrition businesses. “Both are great businesses,” said Jope. “They have some of the strongest brands that can thrive within Unilever. I see a bright future ahead for both the nutrition and ice-cream businesses inside Unilever.” • This article was amended on 10 February 2022 because an earlier version referred to Ben &amp; Jerry’s being founded in San Francisco whereas it was started in Burlington, Vermont.A bitter dispute between university staff and their employers looks set to escalate after it emerged university bosses have been advised to dock 100% of pay for staff who work to rule as part of industrial action that begins next week. More than 1 million students at 68 UK universities are to be hit by further strike action by members of the University and College Union (UCU), with up to 10 days of campus walkouts starting on Monday as part of a long-running dispute over pensions, pay and conditions. UCU members also have a mandate to take action short of a strike including working to contract, not covering for absent colleagues, not rescheduling lectures or classes cancelled due to strike action and refusing to do voluntary activities. In the event of such action, however, the Universities and Colleges Employers’ Association has recommended that universities should withhold full pay for what it describes as “partial performance of duties”. It is up to individual institutions to decide but the UCU has warned of more strike action if universities go ahead with “punitive” deductions. Raj Jethwa, UCEA’s chief executive, told a briefing on Thursday: “[Universities] are not only entitled [to withhold full pay], we think they are compelled do so. The legal position is pretty robust, but beyond that we think the moral position of employers is robust as well.” He said students, who have already endured two years of disruption due to Covid and other factors, would suffer further as a result of the action and universities needed to protect the student experience. So far the number of universities adopting the UCEA recommendation appears to be small. According to the union six universities have threatened to withhold full pay over action short of a strike, while others are warning of deductions of 25%, 33% or 50%. The union says Queen Mary University of London (QMUL), City University of London, Manchester Metropolitan University, Newcastle University, the University of Bristol, and the University of Bradford have all threatened to withdraw 100% of pay for action short of a strike. The UCU general secretary, Jo Grady, accused university bosses of trying to intimidate staff to stop them taking lawful industrial action. “This is a deeply unfair and unprofessional response from management which will only escalate and prolong these disputes. “As well as challenging partial deductions, we are also warning senior management that withholding 100% of pay is tantamount to a lockout and that staff will be within their rights to respond by calling more strike action.”After well over a week of negotiations Roy Keane has rejected the chance to make an emotional return to Sunderland. On Wednesday executives at the Stadium of Light had been cautiously optimistic that Keane would be in charge for the League One game at AFC Wimbledon on Saturday but by Thursday it became clear that contractual difficulties could not be ironed out. With their first choice having opted to remain in his role as a television pundit and the team in disarray after losing their past three league games, Sunderland reconsidered the other names on their shortlist and are in advanced talks with the former Norwich and Preston manager Alex Neil. Keane, Neil, Grant McCann and Sabri Lamouchi had second interviews for a post vacant since Lee Johnson’s sacking just under two weeks ago in the wake of a 6-0 thrashing at Bolton. Neil, who left Preston just under a year ago and has also managed in Scotland with Hamilton, was preferred to McCann. Many Sunderland fans were dismayed by Keane’s decision not to make an evocative comeback at the club he managed from 2006-08. Back then the former Manchester United midfielder galvanised Sunderland, winning promotion to the Premier League and keeping the team in it before falling out with the then owner, Ellis Short. While working for ITV as part of its coverage of the FA Cup tie between Manchester United and Middlesbrough last Friday Keane made clear he was attracted by the idea of returning the frontline. “I’d like to go back in as a manager,” he said. “But of course a club has to want you and you have to want to go to the club. And, just as importantly, the contract has to be right.” Despite his enduring affection for Sunderland – a club he has told friends he would consider managing even if they dropped out of the Football League – and popularity on Wearside, Keane would have been a high-risk appointment. The 50-year-old has not worked as a manager since his sacking by Ipswich in 2011 and is an established football analyst with ITV and Sky Sports. Admittedly there have been coaching roles with the Republic of Ireland and, more briefly, Aston Villa and Nottingham Forest but Keane has been employed solely in television since 2019. Perhaps equally importantly, he signed a raft of experienced players including Dwight Yorke and Andy Reid during his Sunderland tenure but would have been expected to work with the largely young team nurtured by Johnson. Meanwhile there were concerns as to how a sometimes infamously contrary and volatile character might have coped when confronted by League One referees, pitches and club facilities. Although Sunderland – who spoke to multiple managerial candidates after Johnson’s sacking – attracted a crowd of more than 38,000 for last Saturday’s home defeat to Doncaster, another loss, at Cheltenham, on Tuesday has seen them drop to fourth. In less than a fortnight they have gone from being regarded as automatic promotion contenders to play-off challengers and are in desperate need of identifying the correct manager to end their four-season exile in League One.The owner of the shale fracking company Cuadrilla will permanently plug and abandon its two shale wells in Lancashire, drawing a line on Britain’s failed fracking industry. Cuadrilla set out plans to permanently seal the two shale gas wells drilled at the Preston New Road Lancashire shale exploration site a little over two years after the government brought an end to fracking in England. Francis Egan, the chief executive of Cuadrilla, said the government’s oil and gas regulator had ordered the “ridiculous” shutdown of the wells in the northern Bowland Shale gas formation despite Europe’s gas supply crisis. “At a time when the UK is spending billions of pounds annually importing gas from all corners of the globe, and gas prices for hard-pressed UK households are rocketing, the UK government has chosen this moment to ask us to plug and abandon the only two viable shale gas wells in Britain,” Egan said. The UK’s failed shale industry has consistently argued that fracking could help to secure gas supplies, but the claims have been disputed by leading industry experts who have said shale gas would not help to lower UK energy bills. The Guardian understands that the Oil and Gas Authority (OGA) originally called for the wells to be shut down last summer, and gave Cuadrilla until June this year to complete the work. Cuadrilla’s attack on the government’s stance against fracking has won support from two members of the Conservative Net Zero Scrutiny Group, which has recently begun what critics say is a “cynical” campaign against policies designed to end the UK’s contribution to the climate crisis. The Tory MP Craig Mackinlay, the chair of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group, described the shutdown of the redundant wells as “madness” and Steve Baker, the group’s deputy chair, said the decision would “make the situation even worse” for households struggling with energy bills. “We heard the same story a decade ago,” said Greenpeace UK’s head of climate, Kate Blagojevic. “Fracking was going to be the solution to our energy problems. Years later, all this industry has given us are a couple of holes in a muddy field and some minor earthquakes.” The government brought in a de facto ban on fracking in late 2019 after years of bitter opposition from climate campaigners and local protest groups as a study by the industry regulator warned the practice could not be carried out safely without the risk of triggering earth tremors. “Even shale advocates were forced to concede that fracking wasn’t going to lower energy bills, and that remains true for both shale gas and new gas from the North Sea. It will take many years to develop and if it gets produced at all, it will be sold to the highest bidder on the international market, barely making a dent on global gas prices. The solution to the energy crisis isn’t more gas, but better, greener homes,” Blagojevic said. Sam Hall, the director of the Conservative Environment Network, said the UK’s fracking industry had failed to “win communities’ support or frack without causing tremors”, even after the government “expended significant political capital and taxpayers’ money trying to kickstart fracking in the UK”. Fracked gas had “limited potential to reduce energy bills”, he said, and the government was “right to focus on expanding domestic clean energy and reducing gas demand as the route out of the current energy bill crisis”. The OGA’s rules state that only wells “which have real value” are allowed to be left suspended “rather than immediately decommissioned”. A spokesperson for the OGA said it expected a “timely plugging and abandonment of non-producing wells” under its rules, which ensure that “redundant” wells are managed responsibly.Forty-five years ago this month, Fleetwood Mac released Rumours, an album that combined gauzy soft pop, manicured folk and stormy rock with a soap-operatic level of intra-band strife. It won album of the year at the Grammys, went 20 times platinum in the US alone, and sits alongside Kind of Blue and The Rite of Spring in the Library of Congress’s registry of historically significant recordings. What’s truly remarkable, though, is how it continues to sell new physical copies, despite being available to stream and in secondhand form in every high-street charity shop. According to the UK’s Official Charts Company, Rumours sold 34,593 vinyl copies in 2021, third only to new albums by Adele and Abba, and besting new records by Ed Sheeran and Lana Del Rey. It sold 32,508 copies the previous year. It is currently at No 29 in its 926th week on the UK album chart – up five places from the week before – while in the US, Rumours sold 6,000 vinyl copies in the last week of January, reaching No 1 on the vinyl albums chart. It sold 169,000 vinyl copies in the US in 2021 (according to MRC Data). For Brittany Spanos, a senior writer at Rolling Stone, its ongoing popularity has a simple explanation. “It’s a fantastic pop album with classically written pop songs: that never goes out of style.” Those songs emerged from long, meticulous studio sessions punctuated by romantic tension and heavy drug use. Keyboardist-singer Christine McVie was dating Fleetwood Mac’s lighting director in the wake of her marriage to bassist John McVie, while singers Stevie Nicks and Lindsey Buckingham were ending their long-term relationship: the LP feels like every stage of a relationship breakup all at once. “The distinct personalities of the songwriters come through really raw; they’re communicating with each other in heartbreaking, angry ways,” says Zoë Howe, author of the book Stevie Nicks: Visions, Dreams and Rumours. Adds Spanos: “You’re getting the great theatre of heartbreak from multiple sides.” Phil Barton, owner of Sister Ray Records in Soho, London, says Rumours is a “must-stock item – we sell hundreds of copies every year. It never seems to tail off”. He also credits the wider vinyl boom – sales have increased every year for 14 years in the UK – as part of Rumours’ endurance: “People seeking out classics will inevitably include Rumours as part of their collection.” This rings true to Rupert Morrison, owner of Drift, a record shop in Totnes, Devon: “If you had any anxiety of getting back into vinyl, or you wanted to have that implied credibility, it’s a safe bet,” he says. “It’s this implied [idea]: ‘It’s a classic.’” Rumours’ songs have also become modern standards: Florence + the Machine and country supergroup the Highwomen have tackled The Chain, while Kacey Musgraves covered Dreams on her 2022 US tour. The Los Angeles duo Fleetmac Wood create more elaborate interpretations via inventive remixes. “The original production of Dreams, with the hypnotic looped drums, is essentially a prototype modern dance record,” says co-founder Lisa Jelliffe (AKA Roxanne Roll). Fleetmac Wood’s dance-friendly sets cover all Mac eras, although Jelliffe sees why Rumours continues to fascinate. “A lot of modern pop releases feel like marketing compared to the authenticity of Rumours,” she says. “[The band] knew what they created together was bigger than the personal turmoil. This album is incredibly meaningful for people, and it’s healing to take that to the dancefloor.” Nicks’s pop cultural resilience is another explanation. In 2020, the Nicks-penned Dreams returned to the charts after a man named Nathan Apodaca posted a TikTok video of himself vibing to the song while skateboarding and drinking cranberry juice. (The clip spawned countless homages, including one from Mick Fleetwood himself.) Nicks has also acted in American Horror Story, launched a well-received solo tour, and earned a Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction as a solo artist; younger artists such as Miley Cyrus are influenced by her to the point of explicit homage, and she has a high-profile friendship with Harry Styles. “People appreciate Stevie Nicks as an inspirational wise elder of rock’n’roll, but also acknowledge her songwriting more than ever,” Howe says, “rather than just seeing her superficially as this charismatic, stylish singer that everyone had a crush on.” One Rumours fan, 15-year-old Jane Wagle, had her interest in the band piqued by the Dreams TikTok but was inspired to explore Nicks’s work further thanks to Styles’s endorsement. “I know that Harry likes Fleetwood Mac, and I trust him because he likes David Bowie,” she says. “I’m definitely a punk person, a rock person. I wouldn’t expect myself to be that into Fleetwood Mac. But it’s kind of its own thing. It’s really beautiful, and it has its own personality; all the songs are different, but cohesive.” Wagle’s assessment shows there is no simple demographic of who is buying Rumours. Sister Ray’s Barton notes purchasers tend to be female and are “increasingly younger”, but at Chicago’s Reckless Records, where Rumours has been a top seller for the last decade, head buyer Matt Jencik says there’s no typical customer profile. And although Drift’s Morrison says he sees older music fans re-buying Rumours, it’s also difficult for him to pigeonhole buyers. He cites a 24-year-old shop employee: “A lover of extreme music, he still had to admit he had a soft spot for Rumours.” I give Ken Caillat, who co-produced Rumours, the last word on the LP’s staying power. “I think the combination of the young band members – and that half of them were British and half of them were California hippies – and that the lyrics were fuelled by each of the couples breaking up simultaneously, made the songs relatable to people of all ages,” he says. “Their youth and optimism shines through to this day.” Fleetmac Wood play at Troxy, London, on 18 February. • This article was amended on 11 February 2022 to remove an incorrect reference in a quote to the band members being in their 20s when Rumours was recorded.In a timely reminder that respiratory infections are not a modern malaise, researchers have found the first evidence of such an affliction in a dinosaur that lived 150m years ago. Palaeontologists made the discovery when they examined the fossilised neck bones from a diplodocid, a huge, long-necked herbivore that walked the Earth in the late Jurassic period. Dr Cary Woodruff, director of palaeontology at the Great Plains Dinosaur Museum in Malta, Montana, was inspecting the remains of a dinosaur named Dolly, unearthed in the state more than 30 years ago, when he noticed unusual broccoli-like growths in several of the neck bones. “I’ve looked at a lot of sauropod vertebrae and I’ve seen some weird things, but never anything like these structures,” Woodruff told the Guardian. Stumped by what he found, Woodruff put a call out on social media for anyone who might know what they were. The response was almost immediate. A number of scientists – who went on to join the investigation – said the bony growths looked similar to protrusions that can be caused by respiratory infections in modern birds. Detailed CT scans of the neck bones backed up the suspicion. The unusual growths were in regions of the neck bones that would have been attached to air sacs which in turn formed part of the dinosaur’s respiratory system. The abnormalities may have formed in response to an infection similar to aspergillosis, which is caused by inhaling mould spores, the researchers write in Scientific Reports. “I imagine that Dolly would have been very much like a sick person: coughing, sneezing, experiencing a fever and out of it,” Woodruff said. “We’ve all had many of the same symptoms, and likely felt just as crummy as Dolly did. I don’t personally know of any fossil I’ve been able to sympathetically relate to more.” Aspergillosis is fatal to modern birds without treatment. “Did Dolly sadly pass away sick and alone? Or did being on its own and visibly so weak paint a ‘bullseye’ for predators? Either way, we can’t say, but I do believe that in one way or another, it ultimately contributed to the death of Dolly,” Woodruff said. The findings will help researchers understand how such illnesses affected dinosaurs. “Dinosaurs, including the giant sauropods, breathed through a bird-like air sac system, where the air passed through the lungs as well as systems of air sacs that penetrated into the backbone. The new discovery shows damage to one of the vertebrae that matches the damage seen in birds today that have suffered from inflammation of the air sacs,” said Michael Benton, professor of vertebrate palaeontology at the University of Bristol. “Chickens with airsacculitis can show swollen necks, general lethargy, nasal discharges and coughing. Imagine a 50-tonne dinosaur coughing up great blobs of snot,” he added. “We know so little about the diseases dinosaurs suffered, unless those maladies were somehow able to leave marks on fossil bone,” said Steve Brusatte, professor of palaeontology and evolution at the University of Edinburgh. “Here we have evidence that a big long-necked dinosaur had the same type of respiratory infection that many birds have today, and we can infer that because the air sacs birds used to breathe actually leave impressions on the bone. It’s remarkable to envision a dinosaur the size of a jetplane coughing and suffering with the same breathing infection as a pigeon or gull today.”‘We were close friends for a time, but she was never my best friend. I never felt that I knew her – you know, nobody felt like they knew her that well.” Rachel DeLoache Williams is recalling a friendship she made in her late 20s, back in 2016, beginning at an exclusive nightclub on New York’s Lower East Side. Her new companion was, she says, the opposite of her – a “bold, offbeat, audacious” trustafarian and good-time girl who thought nothing of tipping hundreds of dollars at hotels and restaurants. She seemed keen to be friends with Williams, treating her to lavish dinners and even inviting her to sessions with a personal trainer who had worked with Denzel Washington and Gwen Stefani. However, the party girl’s erratic, forgetful and often entitled behaviour masked something far darker, which is now clear to the former Vanity Fair photo editor. “Any time you have to make excuses for somebody – repeatedly – it’s a good indicator that you should give the relationship space,” she says gravely. “I know much more now about sociopathy, and that enigmatic charm. That’s how the whole charade functions.” The charade, of course, was that her friend was not the daughter of a German billionaire but rather that of a Russian truck driver, and she was funding her charmed life with ill-gotten gains and bad cheques. Anna Sorokin was a con artist, who scammed businesses, banks and friends out of $275,000 (£203,000), while masquerading as an heiress, “Anna Delvey”, and trying to secure investment for a Soho House-style members’ club. Williams was not only a confidante but also a victim who ended up footing a bill for $62,000 for a trip to Morocco, before spending months trying to claw back her money from Sorokin. Eventually she worked with investigators to apprehend her. Dubbed “the Soho grifter”, Sorokin went on to become a pop culture phenomenon, with the media even charting her courtroom looks (she hired Courtney Love’s stylist, naturally) prior to her imprisonment for between four and 12 years for fraud in 2019. Part of the “unholy trinity” of scammers who have set transatlantic pop culture alight in recent years – along with Fyre festival’s Billy McFarland and blood testing entrepreneur Elizabeth Holmes – Sorokin’s story has led to books (Williams wrote one, titled My Friend Anna, which chronicles the agonising effect of the debt on her life), plays (Anna X, starring The Crown’s Emma Corrin, premiered on London’s West End last year) and podcasts (see: the BBC’s Fake Heiress). Now the tale has inspired a TV series, Inventing Anna, written by Shonda Rhimes, creator of moreish hits from Scandal to Bridgerton, based on a viral New York magazine article by journalist Jessica Pressler (whose work also formed the basis of the J-Lo movie Hustlers). The series is pacy and pulpy, with Veep’s Anna Chlumsky starring as Vivian Kent, a Pressler-like writer who works for a magazine named Manhattan – and Ozark’s Julia Garner playing the petulant but charming crook. Inventing Anna is, quite literally, ripped from the headlines: it opens to the swaggering strains of Megan Thee Stallion, as copies of Manhattan fly off printing presses, picturing Delvey’s dramatic cat-eye makeup and dishevelled hair. And yet it takes a rather creative tack when handling the story, with each episode warning that it is “completely true, except for the parts that are totally made up”. It covers Kent’s own plight, as she aims to redeem her faltering career by getting the scoop of the decade on the fake heiress. She travels to interview her at Rikers Island prison, while heavily pregnant – lest anyone think this is a series without any emotional heft – and looking as though she may keel over at any second. Through flashbacks, a picture emerges of a conniving thief, a cringe-inducing poseuse, and something of an antiheroine, faking it till she makes it as she looks to secure a $2m bank loan for her business, which never came to pass. Garner is beguiling, her cod-European accent – veering between countries with each word – reportedly approved by Sorokin herself. The overall effect is stylised, soapy and – based on the six episodes released to the press – alternately celebrates and cocks a snook at Sorokin. It opens with a monologue from Garner’s character, describing herself as “an icon, a legend” and describing the viewer as “a big lump of nothing”. With nine hour-long episodes, some viewers may find themselves wondering whether we have, perhaps, hit peak Anna Delvey/Sorokin. Possibly not. Annaliese Griffin wrote a piece for New York magazine’s The Cut last year about the rise of the villain in pop culture, and believes the continued interest in the subject of Inventing Anna stems less from the woman herself and more from people’s curiosity about the world she managed to inveigle herself into. “I’m not sure I would call her a beloved figure, exactly, but the reason she is compelling is that sense of the rules being different for different people,” she says. “If you’re incredibly rich, or connected to rich people, you’re waltzing through the door at a restaurant and being comped or gifted your meals. You can float along in that embrace of money and wealth and power and obliviousness. It confirms to us that there are these different rules, that this world is calculated to keep outsiders out, and that, if you could just figure them out, and crack the code like Anna, you might be able to exist inside it, too.” It is, she believes, particularly seductive for viewers to see someone “taking advantage of the very wealthy – sort of an ‘enemy of my enemy is my friend’ kind of thing”, especially at a time of increased economic precarity. However, Inventing Anna isn’t just about the very wealthy, but also the more ordinary people with whom Sorokin came into contact. Williams had not yet seen the series when we spoke, but expressed her concerns about a semi-fictional treatment of the tale. “[Anna] is getting this entertainment treatment that elevates her and glamorises her in a way that makes this entire situation look like a net positive business venture,” she says. “I like a juicy Shonda Rhimes show, but I think it’s different when it’s based on a true story.” Indeed, Sorokin was paid $320,000 by Netflix for the series (she is believed to have in turn paid this to her creditors). “I have a closer view of things than I care to have,” adds Williams. “But what concerns me today has less to do with me and Anna – it’s more a big-picture concern for this type of entertainment.” Sara Rourke, a psychologist working in LA and London, sees another potentially problematic angle in turning Sorokin/Delvey into an increasingly fictionalised figure. “Anna was blurring the lines between what was real and what was made up, and now people are projecting a narrative of who they think she is. Everybody who watches the show will project all of their experiences, and thoughts and feelings and imagination and fantasies, on to it, about why she did what she did,” says Rourke. “That says as much about the person who those fantasies belong to as they do about her. You can’t take the criminality out of it – people have got hurt in the process of what she’s done – but we maybe don’t see where she may have been the victim, where she’s been hurt and what she’s perpetuating. She’s this ambivalent, love/hate character who has also been commodified in a way.” Problematic as it may be in many ways, Inventing Anna is perhaps the best – and the most apt – way to tell this story on TV. Its semi-fictional form mirrors the way in which Sorokin was divorced from the truth of her own life, while the framing device of a journalist looking for answers acts as a stand-in for everyone who has tried to understand the case for themselves. The reality is that pop culture has now overtaken the story, turning it into a Robin Hood-type legend for the Instagram age. Indeed, Sorokin’s story carries on in the background, now something of a sideshow. She was released from prison in early 2021, on parole until the end of her four-year sentence, and has since been arrested again, for overstaying her visa. In an essay published last week on the US site Insider, written from US immigration custody and titled Erasing Anna, Sorokin rallied against Inventing Anna, asking whether she would “for ever be stuck in a past not entirely of my creation without getting a chance to move on?” Griffin says she didn’t even know that her stint in prison had come to an end, so separate are reality and pop culture. “I read an article about her looking for an apartment,” she says. “I was like, wow – I don’t know how that passed me by.” • This article was amended on 15 February 2022 to remove a reference to Inventing Anna having used an image of the real Sorokin/Delvey in the show’s opening scenes. Inventing Anna is available on Netflix from 11 February; My Friend Anna by Rachel DeLoache Williams is published by Quercus in paperback on 17 February. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.After funding the first wave of Covid-19 vaccine research, the country music star and beloved celebrity Dolly Parton is now spreading the gift of education. The country singer’s company recently announced that her theme parks will pay for its employees to pursue a college degree. Starting 24 February, employees at Dollywood who pursue a college degree will have their tuition, associated fees and books 100% covered by the Dollywood theme park. The offer also includes all 11,000 full-time, part-time and seasonal employees that work at any of the 25 amusement parks and attractions under Herschend Enterprises, Dollywood’s parent company, including Dollywood. Under the Grow U program, the new education pilot initiative, employees can register for a higher learning program on their first day through 30 offered learning partners, with subjects ranging from marketing, technology and other studies. Grow U has also committed to partially funding 150 additional degree programs that include art design, engineering and hospitality, covering up to $5,250. “When our hosts feel appreciated and are given opportunities like this, they feel cared for and they can pass that feeling on to their guests,” said Wes Ramey, a spokesman for Dollywood Co, to the Washington Post. Ramey also confirmed to the Post that the program had Parton’s full support, adding: “She’s very supportive of the employees learning and continuing to grow themselves.” While other companies have previously offered education incentive programs for their employees, many such initiatives have been scaled back or on a smaller scale compared with the Dollywood program, according to the Post. Many larger companies such as Chipotle and Best Buy only offer up to $5,000 of covered tuition to employees. Starbucks only covers an online degree obtained through Arizona State University.The government has announced an immediate review of fairness in the pig industry supply chain and has promised to look into pig contracts in response to a worsening crisis in the sector, as an estimated 200,000 pigs are backed up on farms and cannot be taken to slaughter. The farming minister Victoria Prentis made the announcement following a summit with pig producers on Thursday to discuss ways to solve the continuing crisis in domestic pig production. The National Pig Association (NPA) chair, Rob Mutimer, and the National Farmers’ Union (NFU) president, Minette Batters, requested an urgent summit last month to address labour and supply chain concerns in the pig industry, as well as financial difficulties faced by producers. “The effects on pig farmers have been devastating, and it is clear that many contractual arrangements are simply unfair,” Prentis said. She said ministers wanted to engage with the pig industry on how fairness and transparency could be improved, and a consultation is expected later in the year. Measures the government introduced in the autumn to support pig producers – including permitting foreign butchers to enter the UK on temporary visas, longer working hours at processing plants and a scheme allowing producers to store pig carcasses for several months before processing – have also recently been extended until the end of March. Producers have said the British pig industry is fighting for survival. They had called on government to hold a summit because they said the previously announced support measures had delivered “minimal benefit”. Zoe Davies, the chief executive of the NPA, said the meeting had been a positive start to discussions about how to solve the crisis in the pig industry. “We didn’t get any big commitments today, but I don’t think we expected any,” she said. “The government is committed to finding a solution and we will make sure they are successful, otherwise there won’t be a pig industry.” Davies said producers wanted processors and retailers to work together to tackle the backlog of pigs on farms, while retailers could also do more to promote British pork. Batters said the review of supply chain fairness was positive, but would “do nothing to alleviate the crisis taking place on pig farms across the country”. “We now have a long-term plan but no short-term fix,” she said. “Without urgent action, I fear the pig sector will contract even further and we will see increases in pork imports that are produced to lower standards. That is something I certainly don’t want to see and neither do the public, who want to buy high-quality, British pork.” She called on the government to consider giving financial support to the farmers most affected, which has been provided in Scotland, Northern Ireland and some EU countries. The number of pigs stranded on farms has been rising since the industry began to sound the alarm last autumn. It has almost doubled from 120,000 to nearly 200,000. The backlog of pigs increased rapidly over the festive period when staff took holidays or had to isolate with Covid. The cull of healthy pigs on farms continues, with an estimated 35,000 animals killed since September, according to the NPA, although it said the actual number is likely to be higher. Pigs are backing up on farms because of a lack of staff at the abattoirs where they are slaughtered. Only 100 of the 800 temporary butcher visas granted by government have been taken up so far, the NPA said. It has called on ministers to simplify the visa application process and ease the English language requirement to make it easier to recruit trained butchers. Ahead of the summit, pig farmers from the UK gathered in York to raise awareness about the challenges they face. Farmers have been forced to kill and dispose of animals to make space and ensure the continued welfare of their livestock. The meat industry is one of many sectors of the UK economy grappling with labour shortages linked to Brexit and the pandemic, while a lack of delivery workers and drivers has affected supply chains. “I personally know of another 1,000 pigs killed a couple of days ago on one farm,” said Duncan Berkshire, a pig vet in Yorkshire who also attended Thursday’s summit. “It is just devastating for everyone involved. “In the last three months of visits I haven’t had a single client where there isn’t a problem on the farm that can’t be put down to the fact that pig flow has been interrupted. “The pigs I am seeing at the minute are the biggest I have ever seen and the tightest packed together.”The first surprise of The Tinder Swindler, Netflix’s hit film and the only documentary to have topped its global most-watched list, is that anyone is still using Tinder. The “swindler” of the title is preposterous in every way, but he chose his victims well: women in their early 30s blinded to the absurdity of a “billionaire’s son” using that dusty old dating app, which has no door policy. The second thing to say about this engrossing film is that any online dating scam that results in a woman merely being defrauded of her savings, rather than robbed of her life, practically qualifies as comedy. In fact, there are comic episodes. The story unfurls like a jaw-dropping, real-life version of Catch Me If You Can. “Simon Leviev”, the eponymous villain, looks like a member of the A-Team who just emerged from a costume shop wearing that timeless ensemble Heir to a Diamond Fortune. It’s testament to the suspension of disbelief that drives so much online dating that photos of a man posing on a yacht, in a helicopter or leaning against the bonnet of a sports car inspire some women to think, “He looks nice!” rather than, “That’s clearly fake.” Or, more helpfully perhaps: “He looks like an arsehole.” It’s not just about the money. After the story blew up, online commentators pegged Leviev’s victims as gold-diggers who got what they deserved, but the reality is much sadder. “Oh my God, animals,” says one of Leviev’s victims, remembering the Tinder profile that reeled her in. “A handsome man with a cat? You can’t go wrong.” It’s hard to write in detail about the scam without spoiling the film. But what it says, broadly, about the (straight) dating market confirms truths about men and women that, in more optimistic moments, one might have thought out of date. It is revealing that the one woman in the film who is not, apparently, defrauded, is a 22-year-old, whom Leviev was “lucky” to snag in the first place. Most of us know this simply from being alive: that something happens in online dating when straight women leave their 20s, and which I have watched friends go through with horror. One said to me recently, in despair, “Realistically, I’m looking at widowers, mid-60s and up”. (She is 47.) The only man in her age group who engaged with her sent a photo of himself sprawled on the hood of a Ford Discovery and asked if she was interested in travelling to New Jersey. She’s not flying to Bulgaria with a guy after a single coffee or handing over her passport details if he asks. But the vulnerability that comes from years of exposure to men her age looking for women at least 10 years her junior can put a finger on the scales of one’s judgment. Yet, even with this in mind, the sheer size of the red flags over Leviev make one yell at the screen. What is the point of doing all those “Am I dating a narcissist?” quizzes if, when it comes down to it, you don’t clock the oversharing and love-bombing on the first date? “Very quickly, he became very personal, and that’s what I liked about it,” says one victim, and you know she’s in for it, even before she says, “Here’s this kind of person that you want to save.” (I have dated people I wanted to save and, to a woman, they have all been nightmares, but watching this I felt only relief. Women are awful – but have you met men?) The frightening thing about some stripes of conmen is the degree to which they believe their own bullshit. It feels like one of those truths handed down the generations from woman to woman, like never corner a squirrel in an attic; or, in this case, never confront a deluded man with evidence of his delusions, or he is liable to fly at you, eyes popping. Thank God for the heroes of this story, a team of Norwegian journalists who track Leviev halfway across the globe, and a Dutch woman who, on discovering precisely what she is dating, pulls off a counter-scam that you can hardly believe you’re seeing. This woman should have a statue raised in her honour. Instead, the conclusion is a little underwhelming. In fiction, a Wicker Man-type fate might await Leviev. One can imagine what a writer like Fay Weldon would do with him. In reality, public exposure will have to suffice. Having served two short prison sentences – neither for the crimes alleged by the women in the film – he is currently living as a free man in Israel. For a man who apparently doesn’t feel shame, this doesn’t seem adequate. Still, there are downsides. As the popularity of the film soared this week, Tinder announced that Leviev was banned from its app. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistRussia’s top diplomat has described talks with the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, as like a conversation of “the mute with the deaf”, as Truss personally warned Moscow of tough sanctions in the event of an attack on Ukraine. During an icy press conference in Moscow that exposed the gulf between the two sides over Ukraine, Sergei Lavrov, a veteran of 18 years as foreign minister, said they had found little common ground and that the talks contained “nothing secret, no trust. Just slogans shouted from the tribunes.” His counterpart Truss, who became foreign secretary in September, stuck closely to her prepared remarks while fielding questions from reporters, repeating warnings that a war would be “disastrous for the Russian and Ukrainian people and for European security”. Lavrov said Truss had not varied her tone throughout their two-hour meeting, and had ignored his explanations while repeating statements and demands that Britain had made before. “I’m honestly disappointed that our conversation turned out like the mute with the deaf. We appear to be listening but we’re not hearing anything. Our detailed explanations fell on unprepared ground,” Lavrov said. “It’s like when they say that Russia is waiting for the ground to freeze so that tanks can easily enter Ukraine,” he added. “It seems that our British colleagues were on similar ground today, off of which bounced all the facts we presented them.” Truss challenged Lavrov directly over his assertion that Russia is not threatening anyone with its buildup of troops and weaponry near Ukraine’s borders. “I can’t see any other reason for having 100,000 troops stationed on the border, apart from to threaten Ukraine. And if Russia is serious about diplomacy, they need to remove those troops and desist from the threats,” she said. Away from the cameras, Truss allegedly confused the Russian regions of Voronezh and Rostov with Ukrainian territory when Lavrov asked her whether she recognised Russia’s sovereignty over them. She repeatedly told Lavrov that the UK would never recognise Moscow’s claim, until the British ambassador was forced to step in to correct her, the Russian business daily Kommersant reported. Truss partly confirmed the account in an interview with Russian press: “It seemed to me that Minister Lavrov was talking about a part of Ukraine. I have clearly indicated that these regions [Rostov and Voronezh] are part of sovereign Russia,” she said, according to the British embassy in Moscow. The episode follows a previous taunt by Russia last week when the foreign secretary was taken to task over her comment that “we are supplying and offering extra support to our Baltic allies across the Black Sea”. The Baltic Sea and the Black Sea – where Ukraine sits on the coast – are on opposite sides of Europe. The remark led Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, to observe: “Ms Truss, your knowledge of history is nothing compared to your knowledge of geography. If anyone needs saving from anything, it’s the world, from the stupidity and ignorance of British politicians.” The Foreign Office said that Truss’s remarks had been misinterpreted. The British sanctions package remained under government review on Thursday, somewhat undermining Truss’s threat as she led a British diplomatic effort to head off a potential Russian offensive in Ukraine. France’s Emmanuel Macron travelled to Moscow this week on a similar mission to try to dissuade Vladimir Putin from launching an attack. Truss’s trip is part of a blitz of British diplomacy in Russia. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, is scheduled to travel to Moscow for consultations with the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, on Friday. Other European leaders and officials are also shuttling between Moscow and Kyiv. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is expected in Moscow next week. Expectations for the meetings are limited as Russia has put forward maximalist demands to Nato to remove its troops from member states and to pledge never to accept Ukraine into the alliance. At the same time, Russia has begun joint military exercises in Belarus, continued moving troops on its territory closer to the Ukrainian border, and announced new naval drills in the Black Sea. In his remarks, Lavrov said British-Russian relations had reached their “lowest point in years” and warned Russia would not be cowed by western threats. He also attacked some western countries for pulling non-essential diplomats from Ukraine, publicly suggesting that Russia could follow suit if it decides the west is preparing a provocation.From guns and vacuum flasks to cookers and colour televisions, Enfield has long been a cradle of invention. Rifles, radios, motorbikes and dishwashers were all made in this fertile corner of north-east London’s Lea Valley, which also gave birth to the world’s first cash machine – now memorialised with a golden ATM on the high street. There may be heritage plaques a-plenty, but the glory days of local industry are long gone. The sheds of production have been replaced by the big box stores of Ikea and Wickes, the stable careers in skilled manufacturing exchanged for zero-hours warehouse contracts, in what are now some of the most deprived wards in the country. A place that was once Britain’s equivalent to Silicon Valley has more recently been known as “Shanktown”, on the proposition that, because of its violent reputation, you would be more likely to get stabbed there than dream up the next world-changing invention. But, lurking in among this ragged edgeland of retail depots, redundant gasworks and puffing waste incinerators, one shed offers a glimmer of hope – and a possible prototype for a new kind of productive local economy. Next to a cash and carry warehouse and a ready-mix concrete supplier stands Bloqs, a new £4m temple for London’s growing army of makers. “This is not a place for spoon whittling,” says Al Parra, co-founder of the social enterprise. “We don’t look down on hobbyists and the world of ‘wellbeing making’, but this is people putting bacon on the table.” Once billed as the country’s largest “makerspace”, the project has been rebranded in more grownup terms as the UK’s first “open-access factory”, complete with £1.3m worth of equipment – a smorgasbord of saws, lathes, sanders and sewing machines – along with laser cutters, 3D-printers and a massive five-axis milling machine. Take one look at the tools here and it quickly becomes clear that this is the final boss of makerspaces. On a Tuesday morning in February, the place is humming with people making kitchen cabinets, staircase treads, public benches, playground equipment, industrial kitchens and upcycled fashion accessories. Walter and Rob of design startup Make Workspace are putting the finishing touches to their prototype work pod in one bay, while Lizzie, Marilo and Llew of social enterprise Made from Scratch wrestle with their latest treehouse design in another. “To be honest,” says Lizzie, breaking off from sanding a wooden parakeet for their new adventure playground, “I thought it might have that intimidating vibe of going into a record shop, where everyone is a bit snooty. But it’s not like that. The best thing about being based here is the people – everyone is willing to share expertise and advice, and you can always borrow each other’s tools.” A small workspace begins at £36 a day, use of most machines included, with larger and longer-term lets available and no membership fee to join. Michel, who runs a bespoke joinery business employing seven people, says he can take on much bigger projects since moving to Bloqs. “There are people with skills in metalwork, milling and a professional spray booth,” he says, “so it’s expanded what I can do in one place.” The social enterprise also has its own fabrication arm, Made at Bloqs, so it can take on jobs from local authorities and developers and subcontract work out to its members. “The opportunities here are amazing,” he adds, “and my head is clearer working in this big, light space.” The former 1960s vehicle testing warehouse has been transformed by architects 5th Studio into a light-flooded factory floor. They have added a sleek new mono-pitched building next door, with eight-metre-high ceilings, providing a combined vast 32,000 square feet of space. Ordinary materials, such as corrugated aluminium and translucent polycarbonate, have been carefully deployed, with crisp detailing that elevates the complex above its neighbours. An agricultural polytunnel canopy covers a wood store, while clusters of shipping containers are being turned into individual studios, and leftover glued laminated timber panels have been used to build a materials shop. A big whirring vacuum sucks waste wood chippings into a shredder, where it is filtered and fed into a furnace to provide all the building’s heating and hot water needs. Another system channels rainwater from the roof into a series of reed beds, forming a sustainable drainage network to reduce surface water flooding. “It’s like the Lea Valley in miniature,” says architect Tom Holbrook, who has worked on projects up and down the valley for years, and who began his career as an apprentice stage carpenter before studying architecture. “My first job was doing set builds in pig farms on the North Circular,” he adds, “so I know what a brutal existence it can be, working out of a van in freezing sheds.” Such was the life of Parra and his co-founders when they first moved to a leaky building nearby in 2011. They had begun living and working together in a warehouse in Haringey, before rent rises pushed them to look further afield, landing on a battered building in Edmonton, just across from where their gleaming new premises now stands. “It was rough as badger’s,” says Parra, “piled with trash and holes in the roof.” Two of them lived in makeshift pods, the other two in caravans. “But living and working there made us realise that we could do a lot more together than we could have done separately.” They started renting out their machines to friends when they weren’t using them, and opened a small cafe. Word spread, and soon they were joined by more people who had been priced out, losing their workspaces to the march of luxury loft conversions. “We realised we were part of a systemic need for the city,” says Parra. “Everywhere we looked, live-work was being replaced by just live, as landlords realised they could make a lot more money by converting workspace into housing.” A recent report by an independent commission found that London has lost a quarter of its industrial floorspace over the past 20 years, leaving the capital with a chronic shortage of space for the services it needs to function. Bloqs is exactly the kind of solution needed, but at first it was impossible for the team to grow, or even repair their building. “No one was willing to fund us because we’re so odd,” says Parra. “If you spoke to any money men, they’d say: ‘So, you’re proposing to give access to industrial machinery to members of the public? OK, we’ll call you.’” Then, in 2015, the group caught wind of a new mayoral fund for affordable workspace, and convinced Enfield council to put in a joint bid, resulting in a grant of £1.3m, which was match-funded by the council. Enfield put in some extra money for the building, which it owns and rents to Bloqs on a 12-year lease. “We’re classified as a ‘meanwhile use’,” Parra says. “But we’re going to put down tap roots.” The project has established partnerships with a couple of local colleges, and there are plans for an outreach programme aimed at helping refugees and former offenders back into work. “Our plan is to make ourselves completely invaluable,” he adds, “and so integrated into the economic and cultural life of the borough that we’re no longer regarded as temporary.” It already feels like more than a shed of machines. The former office and reception area has been transformed into Bloqs Kitchen, a cafe and grocery run by Marianna Leivaditaki, head chef at the Hackney restaurant Morito, where beer taps have just arrived. A local wildlife photographer is busy hanging prints for an exhibition in the cafe, while posters advertise a forthcoming make-your-own pasta day. Surely this thriving hub can’t be a cynical “meanwhile” strategy, to create a buzz before being swept away? The area might look like a postindustrial wasteland, but Bloqs sits in the middle of one of London’s most ambitious regeneration projects, the £6bn Meridian Water development. The 25-year plan, originally led by housebuilder Barratt, first proposed a bleak vision of perimeter apartment blocks stamped across the 85-hectare site, of a similarly blunt nature to the Olympic Village a little way down the valley. Barratt walked away in 2017, after disputes with Enfield over “unacceptable” proposed terms, so the council took the decision to take on the role of master developer. “We didn’t want all this public land to be turned into flats for overseas investors,” says Nesil Caliskan, who was elected council leader in 2018. “The aspiration is still for 10,000 homes and 6,000 jobs, but we’re going to phase it, so we can adapt as and when we need to, and create a proper local economy alongside the housing.” Pitched as “your place to make and create”, Meridian Water promises to include light industrial and creative space as well as offices, with the council planning to retain control of the ground and first-floor levels, so that the promised industrial units don’t all turn into coffee shops and yoga studios, as often happens in such schemes. In the council’s eyes, Bloqs plays a crucial role in creating future tenants for the district, spawning a new generation of businesses that will, hopefully, go on to occupy the planned workspace units. In a similar vein, a cluster of hangar-like film studios have been built nearby, in the hope of seeding a film production district – a plan that already seems to be bearing fruit, with the arrival of Netflix to the borough. “We see ourselves as a garden bed,” says Parra, “a platform for innovation and invention to flourish. We’ve had a lot of businesses that have already grown and moved on. But we’re here to stay.”Last week, near the marble-clad walls of Australia’s largest library, a perplexing confrontation broke out between anti-vaccination protesters and the far right’s news outlet of choice, Rebel News. One of the Convoy to Canberra members stood over Avi Yemini, Rebel News’s key figure in Australia, as a small crowd and police watched on. “I’m not going to be intimidated by you, Rebel News, or anybody else,” the protester said. “We don’t want you going up to people.” Others chimed in to defend Yemini. “He’s on our side,” one said. Some began to chant “Avi out! Avi out!” before vision of the incident – which Rebel News says was selectively edited to delete a chant of “Avi stay!” – cuts out. The scene was jarring, not least because Rebel News has positioned itself as an ally of the protesters, their lone voice in an industry otherwise uniformly hated. It speaks to Rebel News’s uncomfortable position within the convoluted ecosystem of such protests. The crowds gathered in Canberra are populated by a disparate collection of sovereign citizens, wellness advocates, anti-vaccination groups, conspiracy theorists, doomsday preppers, United Australia party supporters, and other fringe political groups. Some welcomed Yemini as a kind of cult hero. Others accused him of trying to monetise their movement. Despite the mixed reception, one thing is abundantly clear. The anti-vaccine and anti-lockdown protests, including last year’s Melbourne rallies, have been a boon for Rebel News. It has posted an avalanche of social media content about the convoy, amplifying it across an audience of hundreds of thousands across Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, Telegram and Instagram. In return, audiences have grown exponentially, taking its social media following beyond some of Australia’s well-established traditional news mastheads, and increasing its ability to raise funds. On Twitter – a less-used platform for most anti-vaccination groups – Rebel News Australia dominated the Canberra convoy discourse. Analysis provided to the Guardian by the Queensland University of Technology Digital Media Research Centre shows two accounts – the international Rebel News account and Rebel News Australia – quickly became the two largest disseminators among the 32,218 tweets attached to the two main Canberra convoy hashtags. “They are by far the biggest drivers, amplifiers of it,” Dr Timothy Graham, the centre’s chief investigator, told the Guardian. “I think you can say that without a shadow of a doubt.” On Facebook, where Rebel News Australia is followed by 158,000 users, regular posts about the convoy have helped drive up interactions and grow its audience. In the week to 5 February, Rebel News Australia’s interactions spiked considerably to 95,000, almost double the week prior and triple the page’s weekly average for the past year, driving a 4% growth in its following. The trend is similar – though far more muted – to that witnessed during the September rallies in Melbourne, where Rebel News was ubiquitous. The Melbourne rally fuelled record growth for the page, delivering it almost 44,000 new followers in a single week in September, a growth of more than 64%. Without providing specific detail, Facebook has confirmed to The Guardian that it has removed some of Rebel News’s Covid content for breaching its misinformation and harm policies. But it’s done little to dampen its rise. Since creating its Facebook page in September 2020, Rebel News Australia has built a greater following on the platform than the Hobart Mercury, Newcastle Herald and the Canberra Times. On Yemini’s YouTube account, which had an established following prior to him joining Rebel News, the surge from the Melbourne protests was huge. He grew his subscriber base by 54,000 in September and 73,000 in October, according to analytics tool Social Blade, taking it to a total of 697,000. His monthly video views peaked at 17m in October, and have again surged to almost 15m in January, staggering increases from the 1.9m views he received in August. Many of Rebel News posts link back to donation pages or fundraising campaigns to fund its operations. In Rebel News’s report about GoFundMe cutting off donations to the Canadian convoy protesters, for example, Rebel News included an option for readers to donate to the outlet. “They’re in the middle and I think what’s really happening ... is they’re trying to leverage and exploit what’s going on to build the brand, to get clout, and to try and get donations,” Graham said. “And the crabs are scrambling up the pot.” Rebel’s fundraising efforts continue despite the efforts of PayPal, which reportedly cut services for Rebel News, and YouTube, which has attempted to prevent Rebel News and Yemini from monetising its platform. The way Rebel is fundraising from the protests has itself become a source of consternation among some of those gathered in Canberra. In another video from the protest site, Yemini was filmed from afar by an anti-vaccination group streaming live to its followers. “He was a guy that bagged us out two years ago … really disliked us,” the narrator says. “But started going to our protests, and then started making a lot of money from our protests.” “I haven’t made a cent from our protests.” Rebel News says Yemini is on a fixed salary and has not profited from coverage of any individual topic. ‘Misinformation’: the Canadian origins of Rebel News In September, as anti-vaccination protests in his country grew, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau fielded a question from a representative of Rebel News. Rebel News’s inclusion at a leaders’ debate had been a point of contention. The organisation was initially blocked from attending, but sued the government to force its way in. When Rebel News questioned the prime minister about the episode, Trudeau did not hold back. “The reality is, organisations – organisations like yours – that continue to spread misinformation and disinformation on the science around vaccines … is part of why we’re seeing such unfortunate anger and lack of understanding of basic science,” said Trudeau. “Frankly, your – I won’t call it a media organisation – your group of individuals need to take accountability for some of the polarisation that we’re seeing in this country.” Rebel News’s resources and influence is derived from its Canadian base. It was founded there in 2015, is led by controversial Canadian figure Ezra Levant, and traffic to its website remains overwhelmingly North American. As it rose to prominence, Rebel News openly embraced figures from the far right. Contributors included Tommy Robinson, the founder of the English Defence League, Katie Hopkins, and “Proud Boys” founder Gavin McInnes. During the 2017 Charlottesville rallies, a then Rebel correspondent Faith Goldy spoke positively about white nationalists’ views on race and on the “JQ”, slang for the “Jewish question”. Goldy, who has denied being a white supremacist, was fired after appearing on a neo-Nazi Daily Stormer podcast, and Levant has insisted she was not reporting for Rebel News at Charlottesville and attended “in direct contradiction of my written instruction to her not to attend”. “The moment she confessed that she had secretly appeared on an anti-Semitic podcast, I fired her,” he told the Guardian. After surviving blow-back for the 2017 events, which prompted boycotts by advertisers and Canada’s Conservative party, the pandemic provided an opportunity for Rebel News to shift its focus to anti-vaccination and anti-lockdown causes. The Canada convoys, which inspired the Australian iteration, have shown the outlet’s ability to harness the hate for traditional media among anti-vaccine and anti-lockdown protesters. Late last month, Levant was greeted by a rapturous crowd when he addressed convoy protesters outside parliament in Ottawa. “I want to tell you what excites me the most about this crowd,” he said. “I see a lot of cameras. A lot of independent journalists. Because when people say ‘what do we do about the media?’, I say, ‘you become the media’.” The number of Canadians accessing Rebel News main website has increased by 70% in the past month alone, according to Similarweb, a traffic analysis tool. Australians now make up 13% of the traffic to the website, the third most of any country. The Australian audience to the website has grown by 11% in a single month. Elise Thomas, an open source intelligence analyst with the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, says anti-vaccination and anti-lockdown communities are well-suited for groups like Rebel News to “reinvigorate their following”. “The thing about these kind of fringe communities is that they are often really hyper-engaged communities, they’re not getting this content anywhere else in their life,” Thomas says. Graham describes the protests as “sure-thing in terms of engagement” for groups like Rebel News. “It’s not content that actually has any coherent ideological driver,” he says. “A lot of people are talking about it and it kind of speaks to a really strongly-held identity and partisan beliefs, it really affirms people’s belief about themselves.” Levant contested the notion that Rebel News was profiteering from the protest coverage. “You suggest that we are profiteering off of our protest coverage. But in fact, advertising represents only about 1% of our revenues, as we have been demonetized by YouTube and Facebook censors,” he said. “Whether we have one view or one million, our YouTube advertising revenue is the same — zero.” The hiring of Yemini, who had already amassed a sizeable YouTube following of his own, has helped propel Rebel News to new audiences here. As has Yemini’s recent appearances on Fox News in the US, where he is framed as an objective commentator on Australia’s Covid response. Levant is clearly a fan. He told the Guardian he was “the best” in the company. “I’m not sure what your basis is to suggest that our Australian expansion is due to Covid. I think it’s pretty obvious that it’s driven by the talent of Avi,” he said. He said Rebel News does not consider its audience “far right”. “Traditional partisan labels have lost much of their meaning in the past two years,” he said. Australian content – short, slickly-produced videos, often heavy on confrontation – mirrors the Canadian style, and the two arms also adopt similar strategies to muscle in on the space of news outlets. When Yemini was rejected for a press pass for the Victorian parliament, for example, he sued the state government, much like Rebel’s Canadian arm last year. Yemini, who served in the Israeli military, came to Rebel News with his own chequered past. He has been convicted of assaulting his ex-wife and once described himself as the “the world’s proudest Jewish Nazi” – a comment he has since claimed was sarcasm. The rise of Rebel News Australia on the back of anti-vaccine and anti-lockdown sentiment raises questions for the major social media companies, which have committed to limiting misinformation during the pandemic. Facebook would not share the amount of strikes it had delivered to Rebel News’s page. But it confirmed it had removed some content for breaching misinformation and harm policies. “People who repeatedly breach our misinformation policies will have restrictions placed on their page, if removals reach a certain threshold we will remove the page,” a Meta spokesperson says. YouTube says it has taken action directly against Yemini’s channel and the main Rebel News account by preventing them from running ads or using other monetisation features like Super Chat. “We have suspended both channels from the YouTube Partner Program. All channels on YouTube need to comply with our community guidelines and in order to monetise, channels must comply with the YouTube Partner Program policies, which includes our advertiser-friendly guidelines,” a spokesperson says. “We periodically review and remove channels that are not in compliance with our policies, and channels that repeatedly violate these policies are suspended from our partner program.”When AGL, Australia’s biggest electricity generator, announced plans on Thursday to accelerate the timetable to close its two largest coal-fired power plants, environmental groups complained the pace wasn’t fast enough. Out would go Bayswater, AGL’s 2640-megawatt black coal-fired power plant in New South Wales’s Hunter Valley, between 2030 and 2033, rather than 2035 as previously flagged. And by 2045, the 2210MW Loy Yang A brown coal-fired station in Victoria would follow, compared with a 2048 schedule, the company said. That at least was AGL’s objective, Graeme Hunt, the company’s chief executive told investors, adding with a flourish: “the path to net zero [emissions] will be the defining challenge of our era. Companies that don’t adapt, that don’t innovate, and don’t set themselves on this path will be left behind”. Greenpeace Australia dismissed the new dates as a “token effort”, noting the two plants at current pollution rates add about 35m tonnes of CO2 yearly, or about 7% of the nation’s total. The Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility said the updated plan was “next to meaningless for these crumbling assets” given Bayswater will be 48 years old by 2033 and in 2045, Loy Yang A will be 61 years old”. The latter point was perhaps the most germaine. The Australian Energy Market Operator is already preparing scenarios for all brown coal plants and two-thirds of black coal ones to disappear from the grid by 2032. That’s about a decade earlier than AGL is now forecasting for Loy Yang A. “[Thursday] will not be the last time the closure of a fossil fuel generator is brought forward,” said Kane Thornton, chief executive of the Clean Energy Council, which counts AGL among its almost 1,000 members. “If you look at the rate at which renewables are coming into the market, if you look at the rate at which big batteries are being deployed and the commitments that are being made in the projects being committed to, the pace of change is just accelerating.” Thornton said. Data released a fortnight ago by Aemo underscored the woes facing AGL – which by 30 June plans to split into a generator arm Accel Energy and a retailing one, AGL Australia – and other big fossil-dominated generators like EnergyAustralia and Origin Energy. Gas and coal prices are being pushed higher by global supply constraints and rising demand, while costs of wind and solar farms are falling and their energy source is basically free. Plant profitability isn’t helped, either, by 3m households with solar panels generating their own power, particularly during the middle of the day. As Aemo noted, Victoria’s spot prices in the December quarter were on average negative between 09.25 and 14.20. Between 08.00 and 16.30, they averaged just 10 cents per MW-hour. EnergyAustralia last year brought forward the planned closure of its Mt Piper coal-fired power plant near Lithgow in NSW by at least three years, while its Yallourn plant in Victoria will now shut in 2028 rather than 2032. Origin Energy, meanwhile, says the first of the units at its Eraring plant will shut in NSW by 2030. Dylan McConnell, an energy expert at the University of Melbourne said Aemo’s draft integrated system plan has various scenarios based on emissions goals. The most ambitious, assuming a trajectory that is in line with keeping global warming to 1.5C, has the first of AGL’s Loy Yang A’s units closing by 2027 and all of it by 2029, he says. “It’s a bit of a mismatch,” McConnell says. “You have this sort of market approach and then you have this planning approach, and they just don’t line up.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning One reason is Aemo’s modelling assumes a carbon budget. “In the real world, there isn’t a carbon price or any financial penalty for that,” he says. Not yet, at least. Another challenge is that while renewables have been booming, the pace of growth, particularly for new windfarms, has slowed sharply, in part because of planning uncertainties, McConnell says. Head of the Victoria Energy Policy Centre, Bruce Mountain, agrees there’s every likelihood loss-making coal-fired power plants will drop out of the market faster than companies are saying publicly. AGL’s Bayswater, for instance, will lose its low-cost coal supplies from about 2024, which will then undermine its role as one of the more profitable plants. A 2030 closure date, if that’s what happens, will be challenging for NSW, Mountain says. “The NSW government needs to get another, call it 4000-5000MW of wind and solar capacity operational and producing by [2030], and a very good deal likely of storage capacity,” he says. NSW seems committed to implement its electricity infrastructure roadmap “but there isn’t time to lose”, Mountain says. Victoria is also stepping up its support for new generation capacity while Queensland “remains the real laggard”. Aemo, meanwhile, is also forecasting demand to almost double by 2050 to 330 terawatt-hours a year, from 180 TWh now, particularly as cars switch from petrol and diesel to electricity. To meet that demand and cope with plant closures, the current pipeline of proposed generation and storage capacity in the NEM stands at 138 gigawatts (GW), or more than double today’s capacity of 59GW. Renewables account for 86% of proposed projects, Aemo says. The challenges facing the power sector will only grow, though, if hopes for a hydrogen export sector are realised, McConnell said “The growth in electricity for that is really quite phenomenal,” he says. “So there’s a bit of a disconnect between what the market is doing or saying versus what the expectations are.”Plans to build a $3.3m “discovery centre” on Penguin Island in Western Australia will push the threatened bird colony to breaking point, conservationists say. The state’s new environment minister, Reece Whitby, unveiled a concept design on Tuesday, which would see the existing centre on the island demolished and a new one built 50 metres away. Construction would take place over two months in summer 2023. The design for the new centre would include a raised deck to allow penguins to nest below and may include a sprinkler system to help the birds cool down during heatwaves. “The new centre will enable the island and the City of Rockingham to better care for the little penguin residents while safely welcoming human visitors,” Whitby said. “The penguins are facing a number of critical and linked challenges – climate change, marine heatwaves and a scarcity of food – and I want to make sure we are doing everything possible to support the local population.” But conservationists said the plans are a distraction and the best solution would be to “leave the island alone”. The little penguin population on Penguin Island is suffering from declining population numbers and a horror breeding season, where half the chicks born in 2021 died, equating to roughly 10% of its overall population. The island’s colony is the second northernmost population to be found in Australia and is thought to be genetically distinct – though scientific testing to confirm this has not yet been carried out. While the penguins are on the frontline of climate change, human activity has also hampered their ability to cope, with reports of birds being struck by marine craft and being disturbed by humans on the island. The proposal has drawn the ire of scientists and the island’s tourism operator, who said it was made without consultation and pre-empts an upcoming stakeholder meeting to work out a plan to halt the penguin decline. Dr Joe Fontaine from Murdoch University said the proposals for a raised structure and a sprinkler system were “red herrings” as nesting habitat was not an issue for the colony. “What we’re seeing here again and again is using climate change as an excuse,” Fontaine said. “They’re not acknowledging there are other human impacts going on. The best solution would be to just leave the island alone.” High foot traffic in penguin breeding grounds can cause considerable stress for the birds. Though some birds will stray, when it comes to nesting they generally prefer sites away from human activity and, once established, remain faithful to that specific nest. In summer heatwaves when adult penguins are moulting their feathers, they will try to cool down in shallow water as they are unable to swim during the two-week moulting process. But when large numbers of visitors are present on the island, particularly on the beach, the penguins will avoid these areas which sometimes leads to deaths from heat exhaustion as they cannot reach the water. Fontaine said that the sound, vibration and other disturbances would only push the colony closer to “breaking point”. “This isn’t Sim City,” Fontaine said. “We’re somehow playing in this magic world where you can wave the wand, pick up the old centre and plop it into the new area and do it all in two months. “The idea that it’s possible to do the [demolition] and construction in two months is a heroic assumption.” The chief executive of Perth Wildlife Encounters, Chad D’Souza, said his organisation – which operates the existing centre on Penguin Island – supported a 2016 proposal to build a “rehabilitation centre” on the mainland at Mersey Point. As Penguin Island is closed to tourists for two months each year, a mainland centre could allow the conservation program to operate year round while controlling the movements of tourists and allowing critical rehabilitation to be undertaken for sick or injured penguins. D’Souza said he had been told the proposal was rejected by the WA Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions in favour of building on Penguin Island itself as the agency owned the land. “We just don’t believe what they’ve established is going to save the penguins,” D’Souza said. “It’s in the wrong place, it should be built as a rehabilitation centre on the mainland.” The City of Rockingham mayor, Deb Hamblin, said in a statement the council had previously “advocated” for the proposal on the mainland and was in the process of reviewing the current design. “The city holds serious concerns for the future of the little penguin population on Penguin Island,” Hamblin said. “Last year, council officially endorsed the position that conservation of the little penguin colony requires additional resources from the state, including a specific management plan and the formation of a dedicated working group to govern the matter.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A department spokesperson said in a statement that there was a “long history” of penguins nesting beneath built structures and rejected the suggestion the announcement had been made without consultation. “The design and location of the new centre is being undertaken in a manner that is sensitive to the resident penguin population and with guidance from researchers and technical experts,” they said.Lynette McKell’s mother cries down the phone when she tells her she can no longer afford the rapid tests she needs to visit her in aged care. The near-daily visits have been a great joy for her and her mother, relieving the isolation that has been so prevalent in aged care throughout the pandemic. But McKell’s family is struggling on a single, limited income, and the exorbitant cost of large volumes of rapid tests is proving too much. She is now forced to space out the visits to stop the spiralling costs from chewing through the limited disposable income she has each week. “We fall through the cracks. We’re not entitled to a healthcare card, so what are we supposed to do?” she said. “She cries on the phone on a regular basis … I say, ‘mum, I’m trying to take a few days between visits so I can make [the rapid tests] go a bit further.’” McKell’s story illuminates one side-effect of the government’s failure to secure adequate and reliable rapid antigen test supplies for the aged care sector. Prior to Christmas, the commonwealth promised it would provide enough stock to allow providers to give them to essential visitors for free. But the shortages mean aged care providers like St Basil’s Homes in South Australia, which cares for McKell’s mother, have been forced to prioritise their rapid test stocks for residents and workers, rather than visitors, who are being told to either find their own or purchase them from the provider at cost price. While supplies have improved in the past week, the sector is still in the dark about when shipments will arrive and at what volume. “We have still not received clarity from the [health department] regarding the ongoing supply of RATs post being in an outbreak position,” St Basil’s chief executive, Michelle Church, said. “The advice received today suggests that the supply has now stabilised and that the intent to supply free RATs to aged care providers … has not changed. “But we are still in the dark about when this will occur.” The aged care sector has been calling on the government to set up a national coordination centre to ensure consistent supplies of PPE and rapid tests, along with surge workforce planning. In a statement this week, the Australian Aged Care Collaboration group said it was continuing to press the government for “reliable supplies and more efficient distribution of RATs and PPE”. A spokesperson for the aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, said the government has made more than 2.5m rapid tests available to aged care facilities last week alone for use by residents, staff, and visitors, bringing total supply of the devices to 10.7m. National cabinet was due to discuss visitation when it met on Thursday, focusing on developing nationally consistent guidelines to ensure proper visitation rights. Councils on the Ageing chief executive, Ian Yates, said some jurisdictions were providing visitation guidance that was causing “inhumane” periods of isolation for aged care residents. “We’re not just dealing with reluctance in providers [to visitation], we’re dealing with inconsistent and wrong advice from state health units,” he told Guardian Australia. “When there’s an outbreak, a resident or a couple of staff in a home, there has been persistent advice from some health units, which is not consistent, that you must lock up, and you must lock residents in their rooms. “There have been residents locked up in rooms for weeks and weeks. That is inhumane and also not necessary.” Colbeck’s office said reports of senior Australians being denied visitors and locked in their rooms were “unacceptable”. The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) has been developing nationally consistent guidelines to ensure residents can receive essential visitors at all times, including during an outbreak. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It will be important for the states and territories which set the public health orders in this regard to now align with this advice,” the spokesperson said. “While the AHPPC acknowledges reopening visitation may increase the risk of Covid-19 cases in facilities, it says decisions to limit visitation must be proportionate and take into account the impacts of social isolation on resident health and wellbeing.” Yates said providers were locking down entire facilities, rather than dividing residents into cohorts of positive and negative cases, which allowed greater freedom. “This advice is being issued by health units that have no idea how you operate residential aged care … and part of it is that we think that the states ought to get out of that stuff, and just let the commonwealth work out what advice it is giving to providers.”The risk of widespread coral bleaching across the Great Barrier Reef has subsided after cloud and rain over the past 10 days caused “substantial cooling” of heat-stressed corals, according to the government’s reef management authority. Scientists and conservationists have feared it could suffer its sixth major mass bleaching outbreak this summer with record high temperatures over the reef in December. But now there is cautious optimism the world heritage-listed reef – the ocean’s biggest at 2,300km long – could escape a major event with the potential to kill and weaken corals. A statement to Guardian Australia from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (GBRMPA) said monsoonal weather in north Queensland over the past 10 days “caused substantial cooling, and the temperatures on much of the reef are now below the average for February”. “While the forecast for the rest of the month remains for above average temperatures, it is expected this will only be about half a degree warmer,” the statement said. “The current thermal anomaly and the forecasts have resulted in a diminished risk of mass bleaching on the reef this summer.” But the authority warned the reef had “already accumulated substantial heat stress over the summer” and weather over the next few weeks would be “critical in determining the final outcome”. Coral bleaching happens when the algae that gives the coral its colour and most of its food is expelled, leaving just the white skeleton visible. Depending on the severity, corals can recover or die. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Forecasts of heat stress over the reef from the US government agency the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration show almost no areas currently forecast to hit levels where bleaching was likely. This contrasts with forecasts in late December that suggested by mid-February large areas of the reef north of Cairns would be at risk of bleaching severe enough to kill corals. Townsville-based Dr William Skirving, of Noaa’s Coral Reef Watch, said a monsoonal trough had brought with it cloud and rain over large areas of the reef. “It’s looking much better than it was a couple of weeks ago,” he said. Both Noaa and Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology have said temperatures over the reef in December were the highest on record. Associate Prof Tracy Ainsworth, a coral scientist at the University of New South Wales, said the change in outlook was “welcome news for this year on the reef”. But she said in most years “we are seeing heat stress events occurring on irreplaceable coral reef ecosystems around the world”. “This is a reprieve from severe conditions that would cause coral mortality. But there has still been heat stress accumulating and every year now we are asking how bad things will be. That’s a crazy position to be in. “These events are increasing in intensity as well as becoming more frequent.” The reef has seen five mass bleaching events – in 1998, 2002, 2016, 2017 and 2020 – driven by increasing heat in the oceans caused by rising greenhouse gas levels. Some coral species cope better with heat stress than others and scientists say successive bleaching events have reduced the numbers of less heat-tolerant corals. Some scientists studying the reef say because of this shift, more heat is needed to cause the same amount of bleaching as was seen in earlier outbreaks. Last week GBRMPA said it had received several reports of minor bleaching from across the reef with areas of minor to moderate bleaching between Townsville and Port Douglas. The amount of coral over the reef has been going up in the last two years, but the Australian Institute of Marine Science has said that increase is underpinned by fast-growing corals more susceptible to bleaching. Ainsworth said this was raising the likelihood of widespread coral bleaching in the coming years when the next major event unfolded. Last year the 21-country world heritage committee ignored advice from Unesco that the reef should be placed on a list of sites “in danger” because of impacts from bleaching and poor progress on cutting pollution. The committee is due to consider the reef’s plight again at a meeting scheduled for July in Russia.Rightly considered one of cinema’s greatest paranoid thrillers, John Frankenheimer’s 1962 classic The Manchurian Candidate is a film that remains hugely engaging – and surprisingly topical. Adapted from Richard Condon’s novel of the same name, its famous title lingers in the zeitgeist, still used to speculate on puppet-mastering foreign powers and their political influence. The film opens with the Medal of Honor being awarded to Sergeant Raymond Shaw (Laurence Harvey) for his service in the Korean war. Shaw returns home to a rousing reception, but isn’t a real hero: the Sergeant and the rest of his platoon were brainwashed into believing he saved their lives during combat. Installed as a sleeper agent, a hypnotised Shaw can do the dirty work of communists, activated by the sight of a playing card: the queen of diamonds. Controlling Shaw is part of an intricate scheme orchestrated by villains including Eleanor Iselin (Angela Lansbury, delivering a classic performance), who is secretly working to turn the US government into an authoritarian regime while masterminding her senator husband’s vice-presidential bid. Not everyone submits so easily, though: the film’s protagonist, Major Bennett Marco (Frank Sinatra), senses something is up, suffering from an intense recurring dream – “a real swinger of a nightmare”. The visualisation of this nightmare forms the film’s unforgettable sequence: a surreal space where the American soldiers appear to be at a meeting of a New Jersey ladies’ garden club. They’re actually sitting, totally brainwashed, in front of a congregation of communist scientists. Frankenheimer blends these mixed realities together in hallucinogenic ways, such as showing a well-dressed woman addressing the club, then a spooky smooth-scalped scientist in her place. All this might sound like a preposterous example of McCarthyism on steroids, but it’s executed so well you barely even notice the silliness of it. Sinatra’s frazzled performance is key to film’s success, skilfully illustrating the protagonist’s ravaged mindset and imbuing the drama with red-hot intensity. “There’s something phony about me, about Raymond Shaw, about the whole Medal of Honor business,” Marco says, embroiled in a mystery without knowing what the mystery even is, let alone how to solve it. The film has an uncomfortably edgy aesthetic, infusing what might have been a handsome monochrome look with off-kilter effects – including odd camera angles and blurry elements. Frankenheimer received praise in particular for an out-of-focus shot of Sinatra, with critics suggesting he was using a distorted camera lens to illustrate a disoriented mindset – only for the director to later explain this was unintentional and he was working with the best he had. If the premise were played out today, Shaw wouldn’t be activated by a playing card – instead, maybe, an app on his phone or an implant in his brain (as was the case in a decent, workmanlike remake released in 2004, with Denzel Washington in Sinatra’s role). But that’s one of the least interesting examples of how the contemporary world differs from the one imagined in the film. If the Kremlin wanted to interfere with an American election these days, they could simply spread online misinformation to do the dirty work for them. The villains in Frankenheimer’s film go to drastic lengths, planning to exploit a political assassination (executed by the brainwashed Shaw) and, in the subsequent chaos, usher in an authoritarian regime – by “rallying a nation of viewers to hysteria”, as they put it. This seems almost quaint today: you don’t need extraordinary circumstances to rally Americans into hysteria; just a microphone and media coverage. While the term “The Manchurian Candidate” might not resonate all that much with younger generations, the film – despite being rooted in a very particular political context – has a degree of metaphoric malleability. Most importantly, perhaps, it’s very finely crafted, with only a few flat scenes en route to an unforgettable finale.The Australian government has officially listed the koala as endangered after a decline in its numbers due to land clearing and catastrophic bushfires shrinking its habitat. The environment minister, Sussan Ley, accepted the recommendation of the threatened species scientific committee that the koala populations of Queensland, New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory should have their conservation status upgraded. The stronger listing under national law is recognition that the koala’s plight has become more urgent and that successive Australian governments have failed to turn the much-loved animal’s circumstances around since it was listed as vulnerable in 2012. It comes after the Morrison government last month announced $50m to help the species. The funding was welcomed by environment groups but described as a “drop in the ocean” if the root causes of the species’ decline were not addressed. Ley said in addition to the endangered listing, the government planned to adopt a long-awaited national recovery plan for the koala. “Today I am increasing the protection for koalas in NSW, the ACT and Queensland, listing them as endangered rather than their previous designation of vulnerable,” Ley said. “The impact of prolonged drought, followed by the black summer bushfires, and the cumulative impacts of disease, urbanisation and habitat loss over the past twenty years have led to the advice.” Environment groups have long argued the koala’s conservation status should be upgraded. Three organisations – Humane Society International (HSI), WWF-Australia and the International Fund for Animal Welfare – nominated it for the endangered listing. “The koala has gone from no listing to now being declared endangered on the Australian east coast within a decade,” said Dermot O’Gorman, WWF-Australia’s chief executive. “That is a shockingly fast decline for one of the world’s most iconic animals. The endangered status is a grim but important decision by minister Ley. “There is still time to save this globally iconic species if the uplisting serves as a turning point in koala conservation. We need stronger laws and landholder incentives to protect their forest homes.” The endangered listing will provide additional protection for koalas because it lowers the threshold at which a development must be assessed under national laws for potentially significant impacts on the species. The recovery plan sets out the key threats to the koala and actions needed to prevent its extinction. Such a plan had been identified under national environmental laws as a requirement for the species for the past 10 years but no Australian government had developed one, making it one of almost 200 recovery plans for Australia’s threatened species and habitats that were overdue. It took the black summer bushfire disaster to prompt consultation on a draft, with a final version delivered to the minister late last year. Once a recovery plan is adopted, ministers are legally bound not to make decisions that are inconsistent with it, however governments have no obligation to actually implement the plan. The koala is under pressure from multiple ongoing threats including disease, global heating and clearing of its habitat for development. In 2020, a NSW parliamentary inquiry found the species would be extinct in that state by 2050 unless governments took urgent action to protect its habitat and turn the declines around. Alexia Wellbelove, a senior campaign manager at HSI, said Ley’s decision should prompt Australian governments to do more to address the declining state of the country’s environment. “Although it’s devastating for the koala it’s an important action for their protection,” she said. “It’s a cue for governments really to take a stand against continued habitat clearing for koalas. We can’t just continue business as usual.” Wellbelove said the decision needed to be followed by action on the review of national environmental laws by the former competition watchdog head, Graeme Samuel. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Samuel found Australian governments had comprehensively failed in their duty to protect the environment and the country’s iconic wildlife had suffered because of it. He made 38 recommendations to transform the act, including a proposal for new national environmental standards that require clear outcomes for Australia’s plants and animals. “Until such time that we have strong national environmental standards that specify no-go areas around critical habitat for species such as the koala, habitat destruction will continue and this must be addressed urgently,” Wellbelove said.Ralph Cordingley had three great loves – his family, golf and music. In his final months he asked for his favourite sheet music to be brought to his nursing home because he couldn’t bear the songs they were singing. He was 85 when he died. His daughter, Deborah Clarke, is sure that if it weren’t for contracting Covid-19, he’d be alive today. “There was no reason to believe he wouldn’t have lived longer … he was fully cognitive and smart,” Deborah says. At the same time, though, it’s not about that, not really. “It’s about celebrating them, not just being a statistic,” Deborah says. “These people had lives.” Up until his 80s, Ralph was still playing golf with a tidy handicap of nine. Then a near-death fall meant he decided to enter aged care. He’d been residing at a Blue Care aged facility in Caloundra, Queensland for 18 months before he caught Covid. He was so fit and healthy before then, Deborah says he’d been considering leaving the home because he didn’t like the food. She used to speak with Ralph on the phone every day. Now a grandmother herself, the wild days of her youth are far behind her. She still has purple hair, though, in homage to her enigmatic father. “My dad was a bit of a character,” she says. “He read encyclopaedias from cover to cover; he was very smart – larger than life. “When he was on his way to the hospital [after acquiring Covid], I spoke to him on the way and he said ‘I might get better food.’ That was how he was.” Deborah only found out her father was Covid-positive when he rang her himself. She received no correspondence from the aged care facility until the morning he was transferred to hospital. “It was a shock to me, I thought: ‘How did that happen?’” she says of his diagnosis. “Then I didn’t know how sick he was. He said he was dizzy when I spoke to him in the ambulance on the way there … they thought they could medicate him, but I knew it was serious because the nurse was really emotional. “I thought they’d put him on oxygen and he’d pull through but he was too far advanced by the time he got there.” Born on 20 November 1936, Ralph spent much of his life in the Sunshine Coast town of Caloundra, where he was a longtime president of the Lions Club and a popular councillor – instrumental in helping to buy the local hall. “He was always helpful, understanding, a big personality,” Deborah says. “They all loved him … he put others before himself, and he had a good sense of humour. Even at the nursing home he thought they weren’t running their meetings properly.” Ralph loved his great-granddaughter Kirra, and accompanied her to her school formal last September. Kirra is a top swimmer at her high school and Deborah says her father was the 18-year-old’s “number one supporter”, financially and emotionally. In the end, though, she thinks her dad made the choice to go. “He didn’t want it to be prolonged, he’d just had enough,” she says. “He told me – ‘I want to be kaput’, but he stayed on oxygen so he could say goodbye to my brothers and sisters, and to FaceTime my granddaughter. “When I went to see him at the end-of-life visit, they went to give him water, and he said ‘No, I want cordial.’ They told him he was being bossy and he said ‘Bugger it, I’m not drinking water any more.’” Spoken like a man who knew how to suck the marrow out of life until the end. Deborah says she still has a stack of postcards from various cruises her dad went on in his retirement. He loved them because they were an opportunity to “show off his dancing and singing skills”, two of his great pleasures. “He loved all of that – very much a gentleman. He loved dressing up in his suits and travelling the world,” she says. The last tune Ralph sang was his favourite of all time – The Impossible Dream – and he bellowed it from palliative care unit in hospital just four days before he died. Made popular by the 1965 Broadway musical Man of La Mancha, it is sung by Don Quixote, a man doomed to fail but strident in his belief the world would be bettered for his trying: To dream the impossible dream, to fight the unbeatable foe, to bear with unbearable sorrow, and to run where the brave dare not go … And I know, if I’ll only be true, to this glorious quest, that my heart will lie peaceful and calm, when I’m laid to my rest. “It’s such a poignant song,” Deborah says. “It was the last piece of sheet music he got me to bring him in November when he didn’t like the songs at the nursing home. “I remember sitting with him that month [before he tested positive] and he saw a picture and said he hated it because it reminded him of Covid. He said anyone this old has to have concerns … I think in a way he knew Covid was going to take him.” Ralph passed away in hospital on the 30 January, where his family members had to dress in full PPE to visit him. Less than 24 hours later, Deborah was told to collect his possessions from the nursing home. She says she will remember her dad as an “old-school gentleman” with a cheeky streak that he’s had since her childhood. “When they rang me to tell me he passed away, I said, ‘I’d rather remember him wanting cordial than seeing the body,’” Deborah says. “I don’t even know if I’ve processed it, it’s easy to go into destruction and denial. I’m happy for him and the life he had, but it’s also sad, there’s so many different emotions. “It’s not even about his death, it’s about dignity and how people are treated … I’m just so grateful I got to spend the time with him.”Craig Sherborne never strays too far from home. He prefers plumbing the murky depths of those closest to him, sifting their grit (and his own) for kernels of meaning, upturning stones to glean what unsightly realities lie beneath. The novelist–poet–journalist–playwright is perhaps best known for his critically regarded memoirs Hoi Polloi and Muck, darkly comic renderings of a turbulent childhood in New Zealand with two flawed, idiosyncratic parents: his glamour-puss mother, whom he introduces as “Heels” (she liked shoes), and his gambling, racehorse-owning father, “Winks” (self-explanatory). “Heels” was particularly memorable: a butcher’s daughter obsessed with class, described in Muck as “a bundle of airs and prejudice, strut and flutter, lipstick and hairspray”. She seems to have returned as an older woman in The Grass Hotel, Sherborne’s latest novel, the entirety of which comprises her internal monologue (written in the oft-avoided second-person) addressed to her adult son. We learn that her “wiring” is awry: she has dementia, and her mental faculties are deteriorating. She believes herself “refined”, entitled to a more rarefied air, and is prone to belittling her son, an animal lover she describes as “born numb” and an “embarrassment”. He grows up to be a kind of broncobuster, taming unruly horses on a farm (his “grass hotel”), which he does around travelling across town to care for his equally unruly, waning mother and his ill father, Twinkle – who has “bad shadows” of the body. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning It takes little sleuthing to recognise these characters as Sherborne’s parents, and even a variation of the author himself. As he has written elsewhere, his mother had Alzheimer’s before her death, and his father died of cancer. The Grass Hotel reads as a stylised story about dementia’s throes, familial strictures and the cycle of a child becoming the parent – but beneath the surface lies a far more intriguing subtext of a son inhabiting his mother, parsing meaning from his parents’ final years. Hoi Polloi and Muck handled Sherborne’s childhood and adolescence, but he has yet to delve into his adulthood. Is this a novel, then, or the third memoir? Is it both? It doesn’t matter, really. Autobiography recurs in Sherborne’s creative writing, such as in his Melbourne prize-winning novel The Amateur Science of Love and Off the Record, as well as in his poetry collection Necessary Evil. His speciality is “inside jobs”, as he once wrote in an essay for the Australian, a penchant for flouting the “intimate, sacred code” of protecting family secrets and instead prying them apart for the sake of art. He quotes the poem Epic by Patrick Kavanagh: “I have lived in important places, times / When great events were decided.” To Sherborne, great events are not the grandiose epics woven in tapestry, but the ordinary realities of the people close to us. It is curious, though, how often Sherborne returns to the same source material in different mediums, revisiting moments as if something remains unsaid. In the poem Ash Saturday, Sherborne’s elegy to his father, he recounts how upon scattering his father’s ashes in the ocean, they clung to his skin in the water: “Some of him sticks to my swimming hands – / I shudder and dunk to wash him from me”. In his doctoral paper, he writes: “you left out how hard it had been to get the plug out of the plastic tube containing his ashes. You had to leave your mother sitting on the sand while you ran to her apartment for a screwdriver and hammer.” This scene re-emerges in The Grass Hotel, and it is one of its most morbidly funny and poignant. Perhaps in fiction Sherborne has found it feels most authentic. This authenticity is helped by the novel’s heavily stylised form. Its sentences are discursive, lyrical, beat-poetic. As the mother’s dementia worsens, the prose becomes less coherent, a soup of dissociated meanings evoking the difficulties of the neurological syndrome and its opaque interiority. Take this passage, where the mother wants to tell her nurse to leave: I knew the know-how for making signs. The sign for Get out was a pointed finger. I still know this but the know-how goes in blanks and blinks. Worse. Each week worse. Blank. Blink. Think. Blank. Goes. This fragmented writing – with its echoes of the childlike half-speak of poet Ania Walwicz – is a heightening of Sherborne’s “exaggerated talking”, a monologue style found variously throughout his other books. Here it’s not always evenly paced – there are times the mother’s character feels transparent, revealing Sherborne at his desk – but mostly the novel’s poetic, image-rich, disjointed realm is immersive and memorable, with its lightning “in cardiac jags”, its spiderwebs “mid-air like skeleton flowers”, its broiling sun decanting wind as if “burning drinks of breath”. The Grass Hotel leaves us with a persuasive articulation of familial power dynamics, their emotional turbulence, and the psychical cling – like ash in water – of our parents. “We slip into our children’s minds and they don’t know if it’s actual or figment,” says the novel’s mother to her son, the author to himself. “Carried in them onward and they slip into their children the same.” • The Grass Hotel by Craig Sherborne is out now through Text PublishingIt was 8.10pm and I was running through the dark streets, desperately searching. Just as I was about to concede defeat, I spotted him. He was near the corner pub, lying lifeless on the nature strip. I looked upward to thank the heavens, then messaged my partner: “I’ve found Teddy.” Teddy was my child’s, well, teddy. The two were inseparable. He did all that a good “transitional object” should do – helped Holly get to sleep and soothed her when she was upset. But Teddy was much more than that; he was her confidant, cub, dance partner, hanky, sunshade, plate, mop and weapon. A couple of years on the job had taken its toll. Once a handsome, light brown bear, he’d become matted and filthy. He looked, as my partner cruelly observed, like a rag with a head. But Holly adored him and that made him priceless. If we couldn’t find him, Holly wouldn’t sleep. If Holly didn’t sleep, neither could we. And that is why a ragged bear became the central figure of our family. Understanding the precariousness of our situation, we bought backup bears – a gaggle of understudies if we were to lose the main man. None fooled Holly. They were too fluffy, too odourless or their eyes were too close together. And although we tried to age them (rolling them in the dirt and squishing them under mattresses), she knew. Holly was our only child then, although it was like we had two. When we hired a babysitter, we emphasised that while Holly was important, so was Teddy. He should be included in any head count. When the babysitter returned from taking Holly to the park one day, she burst through the door. “Is Teddy here?” she asked frantically. We assured her that he was, and relief washed in. Unhelpfully, Teddy was a master of camouflage – especially at bedtime. His nondescript ratty colour ensured he blended perfectly into bathmats, carpets and upholstered dining chairs. It also didn’t help that Holly would habitually fling him out of the pram – maybe she was practising the adage: “If you love them, set them free.” More likely she was testing us. We found him in the library, the cafe, the gutter and even on the road. That time he was clearly a hit-and-run victim, even flatter than before with a tyre mark down his front. Somehow Teddy always found his way back to us. Until the day he didn’t. It was winter. Teddy wasn’t in the pram. Or at home. Or the park. After so many false alarms, I was confident he’d show up. We just had to look harder. We retraced our steps, looked in bushes and wrote a “Lost Bear” post in our neighbourhood Facebook group (all we got was 22 sad-face reactions). None of it worked. He was gone. Holly was inconsolable, and so were we. In desperation we pulled out the backup bears. That failed. We tried other, similar soft toys. She wouldn’t have it. A few weeks later, something odd happened. She chanced on one of the spare bears in her toy box. “It’s Teddy!” she cried. “He’s back.” He clearly wasn’t, and I studied her, trying to work out what was happening. “Er, yes … he’s back!” I said, playing along. “And he’s so fluffy! He’s been … out in the rain?!” I wouldn’t have won an Oscar for that dialogue, but I didn’t need to. I padded out the story, adding in bits about where he’d been, how he didn’t have a hairdryer to tame his wild fur. With Teddy’s “return”, I thought we would slip back into the swing of things, but it was never quite the same. Our enthusiasm for the new guy felt a little forced. Holly knew that we knew, but perhaps she was just trying to create an alternative, more comforting reality. Or maybe she was finding a way to leave Teddy on her own terms, as she gradually shifted her attention to a little mauve unicorn. Now we have a second child, and her chosen cuddly toy is an owl. We’ve learned our lesson and bought five birds. We diligently rotate them so that each one is worn down equally, infused with the scent of home. We’ve lost three already. I should probably sew a GPS tracker into the two that remain.When I think of Joe Rogan, a range of unpalatable things spring to mind: supplements, MMA, Jordan Peterson, pro wrestling, cannabis … and now vaccine misinformation. Rogan is also the most successful podcaster on Earth with around 11 million listeners per episode. What is his appeal? Stepping out of my echo chamber and into Joe Rogan’s world, I want to find out by living the Joe Rogan Experience for the next five days – consuming no other media except for his podcast. Day 1 HOLY HELL. These podcasts are long! Rogan releases three to four podcasts per week, with an average length of two hours and 35 minutes per episode. Listening to every single episode of The Joe Rogan Experience nonstop would take about 211 days or just over half a year. Scrolling through more than a thousand episodes on Spotify, I decide to listen to a mix of random thinkers and pundits and some of the more controversial podcasts that lead to him dominating the headlines this week. I start with an author selected at random. Michael Pollan is a journalist and Rogan is interviewing him about his new book on plant medicine. I intend to listen to Rogan while I do housework, but this podcast is really interesting and jammed with information. You can’t take it in while multitasking. I sit, listen and learn a few things: Moses might have been stoned when he came across the burning bush; the Greeks probably took psychedelics with their wine when celebrating Dionysius; and the PCR test we all take for Covid detection was invented by a guy high on LSD. Rogan himself is a good facilitator. He talks (and is fluent in drug bro talk) but not too much, and gives his guest a good opportunity to expand on his work. The questions are intelligent and Rogan comes across as curious and engaged. I meet a friend for a walk and tell her about Rogan. She shudders and warns me not to get red-pilled. As if! I drop by another friend’s house. Nick has listened to a bit of Joe Rogan who he describes as “a dumb person’s idea of a smart person”. I do not tell him I think Rogan’s smart. Day 2 I wake up and start listening to Rogan before I get out of bed. This episode is one with his friend Duncan Trussell. I watch the video of them talking and they appear to be in a cave with lots of candles. I don’t know who Trussell is and I find their conversation hard to follow and boring. Lacking a central topic like the Pollan one, it’s too discursive. They are talking about Taiwan, about some wrestler I’ve never heard of called John Cena, and crypto. I fall asleep for a bit and wake up and they are still talking about crypto. Abandon this one and switch to an episode featuring a libertarian and comedian Dave Smith. Have not heard of Smith. Get out of bed. Do yoga while listening to Smith and Rogan. I’m doing some stretches and some breathing exercises but it’s hard to chill as the talk is turning hectic – Iraq, Gaddafi, losing your wallet and not being able to pay for Starbucks, Putin, Ukraine, Bill O’Reilly, Trump saying we’ve killed a lot of people too, Assad, the corporate press (“has lost its monopoly”, “is losing its grip on power”, “no ethics”), how “masks don’t work” and how Americans became totalitarian in 2020. It’s a lot. I keep listening as I walk to a reiki session. “Civil assets swot raid … this shit is insane … ,” says Smith, rapid-fire. In reiki I turn off Rogan and enter an all-white room that is subtly lit and lightly scented with incense. I wonder if I am carrying the jacked-up energy of Rogan with me into the room. In the 90-minute session, I find myself falling into a state of deep relaxation, something very akin to hypnosis. The reiki master is clearing my energy. Is it the dense energy of a three-hour Joe Rogan podcast? In my trance-like state, when I come to, the idea of listening to more Rogan repulses me. But yet – I haven’t even listened to a full episode. I must push on. I listen to more Joe Rogan that evening. (“The left wing and right wing are crazy and spinning out of control.” “We’re on the national suicide watch.” “The centre became the radicals and the radicals lost any centre to gravitate to.”) Still affected by the reiki I wonder if Rogan will start to mess with my subconscious. If the only voice I hear is Joe Rogan’s, what sort of person will I become? Day 3 Wake up. Listen to Joe Rogan interview author Sebastian Junger. Junger has had an interesting near-death experience but the conversation takes a boring segue and they end up in a pointless cul-de-sac making small talk about the late comedian Robin Williams. I’m tweeting that I’m listening to Joe Rogan and people on my timeline are so anti. They respond “why” and “he’s awful”. But I am not regretting listening. Rogan himself is personable and warm. A friend of mine who is a journalist on a UK news podcasts says, “He’s not what people think he is. On the vaccine he’s super-dumb, but other stuff he is quite reasonable. He has a nice vibe to him.” Go on a foam roller. Pain. Try and distract myself by listening to Joe Rogan interviewing Twitter founder Jack Dorsey. It’s a bit of a soft interview and I don’t really buy Dorsey’s vibe as a rich hippie who just wants the world to talk to each other and solve their problems through his platform. I see some friends for dinner. I notice I am introducing a lot of conversations with: “I heard this thing on Joe Rogan” and “Joe said … ” Perhaps I am being red-pilled? After listening to nothing but Rogan, his cadence is starting to creep into my speech: “That fucking sucks … ,” I find myself saying in a kind of Rogany drawl. Argh. Stop! But the things I am hearing are making me think about things (donating blood, Occupy Wall Street, psilocybin in communion wafers, Twitter as an instrument of world peace). It has not been a total waste of time. Part of the seduction with Rogan is that he doesn’t appear to be controlled by outside interests. He’s natural. If you are used to watching say three hours of breakfast television a day, you know that Karl Stefanovic is not going to just say what he thinks or offer guests a joint or go super niche on things like defunding the police. And so when someone in the media does appear to break out of some corporate mould, it’s compelling. Day 4 Joe would like this. I’m going to go to the gym for three hours and listen to a full Joe Rogan podcast while I WORK OUT. Then I’m going to buy some supplements. I cue up Whitney Simmons – the first female guest I’ve heard (male guests vastly outnumber the women by something like nine to one). It’s hard to listen to Rogan while on the elliptical. For a start I need to hold my phone as headphones don’t really reach, and secondly it’s not good workout listening. But I like their chemistry: just two people hanging out, shooting the shit. At the gym my headphones break, which means on my walk, where I was going to try and get in an hour of Rogan time, I have to circle Rushcutters Bay with Rogan on speaker. Listen to Rogan interview Macaulay Culkin while folding laundry. Listen to Rogan interview Matt Taibbi while cooking rice. Can’t bring myself to listen to Jordan Peterson, which I’ve queued up next. Day 5 Wake up and am determined to tackle the second hour of the Dave Smith interview. Will it ever end? I’ve been listening to it for days. Oh, I see. This is no good. I was kind of with them until Joe started saying that young people don’t need the vaccine. That only the old and vulnerable like his parents should take it. Gross. Get some nurse that’s been working on the ICU for two years as a guest on your show rather than a fuckknuckle libertarian. I’m disappointed. It’s not just misinformation – but it’s misinformation from Joe. His tone implies that young people who take the vaccine are pussies. And by this stage, after listening to him for hours and hours and hours, I like him (and I am starting to speak like him). I think he’s cool and funny. And if he says people who take vaccines are pussies then that has an effect. Part of the unique danger and disappointment of Rogan spreading misinformation is that he is so trusted by so many listeners. The guy is super sticky. Listeners are with him for three hours at a stretch. They get to really know him and value his opinions. This is a type of power in the media we’ve not seen for a very long time. And of course, with great power comes great responsibility. The effect is to finally turn him off.You wouldn’t normally expect an Australian government agency to slap down a user on Twitter for spreading a “baseless myth” or to explain to another person that “there’s this whole universal franchise concept in Australia that we’ve had for quite some time now” in response to a question about voters’ intelligence. But the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) is in the business of democracy. Its main job is to run federal elections but it also plays an educational role – and that’s where the commission’s increasingly popular Twitter account comes in. You won’t see the tax office jump in to squish misinformation with an abrupt: “This is not the first time you’ve made a claim like this. Disappointing to read.” Or the Productivity Commission playfully replying to a grateful reader in dummy text because their Twitter handle was Lorem ipsum – placeholder text in the design world. When the AEC first joined social media in 2012 it started out just like any other government-affiliated account, fairly inactive with only “robotic responses” to other users, the commission’s digital engagement director, Evan Ekin-Smyth, says. But more recently it has started creating a real stir and developed devoted fans. It’s clear but chatty, direct but upbeat. Ekin-Smyth describes it as “personable” with a “firm but friendly” approach. “We progressively became a little bit more active and forthright. But it’s certainly jumped up a notch in this electoral cycle,” Ekin-Smyth says. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The account steps in to break up Twitter fights over voting laws or to set the record straight on the process of electing a new parliament. As we get closer to the 2022 poll – expected in May – there are a lot of questions to answer. Why do we vote with pencils not pens? Is it OK for a minister to say the Morrison government instead of the Australian government? Can unvaccinated Australians vote? And what’s the deal with the colour purple? The account is quick to offer answers. Pens smudge and don’t work in the tropics. Yes Morrison government is A-OK. Unvaccinated Australians can of course vote and please, if you are a political candidate, don’t use signage that is close to the AEC’s distinctive purple. But the casual tone of the official AEC Twitter account belies a growing concern – that Australia is experiencing the same distrust of the political process as seen during the last US election. “What’s happened in international democracies, particularly the US, of course, is that people have started to question the electoral process a little bit more than they otherwise have done in the past,” Ekin-Smyth says. In late 2020, Donald Trump made false claims that the Democrats had rigged the election. The claims helped fuel the 6 January 2021 insurrection and left a lasting impact on trust in America’s democracy. “Our approach is in response to that,” Ekin-Smyth says. “When somebody is talking about the electoral process, we want them to have the facts.” The AEC has a team of six people – including Ekin-Smyth – who send the tweets. They all have specialist knowledge in commission protocols and election matters so the posts aren’t vetted. There is plenty of misinformation for the AEC to combat. One bizarre myth – recently peddled by anti-establishment protesters in Canberra – is that the AEC will use Dominion voting machines which came to prominence after the US election. Speaking this week, protest spokesperson Riccardo Bosi said the electoral commission had asked the government to use Dominion vote-counting machines. “Do you think you’ll get a free and fair election under these bastards?” Bosi said. A video was posted to Twitter and the AEC’s reaction was swift. “This is completely false and very disappointing. The AEC has never recommended using voting machines and has no relationship with Dominion,” the account tweeted. “The speaker is citing a 5-year-old parliamentary report that mentions the AEC and Dominion in adjacent paragraphs.” The discourse underneath was a lot more sensible – with one user pointing out the ACT uses voting machines but at a federal level it made less sense. “And really the only reason to do it (get voting machines) is getting a reasonably final result in terms of ‘who the new government is’ on the night from a Hare Clark system … Federally you don’t need that because nobody cares about the Senate on the night,” the user wrote. The AEC response was swift – and fun. “Are you just going to sit there and take that, @AuSenate???” Ekin-Smyth says his team has seen a growing amount of misinformation – and the number of people engaging with it. During the 2019 federal election, a member of the public posted a photo of themselves next to a ballot box, claiming to be a polling official and saying they were chucking votes out. The AEC was quick to investigate it and have the post taken down – but it’s that type of material Ekin-Smyth worries will go viral. “We could run an election where everything’s absolutely tickety-boo, done by the letter of the law, and there are no problems whatsoever. “But if people question it and the perception of the election is that’s not the case, then we’ve got a problem. Even if it’s not reality, we’ve got a problem.” Between the 2007 and 2019 federal elections, there was declining interest and satisfaction with elections in Australia, a study by the Australian National University has found. People might be more disenfranchised with politics, but trust in how the process plays out during elections is still high, Ekin-Smyth says. “The number of people who indicated after the 2019 federal election that they trusted the AEC was in the 90s [percentage points]. It was a slight increase on the previous election in 2016. “There are electoral management bodies overseas who would run a mile and climb the mountain to receive those sorts of raving reviews. But any level of distrust is a concern and we want to make sure we can protect that as much as possible.” The 2022 election will be the biggest the AEC has run, with 16.9 million voters, 100,000 polling staff, 8,000 voting venues, 60m ballots, and 4m pencils that won’t smudge. Along the way, the AEC Twitter team hopes to continue winning fans and making other departments and agencies jealous. “We do get interactions from colleagues across the public service, looking on with a bit of wonder at how we have such freedom,” Ekin-Smyth says. “We are truly independent, I suppose, and in some ways, our social media approach is evidence of that.”Germany’s foreign minister is facing domestic criticism over her surprise decision to recruit the head of Greenpeace as an international environmental envoy, including accusations she bent the rules to create the post and had obscured the divide between governing and lobbying. Annalena Baerbock described Jennifer Morgan, the outgoing head of Greenpeace International, as “the new navigator at the helm of our international climate policy” when she announced her appointment this week. As a future state secretary under Baerbock, Morgan will coordinate Germany’s €6bn (£5bn) international climate initiative across all the government ministries. The includes supporting projects in newly industrialised countries. She will also represent Germany at international climate conferences, the next being the UN’s meeting in Sharm el-Sheik in November. Morgan, who starts the role on 1 March, will work across the government but is expected to have particularly close contact with Baerbock’s fellow Green party member, Robert Habeck, who is the minister for economics and climate protection, and Steffi Lemke, the environment minister, whose role includes conservation, consumer protection and nuclear safety. The appointment of Morgan will help broaden the remit of her own ministry, Baerbock said on Wednesday. She added that Germany’s 226 diplomatic missions abroad were, by extension, “climate ambassadors” and would be included in her effort to place climate politics at the heart of German foreign policy. But Morgan must first become a German citizen in order to become a state secretary. This, Baerbock said, was in the process of happening, but has prompted stiff opposition in conservative circles amid fears that a US citizen is not capable of representing German interests. She will reportedly receive a salary in line with that earned by bureaucrats of a similar rank, of almost €15,000 a month. Morgan will have to also undergo a security check by Germany’s intelligence services, with some critics suggesting it may be difficult for her to distance herself from Greenpeace protest initiatives where its activists have clashed with the law. Politicians from the opposition conservative alliance have led the condemnation. Thorsten Frei, a member of the Christian Social Union, called the decision hypocritical. He said: “To make a Greenpeace activist state secretary with the wink of an eye does not tally with the recent standards announced by parliament to more clearly identify the influence of interest groups. To grant citizenship and the status of civil servant to a prominent American lobbyist on the quick is a highly idiosyncratic event.” Alexander Dobrindt, the head of the parliamentary group of the Christian Social Union, said the government was opening itself up to manipulation. “That international lobbyists regardless of the topic, are allowed to take over the leadership of government ministries I find surprising, even for this government,” he said. Lukas Köhler, vice-chair of the parliamentary group of the pro-business FDP, part of the three-way coalition government alongside the Greens and the Social Democrats, told Handelsblatt that the general public had reacted “with a degree of astonishment” because of what he called Greenpeace’s “radical views” and its involvement in some activist events in Germany in recent years that had been seen to backfire. Transparency International, the anti-corruption organisation which is based in Berlin, said it saw the appointment as largely unproblematic as the goal behind it was a transparent one, to advance climate protection in the foreign ministry. “For that you clearly need experts,” its chair, Hartmut Bäumer, told the news network RND. “This isn’t about financial advantages for Greenpeace, rather about moral concerns. That is the difference from other organisations for whom financial lobbyism is the priority.” But TI’s managing director, Anna-Maija Mertens, said the organisation would monitor the way in which Morgan carried out her role. “Of course Jennifer Morgan has to ensure she maintains a broad, balanced weighing up of interests,” Mertens said. Ever since her appointment two months ago, Baerbock, who has been mainly focused on tackling high-level crises such as the standoff between Russia and the west over Ukraine, has stressed the importance of broadening the remit of her ministry to include environmental affairs. She has quashed the expectation that she would be forced against her will to water down her commitment to green issues in order to concentrate on the wide range of pressing diplomatic concerns. There had been speculation she had in effect been sidelined in the role of foreign minister because of a worse-than-predicted performance in September’s election over negative publicity stemming from plagiarism allegations. While she has earned a mixed response for her diplomatic efforts to tackle tensions over the Ukraine border, the role has caused her international profile to soar. Speaking in fluent German, Morgan said at a press briefing in Berlin on Wednesday morning that she had lived in the city since 2003 and that her “heart beats for Germany”. Greenpeace’s reputation in Germany was damaged when a protest by one of its activists went spectacularly wrong before Germany’s Euro 2020 match against France. A man lost control of his paraglider as he attempted to fly over the Allianz Arena in Munich. Two people were injured. Officials said the paraglider narrowly escaped getting shot down by marksmen. The stunt was widely condemned as reckless, including by the Green party, and Greenpeace later apologised. Jan-Marco Luczak of the FDP said that, as head of Greenpeace, Morgan should be “held responsible for such life-threatening and punishable initiatives”.As China began to organise hosting the 2022 Winter Olympics one problem started to emerge – they had automatically qualified for the ice hockey competition, yet they didn’t have a team. The solution? Phoning around to put together a squad of ringers from scratch. And so on Thursday, when they made their debut at the Games in Beijing, facing the might of a historically successful United States team, the China roster included players like 32-year-old American-Chinese goaltender Jeremy Smith from Dearborn in Michigan, listed as Jieruimi Shimisi. Likewise, Jieke Kailiaosi is better recognised by his friends in Chicago where he was born as Jake Chelios. More than half of the 25 players in China’s squad were born or grew up in North America. Smith told ESPN he had been surprised to get a call inviting him to join a team in Beijing that could lead to an Olympic place. “If you’re joking,” he told his agent, “I’m waiting for the punchline.” The International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) permits players to represent a country if they have lived and played in a league there for two years, and have transferred to the new national association. So, in order to bond them together as a team – and ensure eligibility for the Games – players were contracted to a new Chinese club. In 2016 HC Kunlun Red Star entered the Kontinental Hockey League, a mostly Russian competition that also features clubs from Belarus, Finland and Latvia among others. China itself has no professional league, and the plan was hatched to avoid Chinese embarrassment on the international stage. They have not fared well over their six seasons, reaching the play-offs only once. In the last three years they have won fewer than 40 of their 170 matches in regulation time. Things got so bad that late last year the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and IIHF discussed dropping China’s team from the Games, fearing they would be overwhelmed. “Watching a team being beaten 15-0 is not good for anyone, not for China or for ice hockey” said the IIHF president Luc Tardif. Domestic fans have also not all taken kindly to the move. Social media posts have questioned their commitment and their qualifications to be Chinese. A typical post on social media site Weibo attached an image of the squad, with user kaixinwanmao saying “If you didn’t tell me, I wouldn’t know this was China’s men’s ice hockey team.” Covid had a twist in the Olympics ice hockey tale though. The US team that China faced in their opening match had also been significantly weakened. In December it was announced that the NHL would not be sending players to the Olympics, with Commissioner Gary Bettman saying it was “no longer feasible” after the NHL season itself had been disrupted. In their first ever Winter Olympics match China nearly took a shock lead after three minutes of the first period. It took 11 minutes for the US to break the deadlock. But after that the game unfolded very much as expected, with the final result going 8-0 to the Americans. It may be that sporting success will determine the extent to which fans accept athletes representing China at these Games with dual heritage. San Francisco-born Eileen Gu, who has already secured one gold medal and will compete for two more, has proved hugely popular domestically and become one of the faces of the Chinese team in their home Games. However, she has been repeatedly questioned about what this means for her citizenship – China does not permit dual nationality ordinarily. Goaltender Smith clarified to reporters in Beijing ahead of his Olympic ice hockey debut that “I did not renounce my citizenship, they never asked me to.” It might be an unconventional way to assemble a team, but it has given an Olympic shot to those who never thought they would have one. The Vancouver-born 36-year-old Brandon Yip plays right wing in the squad, and last featured in the top-level NHL in 2014. “I knew I wasn’t making Team Canada, that’s for sure,” he quipped. After their opening defeat by the US, the task facing the ice hockey team representing China doesn’t get any easier. Their next matches are on Saturday against Germany, ranked fifth in the world, and on Sunday against Canada, ranked No 1.Of all the great achievements of the 1945 Labour government, one stands out on the world stage. The NHS may have the greatest impact on our daily lives, but it is the creation of Nato that ushered in what is now approaching three-quarters of a century of peace between the nations of Europe. Prime Minister Clement Attlee played a vital role in bringing together this unprecedented alliance of democracies. Then, as now, the promise that an attack on one member would be considered as an attack on all formed the foundation of British security policy. As such, Labour’s commitment to Nato is unshakable. That commitment is more important than ever today. The threat to Ukraine is real and pressing. More than 130,000 Russian troops menace its border. Russian combat battalions, tank divisions and air squadrons have massed, flaunting their capability of a full-scale invasion. For now, Putin’s final intentions are uncertain; the flexing and threatening of Russia’s destructive capacity are not. The prospect of a bloody and unjust war looms over Ukraine. It was to prevent such needless wars that the generation of Attlee and his foreign secretary, the formidable trade union leader Ernest Bevin, were the midwives of Nato. With the failures of appeasement and the spectre of Munich fresh in their minds, they knew that the best way to preserve peace is to show that you are prepared to stand up to aggression. Indeed, on the day the treaty bringing Nato into being was signed, Bevin spoke of the new alliance as “a consecration of peace and resistance to aggression”. Now, as the integrity of a sovereign nation on our continent of Europe stands in peril, those words are as sacrosanct as ever. That Bevinite internationalism will guide Labour’s approach to Britain’s security every day of my leadership. Nobody wants war. At first glance, some on the left may be sympathetic to those siren voices who condemn Nato. But to condemn Nato is to condemn the guarantee of democracy and security it brings, and which our allies in eastern and central Europe are relying on, as the sabre-rattling from Moscow grows ever louder. That’s why the likes of the Stop the War coalition are not benign voices for peace. At best they are naive; at worst they actively give succour to authoritarian leaders who directly threaten democracies. There is nothing progressive in showing solidarity with the aggressor when our allies need our solidarity and – crucially – our practical assistance, now more than ever. The kneejerk reflex, “Britain, Canada, the United States, France – wrong; their enemies – right”, is unthinking conservatism at its worst. To truly stop war, you need to show you are serious about standing up for peace, that you are serious about keeping your promises to your friends, and that you will always stand up to those who threaten. Another giant of the Labour movement, Denis Healey, as Labour’s international secretary in 1947, wrote the pamphlet Cards on the Table, which demolished the argument of those on the left that Britain could somehow be a third force, aligned neither with the Americans nor the Soviets. Attlee, Bevin and Healey saw communism for what it was, and were prepared to stand up to its aggression. Today’s Labour party has the same clear-eyed view of the current regime in the Kremlin. We know, as they did, that bullies respect only strength. Russian tanks sit, engines revving, on the verge of annexing Ukraine, but protest placards waved here by the usual suspects condemn Nato, not Moscow. Any equating of the right of a sovereign nation to determine its own future, even to exist, and the vicious aggression of a neighbour is an intellectual sham. To do so is not merely misguided: it is morally wrong. There is no equivalence between a defensive alliance that has never provoked conflict and those who would inflict the appalling cost of war on to others. Moscow’s hard-line leadership won’t see a rally on the streets of Britain as a reason to pull its tanks from Ukraine’s borders. All it will see is naivety and weakness – virtue signallers in the west providing a smokescreen so it can go on beating up and jailing those brave individuals who dare to stand up to its despotism on the streets of Russia. That is why I came to Nato headquarters to be briefed by its secretary general, the former Labour prime minister of Norway, Jens Stoltenberg, on how the alliance can stand together in the face of unnecessary threats from Moscow. And that is why Labour is standing by the UK government’s approach to standing united with our allies in the face of aggression abroad. It is also why Labour is adamant that the government must do far more to stand up to the threat from the Russian regime at home. Under a decade of Conservative rule, London has become the home of international money laundering, where kleptocrats and criminals come to clean their dirty money of its stains. This isn’t just an issue of financial crime, it’s an issue of national security. Dark money and influence leaves the mark of weakness and shame on our country, and it must be scrubbed clean. Labour strongly backs an economic crime bill to create a proper register of overseas entities in property and asset ownership, reform of Companies House to give it a regulatory function, and the rapid implementation of the sensible recommendations in the recent report on Russia by parliament’s intelligence and security committee. By dragging its feet and refusing to take immediate action against dirty money at home, when it has the levers in its hands, the Johnson administration is weakening Britain’s moral and practical leadership abroad. We won’t let up in pressing it to end this prevarication. When Bevin and the representatives of the other free nations designed the alliance one principle was paramount. No nation can be pressed into joining Nato, and no nation can be prevented from doing so by bullying and brinkmanship from others. Each new member joins for their own independent reasons, and each application is judged on its own merits by existing Nato members. That principle remains right and fair. The pandemic has underlined again how today’s great challenges can only be tackled by action on a global scale. While they affect us individually, their very nature demands that they are solved collectively. We must be relentless in working together with our international partners to tackle global poverty, future health crises and climate change. Nato is just one part of the rules-based international system that allows for collective action, but it is a vital one. It should be supported, and its resolve strengthened, not undermined by ill thought-out opposition. That is why Labour’s support for Nato remains as unwavering today as it was when we played an instrumental part in its formation. And that is why I regard both the Ns – Nato and the NHS – as legacies of that transformational Labour government that we need to be proud of and to protect. Keir Starmer is leader of the Labour party and MP for Holborn and St PancrasSnoop Dogg is being sued for the alleged sexual assault and battery of a woman in California in 2013, Pitchfork reports. The anonymous woman – an actor, model and dancer – said that after attending a Snoop Dogg concert on 29 May 2013, the rapper’s associate Bishop Don “Magic” Juan offered her a ride home, but that she fell asleep in the car and was taken to his home against her will. The following morning, Juan allegedly “removed his penis from his pants and forced his penis into her mouth”. The next day, Juan allegedly took the woman to Snoop Dogg’s studio to see if he would hire her for a role on a television show. According to the lawsuit, the rapper cornered her as she was using the toilet, forced her into oral sex and then “proceeded to masturbate and ejaculated on [the woman]’s upper chest and lower neck”. The lawsuit stated that she did not get the television job because she “refused to willingly and enthusiastically give oral sex”. The woman, known as Jane Doe, is suing Snoop Dogg, AKA Calvin Cordozar Broadus Jr, for a violation of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act, sexual battery and sexual assault. Juan is also named in the lawsuit. The Guardian has contacted representatives of Snoop Dogg for comment. He deleted an Instagram post in which he wrote: “Gold digger season is here … be careful nefews [his name for fans] … keep ya guards up … And. Keep ya circle small”. Snoop Dogg’s new album, BODR (Bacc on Death Row) is released on 11 February. It marks his return to Death Row Records, the legendary hip-hop label that he now runs, following his acquisition of the company earlier this week. He is due to perform during the Super Bowl halftime show on 13 February alongside Dr Dre, Eminem, Mary J Blige and Kendrick Lamar.NOT SO KEANE Things haven’t gone right for poor old Sunderland for quite a while now. Since 1939, in fact, when Germany invaded Poland to set off an unfortunate chain of events that robbed their league-and-cup-winning superstar Raich Carter of what would surely have been his best years and culminated in his transfer to Derby County. Sunderland’s immediate post-war ‘Bank of England’ spending spree produced a trophy haul of no trophies, and while the 1973 cup win provided brief respite from the relentless misery, things quickly became so grindingly dull again that even the 1981 arrival of national treasure / people’s sunbeam Ally McCoist couldn’t cheer anyone up. So it’s fair to say they’ve been trending steadily to the point we find them today. Upon somehow managing, back in 2018, to get themselves relegated to the third tier for the first time in their history without any of Lawrie McMenemy’s help, the club – and indeed most neutral observers – blithely assumed they’d be back in the One Below The Big Time before anyone knew it. But here we are, years later, two-thirds of the way through a fourth consecutive League One season, and currently on a run of form – a 6-0 defeat at Bolton followed by losses to bottom team Doncaster and struggling Cheltenham – that is hinting at making even a play-off berth look like a pipe dream. Having briskly cashiered Lee Johnson through the door marked Away The Lad, Sunderland have been desperately seeking someone to knock heads together quicksmart. To this end, they asked Roy Keane to reprise his largely successful stint at the Stadium of Light back in the day. However, contractual negotiations between Keane and owner Kyril Louis-Dreyfus broke down, farcical scenes presumably brought to an end with mouth pops and a slap-bass sting in honour of Julia, Kyril’s second cousin twice removed. Sunderland now have to decide between Alex Neil, Grant McCann, Sabri Lamouchi and [Fiver squints, adjusts pince-nez] Neil Lennon. They’d better get it done soon, too, because a fifth year in League One looms large. Oh Raich! If only you knew it would eventually come to this. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Scott Murray from 7.45pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Liverpool 4-2 Leicester in the Premier League (oh Brenny), while Paul Doyle will be on hand for Wolves 1-0 Arsenal. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I think of the scene from Goal the movie when he signs for Newcastle and told he is training with the first team. That was like me. I was told I was going to train with the first team: Arnautovic, Shaqiri, Adam, Shawcross; I could go on. I was signing these guys on Football Manager two months earlier” – Stoke City’s Harry Souttar gets his chat on with Ewan Murray about flamin’ knack and improving club fortunes. FIVER LETTERS “Given that two sponsors of West Ham have now pulled the plug over ‘cat-flap’, isn’t it time that the UK government re-thought its outrageously generous stadium deal with the club too?” – Alex Folkes. “This week, Dion Dublin said on Match of the Day of Wout Weghorst: ‘He’s a big old unit that you would expect not to do what he does.’ I can’t see HABOUTYWENTDWHD replacing GTFABM any time soon” – Matt Clift. “Poor James A Garfield. Not only did he suffer the indignity of dying due to his own doctors’ ministrations, but then Richard O’Hagan (yesterday’s Fiver letters) added insult to injury by labelling him as ‘famously corpulent’. Not sure who Richard had in mind, maybe Taft or Cleveland, but at 6ft and 210lb, Garfield hardly fit the bill. He’s not even among our top 10 heaviest presidents” – Guy Robert. “Re: Tuesday’s News, Bits and Bobs and Spotify sponsoring the Camp Nou, surely a long-running music compilation series should be all over this branding opportunity? I, for one, would love to go on the Camp Nou That’s What I Call Music! stadium tour” – Phil Taylor. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Phil Taylor. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Portland Timbers midfielder Andy Polo has been suspended and prohibited from all team activities pending an investigation into allegations of domestic violence made against him. Brazilian police have arrested a man they believe hacked into Neymar’s bank accounts and repeatedly stole small sums of money. “What did this lad do?” said Fabio Pinheiro Lopes, in charge of the case. “He got the password of his office colleague and stole small amounts of money from famous people with high net worth.” Spurs have called on their supporters to “move on” from using the word “Yid” after concluding a review with fans’ focus groups. As mentioned, a second West Ham sponsor has garnered fresh publicity by pulling its support of the club after the Kurt Zouma cat business, while brother Yoan has been sidelined by Dagenham &amp; Redbridge for his role in it all. When asked by a reporter if his Hammers teammate should be sacked, Michail Antonio replied with a question of his own: “Do you think what he’s done is worse than racism? I’m not condoning a thing that he’s done – I don’t agree with what he’s done at all – but there are people who have been caught for racism and have played football afterwards. They got punished, they got an eight-game punishment or something like that, but people are now calling for people to be sacked, to lose their livelihood. I’ve just got to ask this question to everyone out there: is what he’s done worse?” Brighton boss Graham Potter doesn’t feel too down after technical director Dan Ashworth headed off for gardening leave/Newcastle. “Of course I am disappointed, Dan was a colleague, a friend – someone I respect a lot,” tooted Potter. “He’s been an important person at the club, but these things happen, it’s life.” And after James Rowe did one from Chesterfield, having been suspended pending an investigation into allegations of misconduct, Paul Cook has returned to the club as manager. STILL WANT MORE? Hear from the campaigners who are embarking on a three-day march around Scottish grounds in a rightful push to end football’s gambling habit. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! IT’S NO 5My wife, Valerie Letcher, who has died after a heart valve operation aged 80, was an academic who wrote extensively on pioneering British female novelists and commentators in South Africa and Canada. In particular, she highlighted the contributions of Harriet Ward (writing from the Cape between 1842 and 1848) and the Munro sisters (Georgina and Isabella). Valerie, who spent most of her career in South Africa, was a member of the Black Sash movement in the 1980s, whose members would line up outside political meetings or in the street, wearing their black sashes, after racist legislation had been passed by the nationalist government of the time. Born in Durban, Valerie was the daughter of Jack Fann, a road engineer, and Violet (nee Galagher), a homemaker. After attending Girls’ Collegiate, Pietermaritzburg, she studied English at Natal University Pietermaritzburg, graduating in 1962, and then took an education diploma. She travelled to the UK for a year to teach English at Ashford school in Kent, and in 1965 began a teaching post at Durban high school. She and I met in Durban and married in 1967. We spent two years in Bristol while I was a researcher there at the university. Moving back to South Africa, we lived in Johannesburg and then Grahamstown and finally Durban. We also spent short periods in the UK, in Oxford, Exeter, London and Bath. It was in Grahamstown that Val spent 10 years as a staunch member of the Black Sash movement, opposing apartheid. In 1990 Val became a lecturer in English at Edgewood College of Education, Natal University. As an educator she was committed to social justice and wherever she encountered racial prejudice among students, she felt compelled to teach them a better way of living. She chose texts that challenged and provoked – a favourite was Ursula Le Guin’s novel The Left Hand of Darkness. At the same time, she was studying for her PhD, which she completed in 1996, on the subject of Ward, a British writer often mistaken for a South African. Her work on Ward, the Munro sisters and other female British writers of the 19th century was published in journals throughout her time in Grahamstown, and after she retired in 2000. We settled in Stratton on the Fosse, in Somerset, in 2003. Val’s retirement life revolved around walking (with the Mendip Ramblers), book clubs, reading, writing, gardening and entertaining friends and relatives. Val was the consummate homemaker and wonderful mother to our three children. She was also a superb host. Her love of poetry was a mainstay of her intellectual life and many dinner parties were enlivened by a quotation from a guest that was completed by Val and vice versa. She is survived by our children, Catherine, Christopher and Sarah, two grandchildren, Amy and Finn, her sister, Felicity, and me.The Aston Martin drivers Sebastian Vettel and Lance Stroll have criticised Formula One for putting entertainment before the sport at last season’s controversial and decisive Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. The drivers accused the FIA and F1 of poor judgment in the decision-making that cost Lewis Hamilton the title. Max Verstappen won the championship at Abu Dhabi, having overtaken Hamilton on the final lap after the race director, Michael Masi, intervened and improvised with the rules governing the safety car and lapped cars. It remains a highly contentious decision. F1 and the teams are known not to want races to end behind the safety car but Stroll and Vettel, speaking at the launch of their new Aston Martin AMR22 car, believed the objective of ensuring a dramatic finale was given greater weight than the integrity of the sport. “Abu Dhabi was just not right, the rules are the rules,” said Stroll. “When there is a safety car lapped cars get to overtake the safety car and then we go racing. There is nothing that says half the cars can overtake and half have to stay behind. Those things can’t be modified during a race just to put on a show. “The rules are the rules. You can’t be modifying the rules for entertainment, it has to be sport first. I don’t think it’s right what happened in Abu Dhabi.” Vettel, a four-time champion, concurred with his disquiet that F1 had lost a sense of perspective in Abu Dhabi but sympathised with Masi and the difficult position he was holding in trying to ensure the GP finished under racing conditions. “The main thing is that we focus on the sport and not so much on the show,” said Vettel. “The main thing is there is clarity in what’s happening in these sort of situations and there are no questions asked any more. “For Michael it has been a pity. There are two interests clashing: one is the sport and the other is the show. I don’t care so much about the show because I look at it as a sport and from a competitive point of view. Michael has been very focused and determined to do a good job. I don’t know what is in store for his future but I hope he sticks around because overall he has done a very good job.” The FIA’s investigation into the events will present its findings to the teams on Monday 14 February. Aston Martin, under the billionaire owner Lawrence Stroll, have a five-year plan to be challenging for race wins and titles. As well as major investment they have reshuffled their management setup, with their former team principal, Otmar Szafnauer, being replaced by Mike Krack, who has held senior roles with BMW and the Le Mans-winning Porsche team.Dan Evans, who has died aged 45 in a road accident while riding his bicycle, was a senior team leader with the healthcare research and development arm of Siemens, Healthineers. His contribution in particular to NHS pathology laboratories workflow and capacity was critical, especially in light of the post-pandemic healthcare backlog. Dan was also a keen cyclist and organic gardener. Born in Wakefield, West Yorkshire, Dan was the son of Pat (nee Taggesell), a teacher, and me, Tony Evans, a headteacher. When he was six years old the family moved to Bonby in north Lincolnshire, where Dan attended Worlaby primary school and Brigg comprehensive. In 1994 he studied for a biochemistry degree at Bangor University, Gwynedd. Dan began his career as a laboratory technician in the products support team with Diagnostics Products Corporation in Llanberis, Gwynedd. When DPC merged with Siemens in 2006, Dan joined the Healthineers research and development team, rising to team leader in 2021. Here his reputation grew as an effective listener who advised clients both in the UK and worldwide. He was in his element when it came to analysing and understanding data, acquiring the nickname Data Dan. On one occasion, during a team bonding weekend in the Lake District, he prepared a curry supper while dressed as a character from Star Wars to add an element of fun to the gathering. Dan loved his work and his achievements were regularly recognised with commendations at Siemens, though he was always modest, saying he was just doing his job. His smile lit up a room, he was popular with colleagues and was always prepared to help and support others. No task was too small. He continued to work throughout the pandemic, supporting NHS laboratories and working in hospitals across the UK and Ireland. Dan met Jo Mitchell, a project officer at Bangor University, in 2005, and together they moved to Y Felinheli, where they enjoyed entertaining family and friends – his barbecues and curries were famous. He also developed an interest in organic vegetable gardening and they soon were almost self-sufficient in vegetables. In his spare time Dan was a badminton player, angler and cyclist, and enjoyed nothing more than walking with Jo in his beloved north Wales. Many family gatherings were spent around the dining table discussing politics and social issues. Dan was a Labour party supporter and an avid Guardian reader. He had a sense of social justice that was reflected in his actions to help others. Jo survives him, as do Pat and I, his brother, Gareth, and his nephew, Owen.Here is a romcom whose chief impact is the pure Twilight Zone weirdness of realising that it could have been made at any time in the last 20 years with the same lead actors: the luxuriously preserved Jennifer Lopez and Owen Wilson. The borrowings from Richard Curtis are of the same general vintage and the closing credits deliver a cutesy and unearned homage to the faux-genuine couple testimonies from When Harry Met Sally. With her legendary radioactive humourlessness, Lopez plays Kat, a singer with a gigantic social media following poised to bring off the publicity coup of the millennium: she is going to perform her massive hit, Marry Me, with her fiance Bastian (played by Colombian music star Maluma) after which they will get married on stage in front of a live global audience. But just as she is about to go on, everyone’s phones are alive with the scandalous news that Bastian has cheated on her. Piteously alone, Kat sees Charlie (Wilson) in the crowd: an adorable single dad and maths teacher who happens at that moment to be holding the “Marry Me” placard that his tween daughter Lou (Chloe Coleman), a massive Kat fan, has brought with her. Impulsively, defiantly, Kat beckons this sensitive everyman up on stage; the lovably bewildered guy complies (for his awestruck daughter’s sake, natch) and the ceremony goes ahead. They know it’s just a stunt – and yet Charlie’s real, ordinary life and genuine values entrance lonely Kat as they get to know each other. Will they get married for real? Or will Kat be tempted back to the world of super-rich celebrity and leave poor Charlie in his civilian slum of yucky non-famousness? Everything about the film is machine-tooled and algorithmically calculated, right down to the chilling refusal to talk about Lou’s mother (who cares, right?) and the fact that Charlie has been given a lovable dog. Wilson is so robotically bland that in 20 or 100 years’ time I fully expect Marry Me to be remade starring the if-anything-younger-looking Jen and Owen. • Marry Me is released on 11 February in the US and UK.The Sky Is Everywhere, Apple TV+ and A24’s adaptation of Jandy Nelson’s 2010 young adult novel, often gives what could be a rote exploration of grief the sheen of a fairy tale. Seventeen-year-old Lennie Walker (Grace Kaufman) lives in a colorful house in a northern California redwood forest surrounded by ancient trees and her Gram’s (Cherry Jones) sweet-smelling roses. A talented clarinetist, her forays into the woods are soundtracked by classical jazz; the wind carries off her poems and letters, written on leaves or looseleaf paper. There once were two sisters who explored together, she narrates, and minutes into the film, there remains only one, after the death of Lennie’s beloved older sister Bailey (Havana Rose Liu) from a heart arrhythmia – the same condition that killed their mother when they were children – at the age of 19. In less capable hands, this catastrophic loss could become the single dominant element of the film, the sap that overwhelms everywhere else. But through the eyes of Josephine Decker, the film-maker behind the experimental theater trip Madeline’s Madeline and the perversely surprising, deeply under-appreciated psychodrama Shirley, adolescent grief becomes something more confounding, sensual, spiky. Decker infuses Nelson’s screenplay with a potent dose of whimsical fantasy, morphing Lennie’s tortuous bereavement into a lonely house, a romantic musical journey and a garden where other complicated, confusing emotions grow. Those emotions mostly pertain to the boys who fill the gaps in Lennie’s life as she returns to school after an absence. There’s Toby (Pico Alexander), Bailey’s boyfriend, whom Lennie both resents as the person who took Bailey’s time in life and covets as the only person who understands her pain in death. And then there’s Joe (Jacques Colimon), a new student and fellow musician, the only person who can coax Lennie out of her grief-addled musical funk and to whom Lennie is immediately attracted. The classic love triangle could feel derivative if not for Kaufman’s fine-tuned performance, Decker’s focus on Lennie’s emotional rollercoaster, and the specificity with which each male character matches her yearning to live and return to herself in spite of crushing loss, like two opposite ends of a puzzle piece. It’s familiar territory; To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before, Netflix’s hit YA adaptation which spawned its own trilogy and in-house stars, similarly follows a younger sister in the shadow of an absent older one (though at college, not dead) in the shadow of loss, but with a more poppy, heartthrob bent. The Sky is Everywhere has a nerdier sensibility – Lennie is a band geek obsessed with Wuthering Heights – which, combined with Decker’s atmospheric, off-kilter style, feels fresh. As in Shirley, Decker’s homage to midcentury horror legend Shirley Jackson which bent the rules of a literary biopic by placing the author in her own plot, The Sky is Everywhere flirts with the conventions of YA through elaborate flourishes of magical realism. A sequence in which Joe and Lennie bond over Bach becomes a fantasy ballet of flower-adorned nymphs. Music floats characters in the air. Lennie’s fortress of grief comes alive as a house no one else can enter, a storm no one else can see or feel. Heightened sound effects – rustling wind, humming crickets, buzzing flies, a springing sound to indicate arousal – effectively bring Lennie’s interior experience closer to our own. The film is strongest in its examination of the emotional scramble of grief, actions that far outpace the characters’ ability to process or understand them. Compared with scenes between Lennie and Joe, which are surprisingly sensuous and sexy (in an accurate teenage way, not an adults cosplaying teenage way), scenes between Lennie and Toby are raw, jagged. In one sequence, Decker interweaves Lennie’s visceral memory of Bailey’s open casket with one of kissing Toby, soundtracked by the tinnitus of an aftershock instead of the usual classical score by Caroline Shaw. It’s provocative, transgressive material, how thoroughly tangled these wires of grief and lust have become, without being salacious or incendiary. Decker’s deftness in exploring these thornier, misunderstood feelings renders some of the more melodramatic moments (the secret engagement of a teenager, a pregnancy reveal) off-key, too bold. Similarly, Lennie’s vivid interiority is in stark contrast to several other thinly sketched characters, such as Lennie’s stoner uncle Big (Jason Segel), little more than a stock hippie, best friend Sarah (Ji-young Yoo), a fellow band geek whose support Lennie mostly rebuffs, and one-dimensional mean girl Rachel (Julia Schlaepfer), Lennie’s band rival. Even Bailey, invoked so often, is mostly a spectral memory. These are off notes in a mostly absorbing symphony of aftermath, one that lands at a message you’d expect: that grief is horrific but endurable, that life goes on, that the only way forward is through. The journey to that point, and the only reasonable resolution to the love triangle, is a surprisingly enjoyable one – an emotional arc that honors the beautiful strangeness of teenage feelings more than its inherent drama, even after the worst happens. The Sky is Everywhere is available on Apple TV+ from 11 FebruaryThe fight for democracy and media freedom in Hong Kong feels like it has “entered its endgame”, after a year of crackdowns, arrests and forced closures of outlets, the International Federation for Journalists has said. In a report on the ongoing threats to the press in Hong Kong, titled Lights Out, the IFJ called on governments to offer support and pathways for Hong Kong journalists seeking to flee the city and find refuge to keep working. It noted “a clear and documented exodus and closure of both local and international media outlets, journalists and media workers that once earned Hong Kong a reputation as a bastion for media excellence in the Asia region”. About 20 media workers, executives and defenders have been arrested or detained since the implementation of the national security law in June 2020, including high-profile figures such as the Apple Daily founder, Jimmy Lai. In newly published letters from prison, the media mogul and activist said he feared the crackdown would eventually turn Hong Kong into “a cage, like Xinjiang”, where China is accused of incarcerating at least 1 million mostly Muslim minorities and other human rights abuses. The IFJ report detailed the arrests, detentions, forced closures and other direct acts against the media, but also described more insidious efforts, including internal changes at national broadcasters, pro-Beijing media attacks and intimidation, and opacity around ever shifting “red lines” which the media struggled to navigate, as well as tightening restrictions on public records. It said fear and uncertainty now dominated life in Hong Kong, and “there is a now a palpable sense that the fight for democracy and media freedom has entered its endgame”. “We haven’t come to this conclusion easily; it’s deeply concerning we’ve come to this point,” IFJ’s Asia Pacific director, Jane Worthington, told the Guardian. “It’s changing the whole reporting map of Asia, what is happening in Hong Kong. It’s shuffling everything around.” Since the introduction of the national security law, some foreign journalists have left, or been denied visas. The New York Times shifted staff to Seoul, while Initium Media decamped its headquarters to Singapore, and several journalists forced to leave China were unable to resettle in Hong Kong and have set up in Taiwan. There were, however, fewer options for Hong Kong journalists, Worthington said. The IFJ said journalists who chose to move overseas would need support from foreign governments – akin to the UK’s pathways for Hongkongers – to continue their work in exile. “We have a real argument that they are persecuted,” Worthington said. “Not all will have the economic circumstances to move themselves and their families … They need pathways.” Of the media workers and defenders who had been detained, at least 12 had been charged with national security or other offences, including Lai. Arrested in August 2020, Lai has been in prison since December 2020, on remand and then serving sentences for a number of convictions while also awaiting trial on national security charges. In excerpts from prison letters written in late 2021, to be published in the March issue of Index on Censorship magazine, Lai railed against the government assault on freedom of the press and speech, and said he was relying on his faith as a source of strength while in jail. Writing after Apple Daily’s closure, Lai said the “barbaric suppression” of Beijing and the Hong Kong government had worked, and quieted the population. “But the muted anger they have is not going away. Even those emigrating will have it forever,” he said. “This Apple Daily shutdown only aggravates it, making it certain to people that the hopelessness of Hong Kong is irreversible. The more barbaric [the] treatment of Hong Kong people, [the] greater is their anger, and power of their potential resistance; [the] greater is the distrust of Beijing, of Hong Kong, [the] stricter is their rule to control. The vicious circle of suppression-anger-and-distrust eventually will turn Hong Kong into a prison, a cage, like Xinjiang. World, cry for Hong Kong people.” He also expressed some guilt over the suffering of his jailed fellow executives, in particular the chief editor, Lo Wai Kong. “It would be disingenuous to say that by creating Apple Daily I have put him in this situation,” he wrote. “But I do have a guilty feeling and want to share his price of his cross, which is weighing too heavily on him.” A few months later he wrote to staff in Canada. “There is always a price to pay when you put truth, justice and goodness ahead of your own comfort, safety and physical wellbeing, or your life becomes a lie,” he said. “I choose truth instead of a lie and pay the price.”This letter is a formal legal document, the equivalent to being interviewed by the police under caution. As such, it is incumbent on the respondent to give full and accurate answers at all times. Failure to do so may result in further criminal proceedings being taken against you. Name: Rishi Sunak. Is it really?: Yes. It’s not, is it?: Er ... You’re Boris Johnson, aren’t you?: Gosh! So I am. That’s better. Try to make this easier for all of us. Name: Boris Johnson. Provide full details of the event at Downing Street on 20 May 2020: From contemporaneous notes I made subsequent to this party that wasn’t a party becoming public knowledge, I see that I had a meeting with Party Marty … I mean, my principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds ... on that morning in my office. We discussed the ongoing Covid crisis and at no time did Martin suggest to me that it would be a nice idea to take advantage of the nice weather and to throw a bash for all the staff in No 10. And I definitely did not say that was a good idea, providing everyone brought their own booze as I was getting fed up with everyone getting pissed at my expense. I also don’t remember Martin giving me an odd wink on the way out and telling me not to read the email he was about to send urging everyone to work even harder. On their suntans. I then went back to my desk where I spent the day writing a speech about how the country needed to make personal sacrifices and anyone caught breaking lockdown restrictions would be banged up. And that’s about all I can remember. No, it’s not. Go on: Er … after another tough day of being prime minister, I went downstairs with Carrie to have a quiet drink in the garden. When I got there, I was amazed to find Party Marty and 40 members of staff already sprawled out under the trestle tables and on the lawn. Not least because I had been expecting to find 100 people there. The invitation, that I hadn’t seen, had quite specifically instructed all Downing Street personnel to attend the work seminar on how to give a socially distanced PowerPoint party, so it was disappointing that so many people had bunked off early. That wasn’t the kind of “can-do” spirit I expected of my staff. I was then asked to give a short speech thanking the NHS heroes who were working night and day to fight the virus. My suggestion that the best way we could honour the doctors and nurses was by getting completely shit-faced was particularly well received. I’m afraid that after about half an hour I left this work event to go back upstairs to my flat, but I was pleased to see that the rest of the staff stayed on to work late into the night. One couple were so dedicated that they were still there the next morning. They had to be fished out of the flower beds, along with all the empties, by the Downing Street maintenance staff. One of the policemen at No 10 later told me he had watched the proceedings on the CCTV cameras and it had been one of the best work events he had ever seen at No 10. I told him that a prime minister always had to be alive to new ways of working. Provide full details of the event at Downing Street on 19 June 2020: My birthday! My recollection of this is rather fuzzy. What I can remember is that I had been out at a school in Milton Keynes where I had lectured the children on the importance of not having a birthday party and had come back to Downing Street fully expecting to work alone in the cabinet room on the next phase of my Covid recovery plan. But immediately I got in the room I was ambushed by a cake, a crate of beers and about 20 people, including Carrie, Lulu Lytle and the chancellor. I was later told that it was Rishi Sunak who had organised this event, along with many others in Downing St, in an attempt to discredit me. At no point did I once consider this to have been a party, however, as no one was taken to hospital to have their stomach pumped. The two choruses of Happy Birthday to Me were merely sung to ensure that everyone in the room washed their hands for the requisite period of time. I then had a meeting with cabinet colleagues, Carrie and Lulu about how to get Lord Brownlow to pay for the hideous wallpaper. I didn’t even get a proper present. Provide full details of the event(s) at Downing Street on 13 November 2020: It is possible that I may have very briefly dropped in to give a brief speech at Lee Cain’s leaving do. Which also definitely wasn’t a party. Just a work event at which everyone was getting pissed. And if I was there, I definitely said it was someone else’s turn to fill up the suitcase with booze at the Co-op. Not that there was a drinking culture on my watch. I’ve always been a stickler for keeping to the rules. “Sure you have,” said Caino. So it must be true. What about the other event that night?: What party? I mean, event. The one in your flat to celebrate Dominic Cummings’ exit: There wasn’t one. I should know. Because I was there. At no stage did Carrie ever have her friends into the flat because that would have been a breach of the regulations. Which you can see from my previous answers I would never have tolerated. As I said, I went up to the flat on my own to find that Carrie was singing along with her friends who weren’t there to an Abba documentary on the TV. “Could you turn it down a bit?” I asked, as I wanted to work. At some point I may have given up and joined the gang in a chorus of Mamma Mia, and this may be when I tripped over the dog and spilt red wine over the sofa. Which is where I was made to spend the night. Provide full details of the events at Downing Street on 17 December 2020 and 14 January 2021: As you don’t appear to have any photographs of me at these alleged events, I am denying I was there. But if pictures do emerge of me, then I can assure you it was all entirely innocent and definitely not against the lockdown guidelines. All I’ve ever tried to do is serve my country and I don’t expect anyone who knows how hard I have worked to begrudge me doing what the hell I liked. Provide full details of the event at Downing Street on 15 December 2020: Oh, FFS. Now you’re just being petty. One photo of me looking the worse for wear, an open magnum of champagne and two civil servants dressed in tinsel and paper hats and you immediately leap to the conclusion that we’re having a party. Haven’t you got anything better to do? This was clearly a work event. An exam to test the staff’s knowledge of which rules they were allowed to break. Hell, everyone was getting pissed with mates, weren’t they? Are these your full answers and do you believe them to be true?: I do. They sound like lies to us. Shall we just call it a £2,000 fixed penalty notice?: I don’t have my wallet on me. But Brownlow should see you right. • An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: Join online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace looking back at the latest events in Westminster. On Monday 7th March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereIt tracks that Steven Soderbergh, a film-maker who’s spent his retirement from making films mostly making more films, would try his very best to maximise time during the pandemic. Not only do his intimidatingly extensive lists of everything he’s been watching and reading show that he’s obsessively consuming, but he’s also been frantically creating, finishing one movie and then making two others in full. His new deal with HBO Max has seen him take Meryl Streep out on a boat in the elegant, semi-improvised comedy Let Them All Talk before sticking to the Michigan mainland in the tense crime drama No Sudden Move. His latest is a far simpler, yet no less enjoyable, achievement, a tight, mostly one-location thriller riffing on Alfred Hitchcock as well as OG Hitchcock riffer Brian De Palma. Kimi is the name of an Alexa-style device with a key USP: people. A large scattered team of operatives sift through the many interactions between users and machines to perfect the dynamic, ensuring that miscommunication is kept to a minimum. Zoë Kravitz’s agoraphobic Angela (perhaps a reference to The Net’s similarly named hacker) spends her days listening to such audio, quarantining herself from the world as Covid rumbles on. The pandemic has set her anxieties back and she refuses to go outside despite an over-the-road neighbour (comedian Byron Bowers) trying to tempt her on a date. But when Angela hears something sinister on a flagged Kimi stream, her safe, insulated world is suddenly in disarray. In a sleek 89 minutes, writer David Koepp (whose similarly contained thriller Panic Room was notably watched by Soderbergh twice last year) keeps things refreshingly simple and stringently devoid of any extraneous padding. It’s no surprise, after an opening tease concerning the financial specifics of the company behind Kimi, that there’s a conspiracy to unravel but it unravels with a quick ease, an age-old tale of the hero who saw too much and the villain who wants to keep them quiet. We know where films like this tend to go, and Kimi is light on genuine surprise, but Koepp and Soderbergh keep most of it grounded, avoiding the clumsy narrative leaps these films often resort to, making so much of it feel awfully credible. Like Soderbergh’s other late-stage thrillers, from Contagion to Side Effects to Unsane to the miniseries Mosaic, Kimi firmly exists in a real-world setting with real-world rules, and although lightly etched, it’s a rare tech thriller that doesn’t unintentionally slip into science-fiction. The inclusion of a more evolved Amazon Echo is handled with a deftness that’s been missing from other recent-ish examples of voice AI movies, from the schlocky Netflix thriller Tau to the comedy disasters Jexi and Superintelligence, its role here rising far above mere gimmickry. Koepp isn’t trying to make larger Ted Talk points about big tech – there’s really no time for that – but with light jabs, he provides a rather bleak state of the union with regards to issues of privacy and corporate morality. This crescendoes rather brilliantly in a standout scene involving Angela leaving her enviable apartment (the size of which is perhaps one of the film’s more hard-to-stomach elements) for an uncomfortable meeting with her employers, personified by an ingeniously cast Rita Wilson, subverting her wide-smiled cheeriness to chilling effect. It’s the moment that then launches Kimi into an inevitable chase (for what is a film such as this without a chase?), anxiety edged up a few notches by Kravitz’s believable unease with being back in the wide world. She’s an actor whose soft-spoken minimalism often makes her a little too aloof, but that’s well utilised here, and there’s a great deal of fun in watching her cathartically and violently snatch back her agency in the rousing finale. After watching so many pandemic-shot films that felt shoddily thrown together, it’s such a pleasure to be in the confident hands of a film-maker like Soderbergh, whose crisp and stylish cinematography (he uses his pseudonym Peter Andrews to shoot once again) turns a modest direct-to-streaming film into something utterly cinematic, assisted by Cliff Martinez’s wonderfully grand, old-school score. Koepp’s script also uses the background of Covid as a quietly accepted part of life in the early 2020s, rather like Rob Savage’s jolting Zoom horror Host, instead of relying on tired banana-bread jokes and/or involving it in the thrust of the main plot, one of the few films to modulate its presence effectively. Kimi is in some ways a minor Soderbergh entry, an exercise in style rather than something of great substance, but it’s a thrill to watch him at play, even when he’s taking it easy, he’s still working harder than most of his peers. Kimi is now on HBO Max in the US and on digital platforms in the UK.The American experimental composer George Crumb, who has died aged 92, came to prominence in the mid-1960s with a series of ground-breaking compositions scored for unusual instrumental combinations, using then still-novel performing techniques. One of the most remarkable works to come out of these departures was the haunting Ancient Voices of Children (1970), setting five poems by Federico García Lorca. As well as singing, its solo soprano is called upon to intone softly over the strings of the piano in order to set up sympathetic vibrations; breathe and whisper through a paper funnel; and screech. Elsewhere Crumb required players to sing, whistle or double up on percussion, or play the piano directly on the strings with paper clips. In the trio Vox Balaenae (Voice of the Whale) (1971), the flautist sings and groans through the instrument as well as playing it conventionally, and the ranges of the cello and piano are similarly expanded. Crumb was an early adopter of electronic and amplified instruments, for example in Songs, Drones and Refrains of Death (1968), for baritone and an ensemble comprising electric guitar, electric bass, two amplified pianos and percussion. In Black Angels (1970) for “electric string quartet” the four performers’ instruments are amplified, and they speak and play a small array of unpitched percussion. It marked a protest against the Vietnam war raging at the time, and specifically against the use of helicopter gunships. The use of the amplified piano, sometimes accompanied by percussion, was a recurrent fixture in Crumb’s work from then on, most vividly in the four collections of illustrative pieces inspired by the Zodiac and entitled Makrokosmos (1972-79). Its title pointed to a counterpart at several removes in the six volumes of character pieces for piano, Mikrokosmos, by Béla Bartók. The Hungarian composer’s Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion (1937) was a formative influence, as was, at a more fundamental level, the music of the Viennese serialist Anton Webern. Indeed, Makrokosmos vol 3 (1974), subtitled Music for a Summer Evening, used two amplified pianos and two percussionists to create its by turns hypnotic and evocative soundscapes. In his own generation, Crumb’s exploratory approach was akin to that of another Hungarian, Gyorgy Ligeti. Amplified piano was the medium for Crumb’s last major collection, the two volumes of Metamorphoses (2015-20), 20 “fantasy-pieces after celebrated paintings”, inspired by the works of artists ranging from Whistler and Van Gogh to Klee and Jasper Johns. His final completed composition proved to be, in typically unconventional fashion, a percussion quintet, Kronos-Kryptos (2019, revised in 2021 after the composer made a recovery from a stroke). There were almost always illustrative, dramatic or expressive purposes behind Crumb’s mature music, whether in his many vocal cycles, such as the seven volumes of the American Songbook (2003-10) and the three of the Spanish Songbook (2008-12), or what proved to be his largest composition, the vocal-and-orchestral Star-Child (1977), which won the 2001 Grammy for best contemporary classical composition. The recording was released in Bridge Records’ ongoing complete Crumb edition. Often his music took on a mystical quality, sometimes reflected in the graphical notation of particular scores, as in the circles of Eleven Echoes of Autumn, 1965, completed the following spring, or the Spiral Galaxy finale of Makrokosmos vol 1, where the music is laid out as a helix. Born into a musical family in Charleston, West Virginia, George was the son of Vivian (nee Reed), a cellist, and George Crumb Sr, a clarinettist. His father taught him the clarinet, and he started composing in his teens. A summer course at the National Music Camp in Interlochen, Michigan, in 1947 was followed by a bachelor’s degree from the Mason College of Music and Fine Arts (now part of the University of Charleston) in 1950. He gained further degrees from the universities of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (1952) and Michigan (1959). In between, a Fulbright scholarship enabled him to study in Berlin with Boris Blacher. Crumb began teaching at a college in Virginia, and from 1958 at the University of Colorado, before moving in 1965 to the University of Pennsylvania, where he remained until retiring in 1997. A Pulitzer prize (1968) for his orchestral suite, Echoes of Time and the River, commissioned by the University of Chicago to mark its 75th anniversary in 1965, was followed by many other awards. Though outwardly he was a relatively shy man, his pupils, including the composers Jennifer Higdon, Christopher Rouse, Margaret Brouwer and Osvaldo Golijov, all spoke of his warm-hearted and gentle personality. He was able to nurture the best in all he worked with, including the many performers of his own works, most of which are enormously demanding. On occasion he could be blunt: when asked for an opinion on a fellow American composer’s music he described it succinctly as “horseshit”. In 1949 he married the pianist Elizabeth Brown, with whom he had three children: Ann, a singer, David, also a composer, and Peter. Ann died in 2019, and he is survived by Elizabeth, and his two sons. • George Henry Crumb, composer, born 24 October 1929; died 6 February 2022 • This article was amended on 11 February 2022 to correct details of surviving family members.Ben Stokes will have a camera crew with him during next month’s Caribbean tour after becoming the latest high-profile sportsperson to sign up to a documentary about his life and career. The Guardian has learned that Stokes, 30, has spent the past 18 months secretly working on a feature-length film with the TV production company Whisper and his sponsors, Red Bull, that charts his time on and off the field. The period of filming has included the death of his father, the former New Zealand rugby league international Ged Stokes, in December 2020, and the break he took from cricket last summer in order to address his mental health and a longstanding finger injury. Stokes responded to the recent 4-0 Ashes loss by declining an invitation to play in this year’s Indian Premier League and declaring that Test cricket will be his prime focus, starting with the three-match series against West Indies. As well as documenting this next phase of his career in the film, the all-rounder will be looking back on his highs and lows. The golden summer of 2019 will be re-lived, when Stokes powered England to World Cup glory at Lord’s and pulled off his stunning Headingley heist in the Ashes, as well as his formative years and family life after moving to Cumbria from New Zealand aged 12. It is understood the Bristol street fight in 2017 – an incident that cost Stokes a place on that winter’s Ashes tour and saw him found not guilty of affray the following year – will also be addressed, despite some previous reluctance on the player’s part. The project is still at the production stage and no release date or broadcast partner has been confirmed. But Whisper will continue filming next month, while also producing the television coverage of the Test series in the Caribbean. Teammates have already been interviewed and the England and Wales Cricket Board has given its blessing to the project, which, given that it involves a centrally contracted England player, will ultimately need ECB signoff before being released. Other sportspeople who have recently released official documentary films about their lives include Andy Murray, Neymar and Cristiano Ronaldo. Cricket’s recent forays into this world include The Test – Cricket Australia’s burnished Amazon series that charted the year after the 2018 ball-tampering scandal – and Cricket Fever: Mumbai Indians on Netflix.Keir Starmer has launched an outspoken attack on the Stop the War coalition, in which Jeremy Corbyn is a leading figure, effectively accusing the campaign group of siding with Russia against Nato. In an opinion article for the Guardian, written on the way to Brussels where he reaffirmed Labour’s staunch support for Nato, Starmer says Stop the War are “not benign voices for peace”. “At best they are naive, at worst they actively give succour to authoritarian leaders who directly threaten democracies. There is nothing progressive in showing solidarity with the aggressor when our allies need our solidarity and – crucially – our practical assistance now more than ever.” He said Putin’s regime would see Stop the War protesters in the UK as “virtue signallers” who were “providing a smokescreen so it can go on beating up and jailing those brave individuals that dare to stand up to its despotism on the streets of Russia”. He accused the group of a “kneejerk reflex: ‘Britain, Canada, the United States, France – wrong; their enemies – right’.” Corbyn is the deputy president of the Stop the War coalition, alongside Andrew Murray, who was chief of staff to the former Unite union leader Len McCluskey. Murray is a former communist who joined Labour when Corbyn became leader. The group’s president is the musician Brian Eno. Stop the War was founded in the run-up to the invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, and regularly holds rallies on issues including Israel and Palestine. Its critics claim it is not just anti-war, but anti-west. Stop the War is holding an online rally on Thursday evening, with the title No War in Ukraine: Stop Nato Expansion. Speakers include Corbyn and the Labour MP Diane Abbott. Starmer said: “Nobody wants war. At first glance some on the left may be sympathetic to those siren voices who condemn Nato. But to condemn Nato is to condemn the guarantee of democracy and security it brings and which our allies in eastern and central Europe are relying on as the sabre-rattling from Moscow grows ever louder.” Murray rejected the Labour leader’s criticisms, saying: “Keir Starmer ignores Nato’s actual role over the past 25 years. It is those who supported intervention in Iraq and Afghanistan and Libya who have shown solidarity with the aggressor.” “Stop the War called those conflicts right when most Labour MPs did not,” he added. “Keir Starmer would do better to back the French and German governments in seeking a diplomatic solution.” Starmer has repeatedly distanced himself from Corbyn, who is currently sitting as an independent MP after having the whip removed over his response to a critical Equality and Human Rights Commission report on Labour’s handling of antisemitism complaints. Unless he is allowed back into the fold, Corbyn will not be able to stand as a Labour candidate at the next general election. Friends have suggested he could stand as an independent. Starmer, as he travelled to Nato on the same day as the prime minister – a rare show of unity amid political turmoil at Westminster over the lockdown parties scandal – sought to place himself in a line of senior Labour figures, including the postwar foreign secretary Ernest Bevin, who took a tough line with Soviet Russia. “Attlee, Healey and Bevin saw communism for what it was and were prepared to stand up to its aggression,” he said. “Today’s Labour party has the same clear-eyed view of the current regime in the Kremlin. “We know, as they did, that bullies only respect strength. Russian tanks sit, engines revving, on the verge of annexing Ukraine but protest placards waved here by the usual suspects condemn Nato not Moscow.” Corbyn shocked many Labour backbenchers in the aftermath of the Salisbury poisonings in 2018 when he declined to attribute responsibility for the attacks to Moscow without “incontrovertible evidence”. Asked in a BBC interview in Brussels how he had served in Corbyn’s shadow cabinet despite their difference of view over Nato, Starmer said: “Jeremy Corbyn had a very different view. He was wrong about that. And I spoke out at the time and said he was wrong about that.” On Salisbury, he said: “He was wrong in relation to the Salisbury poisoning incident, where he didn’t respond appropriately. I said so at the time, but it’s very important to me, this is my first chance as leader of the Labour party to come here to Nato headquarters to have the meeting with the secretary general and to deliver a very important message for our party and for our country, which is that the Labour party support for Nato is unshakable.” Some Labour strategists believe Corbyn’s apparent ambivalence over Russia’s role in the poisonings was a key reason for the public scepticism about his leadership that contributed to Labour’s disastrous performance at the 2019 general election. However, Corbyn’s supporters blame highly critical media reporting of the then Labour leader, as well as the debilitating parliamentary battle over Brexit that divided the party.A planned American “freedom convoy” of truckers opposed to vaccine mandates, inspired by protests in Canada, could involve a blockade of the Super Bowl in Los Angeles this weekend that “could severely disrupt transportation, federal government, and law enforcement”, according to reports. The Department of Homeland Security issued a bulletin to US law enforcement agencies warning of a convoy “potentially impacting Super Bowl LVI” on 13 February, and the 1 March State of the Union address in Washington, where the mooted convoy is likely to arrive, CBS reported. The DHS bulletin said such a protest “could severely disrupt transportation, federal government, and law enforcement operations through gridlock and potential counter-protests”. In Canada, trucker protests have been linked to the far right and caused days of disruption in the capital, Ottawa, and at the US-Canada border, with major disruptions to the economy. The idea of a US convoy has spread widely online, as thousands of people have joined pledges to bring the demonstration to Washington. Some people on Facebook and Telegram, the secure messaging platform, have now started to suggest the convoy could “shut down the Super Bowl”. One aspiring politician, Ryan D Kelley, a fringe candidate in the GOP primary for the upcoming Michigan gubernatorial race, appears to have backed the idea: “Sure would be a shame if a convoy of trucks surrounded the Super Bowl so that nobody could attend,” he wrote on Wednesday. A poster being circulated for the proposed convoy advertises the event as a “medical freedom protest” – objecting in particular to requiring children wear face masks. Most of the significant organization appears to be behind the idea of the convoy heading to Washington later in March. Facebook has shut down a number of the groups dedicated to planning the convoy, which has hampered organizing efforts, but also makes it difficult to assess just how likely, or how big, any rally might be. But the QAnon conspiracy movement has seized excitedly on the idea on the far-right message board 8chan, where followers have been closely watching events in Ottawa. One motivating factor for QAnon supporters’ fixation appears to be the baseless rumour that host cities for the Super Bowl also become hotbeds of human trafficking, which the FBI has repeatedly refuted.Your editorial (The Guardian view on Jack Reacher: enduring appeal, 9 February) rightly refers to me as an admirer of the works of Lee Child. The thought that there is a new Jack Reacher to read in the evening makes the whole day whizz by happily. But I have wondered lately how he would manage working from home. Antonia Fraser London • Membership of the mile-high club is more exclusive than Pass Notes would have us believe (Flights of passion: how the mile-high club became big business, 7 February). When my wife and I worked for Pan American Airlines in the late 1960s, the rules were widely acknowledged. To qualify, it was necessary for it to have taken place “with somebody new, not with the crew and not in the loo”. David Rogers London • The headline “Marbles return could be a lovely jubilee gesture” on the letters in your print edition (9 February) instantly evoked a delightful vision of massed British subjects crouched over their beloved glass marbles, cheered on by an enthusiastic Queen. Dull reality struck on reading the word “Parthenon”. Pauline Heron Cononley, North Yorkshire • I’m sure that Boris Johnson is not a clown (Letters, 8 February), because when he does go, you just can’t imagine anyone saying “those will be big shoes to fill”. Jem Whiteley Oxford • Can we have an Elizabeth line from Sheffield to Manchester? We’d be quite happy for it to open with a few flaws (‘It has to be flawless’: long wait for London’s Elizabeth line is nearly over, 8th February). Prof Mark Doel Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Boris Johnson broke lockdown laws, appears to believe rules do not apply to him and is creating an atmosphere of mistrust in politics that threatens the long-term democratic future of the UK, Sir John Major has said. Generally Johnson, who has been in Belgium and Poland today on Ukraine-related visits, has not responded to Major’s speech, but the PM did say his predecessor’s claim that Johnson had “shredded” Britain’s reputation abroad was “demonstrably untrue”. (See 4.08pm.) Downing Street has pledged to reveal if Boris Johnson is fined by police for attending any parties while Covid restrictions were in force, but the prime minister refused to rule out staying on even he is found to have broken the law. Dame Cressida Dick, the Metropolitan police commissioner, has said it was not the job of officers guarding Downing Street to prevent illegal parties. (See 1.50pm.) Keir Starmer has launched an outspoken attack on the Stop the War coalition, in which Jeremy Corbyn is a leading figure, effectively accusing the campaign group of siding with Russia against Nato. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has has personally warned Moscow of tough sanctions that are to be imposed if Russia attacks Ukraine, during tense talks that Russia’s top diplomat said were like a conversation of “the mute with the deaf”. In his BBC interview Keir Starmer also said that the West Ham defender Kurt Zouma should be dropped after the video emerged of him dropping, kicking and slapping his pet cat. Asked if Zouma should be dropped, Starmer replied: Yes he should be dropped. I don’t know what they were thinking in playing him the other night. That was just a mistake. It’s such a bizarre thing to be so cruel like that. It’s very, very odd, but I think the club needs to do the right thing, which is to drop him. Keir Starmer has recorded an interview with the BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, in which he has restated Labour’s support for Nato, as he did in his Guardian article. (See 4.50pm.) In a second move likely to anger the left, he hit back at Unite for threatening to withdraw funding from Labour over a pay dispute involving bin lorry drivers working for Labour-run Coventry council. Asked whether he was worried by the threat, he said: The Labour party I lead is not going to be influenced by threats from anybody, whoever they are. And that’s just an absolute matter of principle for me. So this is very, very straightforward. It’s not about the the particulars of a dispute here or dispute there. I am not prepared for the Labour party I lead to be threatened by anyone. Period, full stop. Keir Starmer’s Guardian about Nato (see 4.50pm) has understandably divided Labour opinion. Here is reaction from two advisers who used to work for Jeremy Corbyn. From James Schneider, Corbyn’s former communications director From Matt Zarb-Cousin, Corbyn’s former press officer And here is reaction from two figures on the Labour right. From Tom Watson, the former deputy leader From Andrew Adonis, the former transport secretary (and the author of a biography Ernest Bevin, one of the founders of Nato) Stop the War says Boris Johnson is just “grandstanding” on Ukraine to distract attention from his domestic difficulties. It is holding a rally tonight, where Jeremy Corbyn, the former Labour leader, is speaking. Keir Starmer has launched an outspoken attack on the Stop the War coalition, in which Jeremy Corbyn is a leading figure, effectively accusing the campaign group of siding with Russia against Nato. My colleague Heather Stewart has the story here. Here is Starmer’s Guardian article containing his comments. And here is the extract about Stop the War. Nobody wants war. At first glance, some on the left may be sympathetic to those siren voices who condemn Nato. But to condemn Nato is to condemn the guarantee of democracy and security it brings, and which our allies in eastern and central Europe are relying on, as the sabre-rattling from Moscow grows ever louder. That’s why the likes of the Stop the War coalition are not benign voices for peace. At best they are naive; at worst they actively give succour to authoritarian leaders who directly threaten democracies. There is nothing progressive in showing solidarity with the aggressor when our allies need our solidarity and – crucially – our practical assistance, now more than ever. The kneejerk reflex, “Britain, Canada, the United States, France – wrong; their enemies – right”, is unthinking conservatism at its worst. To truly stop war, you need to show you are serious about standing up for peace, that you are serious about keeping your promises to your friends, and that you will always stand up to those who threaten. The conclusion of Boris Johnson’s whirlwind European trip took place at Warsaw’s presidential palace where he was greeted by the Polish president, Andrzej Duda, PA Media reports. PA says: They exchanged warm words, with the prime minister repeating that Britain stands ‘shoulder to shoulder’ with Poland and its eastern Nato allies. Discussions then took place between Johnson, Duda and their advisers. A number of Polish ministers were also present. The talks are due to close the trip, with the prime minister scheduled to fly back to London onboard a chartered plane after the meeting. Nadine Dorries has ended legal restrictions keeping the Times and the Sunday Times separate, PA Media reports. PA says: The culture secretary announced she had formally released News UK, which publishes both newspapers, from legal undertakings to keep the two publications as separate entities. It comes after News UK submitted an application requesting the secretary of state to release the company from the arrangement, which stated the newspapers must be kept separate and editorially independent under the supervision of six independent directors. The requirements were designed to protect media plurality when Rupert Murdoch bought the titles in 1981, when he already owned the Sun and the News of the World. Changes were made to the arrangement in 2019 to allow for sharing of journalistic resources between the two publications and to strengthen the arrangements relating to the independent national directors. Here are the main lines from Boris Johnson’s pooled TV interview. Johnson said Sir John Major’s claim this morning that he has “shredded” Britain’s reputation abroad (see 3.37pm) was “demonstrably untrue”. He explained: If you look at what the UK is doing to bring the world together, if you talk to our friends in Lithuania, in Ukraine where I was the other week, or here today in Poland, you can see that actually it is the United Kingdom that has been working for months to warn people about what was happening - and I’m afraid we’ve been sadly proved right in what we were saying. It’s the United Kingdom that has been working to bring countries together, not just in the sanctions package that we want to see, but also in making sure that we fortify Nato’s eastern frontier in the way that we are doing. He refused to say whether he had broken lockdown rules, saying he would have “plenty to say on that in due course”. But it was not a topic he wanted to discuss today, he said, because he was focusing on Ukraine. He said that there was “an automatic package of sanctions ready to go” if Russia attacks Ukraine. He said sanctions should include the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, going from Russia to Germany. He said: We all know how difficult that it for some of our friends and we all know that, particularly right now with the spike in gas prices, it will be tough to say ‘no’ to Nord Stream 2. But I think it is absolutely right that we need to make progress on that. That is a very, very important priority. Sky News is broadcasting an interview with Boris Johnson from Poland. Beth Rigby, Sky’s political editor, is doing a pooled interview on behalf of all broadcasters, and she is asking him repeatedly about partygate. She says Dame Cressida Dick, the Met commissioner, said today most of the 50 Downing Street staff getting letters from partygate investigation could end up receiving fines. She asks Johnson if he is worried about that. Johnson says he will have plenty to say about that in due course, but that today he wants to focus on Ukraine. Rigby tries again, but she gets the same answer. Johnson tries to wind up the interview, but Rigby asks him to reply to Sir John Major’s claim today that Johnson has “shredded” Britain’s reputation abroad. This is one question on domestic politics that Johnson is willing to engage with. It is “demonstrably untrue”, Johnson says. This is what Major said in his speech. Unfortunately, that trust is being lost, and our reputation overseas has fallen because of our conduct. We are weakening our influence in the world. We should be wary. Even a casual glance at overseas comment shows our reputation is being shredded. A nation that loses friends and allies becomes a weaker nation. And when ministers attack or blame foreign governments, to gain populist support at home, we are not taken seriously. Megaphone diplomacy merely increases hostility overseas. International trust may not be easy to regain. Conor Burns, the Northern Ireland minister and another Johnson loyalist, has also taken a swipe on Twitter at Sir John Major. Nick Timothy, chief of staff to Theresa May in her first year as prime minister, has also had a go. The two tweets provide an interesting insight into the pathology of Tory feuding. Burns is an uber Johnson loyalist. Timothy is anything but; many of those most opposed to Johnson served under May, and Timothy recently wrote: “If [Johnson’s] party allows [Johnson to stay on], the Tories will invite upon themselves public disdain and eventual defeat.” But Burns and Timothy are both Brexiters, and for them their dislike of Major because he’s a remainer trumps almost everything. According to the FT’s Max Seddon, the talks between Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, and Sergei Lavrov, her Russian counterpart, were even more icy behind the scenes than when they appeared together at their press conference. (See 12.58pm.) Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, has tested positive for Covid, a spokesperson has confirmed. The spokesperson said: The first minister of Wales has tested positive for coronavirus after taking a PCR test. He is self-isolating and working remotely. Vaughan Gething, the Welsh government’s economy minister, will host the three-weekly coronavirus regulations review due to take place on Friday in Drakeford’s place. Boris Johnson has just held a press briefing now with his Polish counterpart, Mateusz Morawiecki. In his opening remarks Johnson said: I’m here because Poland is absolutely critical to our collective European security and the lesson of the last 100 years is that when Poland is threatened with instability or aggression on the borders, then we’re all threatened and we’re all affected. He said the UK and its allies were trying to de-escalate tensions. But he said the UK would not accept a world “in which a powerful neighbour can bully or attack their neighbours”. We need to work together now to achieve de-escalation, to persuade Vladimir Putin to de-escalate and to disengage. We won’t accept, Poland and the UK, won’t accept a world in which a powerful neighbour can bully or attack their neighbours. And a country like Ukraine should be free to decide what organisations it joins, Johnson said. Russia wants an assurance that Ukraine will never join Nato. Johnson and Morawiecki left without taking questions. Labour has demanded a review of how fraud is tackled in the UK, amid concerns over a drop in the number of specialist prosecutors, PA Media reports. PA says: New figures show specialist fraud staff at the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) decreased from 224 at the end of 2015 to 167 at the end of 2021, according to the shadow solicitor general, Andy Slaughter. But Alex Chalk, the solicitor general, insisted the CPS was “taking the fight to fraudsters” and also highlighted work done elsewhere by the government to recover taxpayers’ cash. The Conservative peer, Theodore Agnew, resigned last month from his ministerial posts over what he described as the “schoolboy” handling of fraudulent Covid-19 business loans. The shadow attorney general, Emily Thornberry, said in a statement: “We need root and branch reform of how we tackle fraud as a country, from making it easier to prosecute wrongdoing by the major corporations to including scam ads in the scope of the online harms bill. Fraud is the UK’s number one crime, and it’s high time we treated it as such.” In her interview with Eddie Nestor on BBC Radio London, Dame Cressida Dick, the Metropolitan police commissioner, said it was not the job of officers guarding Downing Street to prevent illegal parties. She would not say whether the police officers who protect the building knew about the gatherings now being investigated by the Met because they seem to have broken lockdown rules. But she went on: I would say one thing to you, which is that my officers are there primarily, with firearms, to keep people safe from terrorists, from armed attackers and the like. That is their primary job. I do not ask them, and I’m not going to start asking them, to patrol the corridors of Whitehall looking for, you know, what might be going on in offices. That is not appropriate. We don’t do it in any other environment. We wouldn’t come marching into the BBC to do that. But Dick also said the current police investigation would cover what officers at the gate at No 10 knew about the parties taking place. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has said the requirement for children and teachers in secondary schools in Scotland to wear face coverings in class is being scrapped from the end of this month. She told MSPs during FMQs that the change would apply to teachers and pupils, and would come into place from 28 February, when all schools will have returned from the half-term break. As PA Media reports, Sturgeon said the decision to remove the masks in classrooms came after “reducing case rates” for coronavirus in secondary school-aged children, as well as the decrease in hospital admission rates among all ages. Zac Goldsmith, the environment minister and a friend of the Johnsons (the PM and his wife stayed in Goldsmith’s Spanish villa last year), has hit back at John Major following the former PM’s speech this morning. Goldsmith said Major was just a “stale old corporatist” who was still bitter about Brexit. Goldsmith’s father, Sir James, set up the Eurosceptic Referendum party in the 1990s which made a modest contribution to Major’s electoral defeat in 1997 (but paved the way for the much more successful referendum campaign almost two decades later). James Cleverly, the Foreign Office minister, told MPs earlier that a law allowing sanctions against Russia to be directed at a wider range of individuals and organisations will take effect today. He said: As the foreign secretary set out on January 31, we are now laying legislation to broaden the designation criteria for the Russia sanctions regime. As minister for Europe, I have signed that legislation which we will lay before parliament and intend to come into force this afternoon. We are toughening and expanding our sanctions regime in response to Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. This legislation will significantly broaden the range of people, businesses and other entities that we can sanction in response to any further Russian aggression. Dame Cressida Dick, the Metropolitan police commissisoner, has said she wants rogue officers in the force to “get out now”. Speaking on BBC Radio London, she said she was “seething angry” about the recent revelations about racist, misogynist and homophobic messages exchanged by officers. She said: There is no place in the Met for sexism or racism or homophobia, for abuse of trust or for bullying, and in the last few days I have gone out extremely strongly to my colleagues and told them enough is enough. This is a fantastic police service. It is hugely capable in so many ways, but its reputation has been tarnished by the awful things that you were hearing about there in relation to the impact team at Charing Cross and also, some other awful things have happened and come to light in the last several months. So I am absolutely determined that we will be getting out there and rooting out any further individuals. I’ve already said: If you have those attitudes or behaviours, get out now. Otherwise, we will find you and I have a whole new team which will be helping me root out individuals and, indeed, where there are dysfunctional or toxic teams, rooting those out too. Dick also said she had no intention of resigning over the scandal. She said: I have absolutely no intention of going and I believe that I am, and have been, actually for the last five years, leading a real transformation in the Met. We have a service now which is, I’m absolutely certain, more professional, fairer, more transparent, more accountable and closer to its communities and more effective in, for example, reducing violent crime, which has been going down year-on-year-on-year in almost every category, bucking the national trends. Boris Johnson has arrived in Warsaw and has been taken by motorcade to the chancellery of the Polish prime minister, PA Media reports. PA says: Johnson is due to receive an official welcome from his Polish counterpart, Mateusz Morawiecki. The pair are then due to hold talks about tensions with Russia before giving statements to the press in Poland’s capital. They will then travel to a military base to meet Nato armed forces, including UK troops. At his joint press conference with the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, Sergei Lavrov, her Russian counterpart, claimed the west was using Ukraine against Moscow. He also accused Kyiv of attempting to rewrite agreements intended to end the conflict in eastern Ukraine. He also accused Truss of not hearing his concerns. He said: I’m honestly disappointed that what we have is a conversation between a dumb and a deaf person. It’s as if we listen but we don’t hear. Truss restated her warning that an invasion would have severe consequences for Russia. She said: There is still time for Russia to end its aggression towards Ukraine and pursue the path of diplomacy. But Nato is very clear that if that path is not chosen there will be severe consequences for Russia, Ukraine and the whole of Europe. Oliver Carroll, a UK correspondent based in Moscow, thinks Truss did quite well in her encounter with Lavrov, who has been Russian foreign minister for almost 20 years and who is regarded as one of the toughest diplomats in the world. But Lionel Barber, the former Financial Times editor, has a different take. And this is from ITV’s Emma Burrows. Here are the main points from this morning’s No 10 lobby briefing. Boris Johnson has not yet been contacted by the Met police in connection with the partygate investigation, No 10 said. Last night the Met said it would be contacting more than 50 people from Downing Street and elsewhere in Whitehall in connection with the inquiry. The PM’s spokesperson said that, if Johnson is contacted, No 10 will confirm this “given the significant public interest”. But it will not release the same information about officials. The spokesperson did not challenge John Major’s claim that Johnson and his staff did break lockdown laws. (See 11.45am.) In the past No 10 has said the PM did not break the law. But today the spokesperson said: “There’s a Met investigation under way on these events, I simply wouldn’t seek to comment.” The spokesperson said Johnson would not be getting personal legal advice from government lawyers in relation to the police inquiry. He said: With regards to the prime minister, he won’t be receiving bespoke personal legal advice from the government legal department in that regard. When it comes to the civil service there are processes in place in terms of general broad support for civil servants, but I think the same approach broadly will remain. The spokesperson declined to accept Major’s claim that Downing Street’s response to the partygate allegations looked “distinctly shifty”. Asked about this claim, the spokesperson said: The prime minister wanted the full details of this to be looked into firstly by Sue Gray and he wants the Met investigation to be concluded as well. The prime minister initiated the investigation into these events. This is what Major said on this issue in his speech. At No 10, the prime minister and officials broke lockdown laws. Brazen excuses were dreamed up. Day after day the public was asked to believe the unbelievable. Ministers were sent out to defend the indefensible – making themselves look gullible or foolish. Collectively, this has made the government look distinctly shifty, which has consequences that go far beyond political unpopularity. No government can function properly if its every word is treated with suspicion. A report by the Constitution Unit of UCL tells us that the public trust the courts more than the civil service; the civil service more than parliament; and parliament more than the prime minister. Q: Do you think Boris Johnson’s government will suffer the same fate as yours did over sleaze in the 1990s? Major says he is not going to predict what will happen. But he says the sleaze allegations when he was PM either related to individual behaviour, or to things that had happened in the past, like arms to Iraq, that related to decisions taken in the 1980s which only came to light in the 1990s. But he says it is important to speak out. He says the UK has had a political system “as clean ... as any country I know”, but that what is happening now is “nibbling away” at that. And that’s it. The Q&amp;A is over. Q: Do you think the UK would still be in the EU today if you had granted a referendum on Maastricht? Major says that before the Maastricht treaty was negotiated, he got parliament to approve his negotiating position. He got a majority of about 500 to 100, he says. He says he delivered on what it said. And he said he was able to tell other EU leaders that, because his mandate had been approved by parliament, he would deliver on what he negotiated. But when he went back to parliament, a new group of MPs said the mandate did not matter, he says. There was no reason to have a referendum, he said. And when the referendum did take place in 2016, just 37% of the electorate backed the vote to leave, he says. He says it would have been “utterly dishonourable” for him to have held a referendum on Maastricht having told EU leaders that parliament would back what they were offering. Q: Do you regret creating the Conserative Eurosceptic movement with Maastricht? Major expresses surprise. He says the Eurosceptic movement went back to the 1970s. Major says Britiain’s influence in the world has diminished under Boris Johnson. He says he welcomes the fact that Liz Truss is in Moscow today. And he says Johnson had a “brief conversation” with Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, recently. But he says Emmanuel Macron, the French president, had a five-hour meeting with Putin in person. “That would have been us years gone by,” he says. Newsnight’s Nick Watt asks if Major thinks Johnson lied about the implications of Brexit. And he asks Major how he would respond to supporters of the PM who would say this is just Major pursuing a 30-year vendetta against Johnson since the days when he caused trouble for the Major government as the Telegraph’s Brussels correspondent. Major says that as a Brussels correspondent Johnson’s reporting was “often mistaken”. He says the Foreign Office once offered to brief him before he published a story. Johnson replied that this would be “one phone call too many”. He says he does not know whether or not Johnson’s claim that Brexit would save £350m a week for the NHS was an intentional lie, but he says he has not noticed that money materialising. And, asked about Johnson’s claims about Brexit and Northern Ireland, Major says the Northern Ireland protocol was “arguably one of the worst pieces of negotiation we have seen in recent history”. He goes on: It does help if you sign treaties if you understand them before you sign them. In his speech Major said: “At No 10, the prime minister and officials broke lockdown laws.” When pressed on this in the Q&amp;A, Major appears to backtrack a little, and says he would be happy to await the results of the police inquiry into these events. But he says Johnson should resign if he is found to have broken the law. Asked whether any PM should have to resign if found to have broken the law, Major replies: “That has always been the case.” Asked about Boris Johnson’s plan to set up an Office for the Prime Minister, Major says he thought one existed already. It sounds “a little like a gimmick”, he says. Sir John Major is taking questions now. He says that if Margaret Thatcher had tried to do some of the things that Boris Johnson is doing, the cabinet secretary would have told her she couldn’t. He says that does not seem to be happening now. If people are giving him advice like that, and he is ignoring them, then those officials should resign, he says. UPDATE: Major said: If Mrs Thatcher in her time had been seen to behave in the way the present prime minister has, I can tell you what would have happened. The cabinet secretary would have been around straight away to tell her she couldn’t do it and so would Mr [William] Whitelaw, Lord Carrington, Sir Geoffrey Howe and many other senior and weighty member of the cabinet. If I had done it I would have had Douglas Hurd, Ken Clarke, Michael Heseltine, never mind others in No 10, telling me, ‘You just cannot do that’. Nobody in cabinet, nor indeed the cabinet secretary, seems to be saying that to the present prime minister and that is a weakness in No 10. Sir John Major’s speech is mostly about standards, and why he believes Boris Johnson and his government have undermined the norms essential to a healthy democracy. But he also included a powerful passage attacking the plans in Priti Patel’s nationality and borders bill that criminalise entering the UK without authorisation to seek asylum. He said: [The bill] also proposes to criminalise the migrants themselves. We should search our souls before doing this. Can it really be a crime to be frightened; homeless; desperate; destitute; fleeing from persecution, or war, or famine, or hardship; and to cross half the world on foot and dangerous waters in an unsafe boat, in the hope of finding a better life? Of course, if the numbers are too large, this creates an appalling problem for local communities. But surely, to seek sanctuary from an unbearable life cannot – morally – be treated as a crime? Yet, the government’s border bill proposes to punish asylum seekers who take an unsanctioned route, with a jail sentence of up to four years. There must be a better way to protect areas such as Kent, than filling our prisons with miserable unfortunates, whose only real crime is to seek a better life. Prison – for these refugees – is punishment without compassion. I do sympathise with the awful problem facing the government. But these proposals are not natural justice, and are decidedly un-British. I hope the government will reconsider. Sir John Major, the former Conservative prime minister, is delivering a speech to the Institute of Government thinktank accusing Boris Johnson of breaking lockdown laws and undermining the standards that uphold democracy. He has disliked Johnson since the 1990s, when Johnson was one of the rightwing journalists critical of his leadership, but even by his standards this is strong stuff. Major’s office released the text in advance to journalists, and my colleague Peter Walker has the story here. Here are the main points from Boris Johnson’s press conference this morning with Jens Stoltenberg, the Nato secretary general. Johnson said the Ukraine crisis is reaching its “most dangerous moment”. He said: Our intelligence, I’m afraid to say, remains grim. We’re seeing the massing of huge numbers of tactical battalion groups on the border with Ukraine. This is probably the most dangerous moment in the course of the next few days in what is the biggest security crisis Europe has faced for decades. But he said he did not think Vladimir Putin had definitely decided to invade Ukraine. I honestly don’t think a decision has yet been taken but that doesn’t mean that it’s impossible that something absolutely disastrous could happen very soon indeed. He would not rule out the UK giving further military support to Ukraine in the event of an invasion. Asked if he would authorise military support for an insurgency in Ukraine against Russian invaders, he replied: We will consider what more we can conceivably offer. The Ukrainians are well prepared, there are things we’ve offered that they in fact don’t seem to need because they think they have them in enough numbers already. It’s possible, I don’t want to rule this out, but at the moment we think the package is the right one. But I want to stress it would be an absolute disaster if it was to come to that and if there was to be serious bloodshed on Ukrainian soil. He said talks with Russia could cover issues like transparency about Nato exercises, force posturing and the stationing of missiles, as well as Russia’s breach of the Intermediate-Range nuclear forces area. He went on: All those are subjects for discussion and far, far better to begin a discussion now than to have a catastrophe. Stoltenberg said he had written to the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, proposing further talks. He said: This morning I have sent a letter to foreign minister Lavrov reiterating my invitation to Russia to continue our dialogue in a series of meetings in the Nato-Russia council to find a diplomatic way forward. We are prepared to listen to Russia’s concerns and ready to discuss ways to uphold and strengthen the fundamental principles of European security that we all have signed up to. Nato will not compromise on core principles - the right of each nation to choose its own path and Nato’s ability to protect and defend all allies. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, is currently holding a press conference with her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, after their talks in Moscow. She accused Russia of “attempting to destabilise Ukrainian democracy” and argued that its threats levelled against Ukraine were counterproductive. She said: These acts have actually had the effect of strengthening Nato’s resolve and turning the Ukrainian people further away from Russia. At the press conference the BBC’s Laura Kuensssberg asked Boris Johnson about Ukraine, but also whether he would resign if he were found to have broken the law over lockdown-busting parties at No 10. Johnson refused to say. In response to the question, he just said: On your point about what’s going on at home, that process must be completed and I’m looking forward to it being completed, and that’s the time to say more on that. When Kuenssberg pressed him a second time for an answer, Johnson replied: “We are going to wait for the process to be completed”. The Times has reported this week that allies of Johnson are saying that he won’t resign if he is found to have broken the law. But today the paper quotes an unnamed Tory saying this may be impossible. In their report Steven Swinford and Fiona Hamilton say: A senior Conservative MP said that those who believed that the prime minister could survive were “deluded”, adding: “We are supposed to be the party of law and order. We can’t have a prime minister who has received a criminal penalty. A criminal penalty in any normal world should be the end.” Good morning. Boris Johnson is in Brussels this morning where he has been meeting Jens Stoltenberg, the Nato secretary general, at Nato HQ. They have been holding a press conference, and Johnson used his opening remarks to say that the UK’s commitment to European security was “unconditional and immovable”. These are from the Mirror’s Pippa Crerar. I will post more from the press conference shortly. Later Johnson is visiting Poland. Keir Starmer is also visiting Brussels to stress Labour’s support for Nato. Here is the agenda for the day. 10.30am: David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, asks a Commons urgent question about Russian sanctions legislation. Around 11am: Anneliese Dodds, the shadow Cabinet Office minister, asks a Commons urgent question about Randox contracts. 11am: Sir John Major, the Conservative former prime minister, gives a speech on trust and standards in government. 11am: Dame Cressida Dick, commissioner of the Metropolitan police, takes questions from listeners on BBC Radio London. 11.15am: Jonathan Reynolds, the shadow business secretary, gives a speech on Labour’s priority for business. 12pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, takes questions from MSPs. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comThe head of the Unite union, Labour’s biggest donor, has threatened to completely pull funding for the party over an ongoing pay dispute involving bin lorry drivers in Coventry. About 75 refuse workers started a two-month strike over pay at the start of February, after talks with Coventry’s Labour-run city council failed to achieve a resolution. Sharon Graham, the general secretary of Unite, said: “Let me be very clear – the remaining financial support of Labour party is now under review. Your behaviour and mistreatment of our members will not be accepted.” The dispute has become increasingly heated in recent weeks, with both sides arguing over claims regarding drivers’ pay and independent arbitrator Acas being brought in to help negotiations. The council has opened several temporary waste collection sites but was criticised by Unite for hiring agency bin lorry drivers to continue collections during walkouts, with Graham saying: “We have a so-called Labour council prepared to pay agency drivers to drive its bin lorries on more money than the union is asking for.” The council said the move was “to ensure residents suffer as little as possible”. Addressing striking workers in an online rally on Wednesday evening, Graham said: “Until this strike is settled, the remaining financial relationship with the Labour party is now under review. “There will be no Labour politician in the Midlands or party office who will get one single penny from my members, or any practical support of any kind, while this strike is going ahead. Not one penny will pass from our coffers until you sort out this mess that you have created. “No longer will my union accept being treated like dirt by those who have their hands in our wallets at election time. Act like Labour, and we will treat you like Labour.” Asked about Graham’s comments, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said the party was “not going to be influenced by threats from anybody”. “That’s a matter of principle for me. It’s not about the particulars of a dispute here or dispute there, the Labour party I lead is not prepared to be threatened by anyone. Period. Full stop,” he told the BBC on Thursday. In December, Graham said she planned to cut political donations to the party and divert the money to union campaigns. The striking workers in Coventry, who are Unite members, say they all hold an HGV licence but are paid at a rate below comparable rates of pay for HGV drivers in the region. The council has disputed Unite’s numbers and insisted it is one of the highest paying local authorities in the West Midlands. It says the strikes are costing the council £1.8m and said there might be job losses as a result. A spokesperson for Coventry city council said Unite’s claims that the council had released false information were “unfounded and untrue”. They said: “However, we are not interested in a public war of words but remain committed to talks to resolve the ongoing dispute and provide a service to the residents we serve. We urge Unite to do the same and consider our offers to end the strike. “The hourly wage for our bin drivers is between £11.50 and £14.38 depending on where drivers are on their pay grade. This makes us one of the highest paying in the West Midlands when comparing pay for bin lorry drivers. “We therefore remain disappointed Unite has refused to suspend strike action or allow exemptions to provide a service for the most vulnerable residents of our city such as those in care homes.”Chelsea are braced for bids for Kepa Arrizabalaga this summer and are unlikely to stand in the goalkeeper’s way if they receive a suitable offer. The Spain international has had a mixed time since leaving Athletic Bilbao for £71.6m in 2018 and his recent improvement has not been enough to dislodge Édouard Mendy as Thomas Tuchel’s first choice. Tuchel is considering whether to bring Mendy into the side when Chelsea face Palmeiras in the Club World Cup final on Saturday and Arrizabalaga, who impressed in the semi-final victory over Al-Hilal on Wednesday, could look for a fresh challenge at the end of the season. Arrizabalaga’s form has improved since Tuchel replaced Frank Lampard last year and Chelsea believe he could be a summer target for one of the big Spanish clubs. The 27-year-old has done well when given opportunities this season and Chelsea accept he will not want to continue as their No 2 if he has a chance to play regularly elsewhere. Chelsea have not had to deal with any offers for Arrizabalaga. He struggled under Lampard and his asking price and high wages meant that interest was minimal. However, Chelsea know that having such an expensive goalkeeper on the bench regularly is not ideal and there would be more disappointment for Arrizabalaga if he is left out against Palmeiras. Arrizabalaga, who has made tweaks to his game under Tuchel, impressed while Mendy was representing Senegal at the Africa Cup of Nations. He helped Chelsea reach the Carabao Cup final at Tottenham’s expense last month, made two stunning saves in the second half against Al-Hilal and has become an expert at saving penalties. He has played a key role in Chelsea winning three shootouts this season and denied Ryan Hardie from the spot when Tuchel’s side knocked Plymouth out of the FA Cup last weekend. Although the feeling at Chelsea is that Arrizabalaga should be Spain’s No 1 instead of Unai Simón or David de Gea, Tuchel could still drop him against Palmeiras. Mendy has joined the Chelsea squad in Abu Dhabi after winning Afcon and has emerged as one of the best goalkeepers in the world since leaving Rennes in 2020. Chelsea have never won the Club World Cup and Tuchel could decide he does not want to leave anything to chance. If Arrizabalaga is dropped against the Copa Libertadores champions, his next chance to impress could come in the Carabao Cup final against Liverpool on 27 February. Chelsea are yet to end the uncertainty hanging over their defence, with César Azpilicueta, Antonio Rüdiger and Andreas Christensen out of contract this summer. However, they have resumed talks with Rüdiger over a new deal and hope to reach an agreement with the centre-back, who is a target for Bayern Munich, Real Madrid and Paris Saint-Germain.Book now It’s widely acknowledged that there’s great therapeutic value in writing - many people write to find out what they think about the world, or, as Chuck Palahuniuk puts it, to use writing as ‘a tool to resolve psychologically what you can’t resolve physically’. Yet, despite these benefits, there are psychological barriers to writing. The enormity of the task, which in the thrilling early stages of writing might feel manageable, gradually reveals itself as a significant obstacle. It requires resilience and time to overcome - to persevere and get that draft finished, and for this reason, many people with the talent to write a novel so often give up. This masterclass with multi-award winning writer Tim Lott will dig into the fundamentals of writing psychology, such as what the main barriers that stop people from persevering are, as well as how you can overcome them to keep on going. Aimed at all aspiring writers, the emphasis of this course is to face up to that blank sheet of paper and begin the gentle jog towards the first checkpoint, under the guidance of one of the best writers and coaches in the business. This course is for … Writers with all levels of experience in need of a psychological boost Course content The personality of the writer How to gain emotional and practical support for your writing Overcoming guilt How to stay motivated Confidence Fear Endurance Getting in touch with your unconscious self How to be honest with yourself and honest about other people - and why this is not as easy as it sounds The writer’s toolkit is a masterclass series with award-winning novelist Tim Lott. Designed to give aspiring writers the tools they need to produce their best work, classes are available to book individually or as a pair. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6.30pm (BST). Tutor profile Tim Lott is the author of eight novels and Penguin Modern Classic memoir The Scent of Dried Roses. He is one of the most sought-after writing teachers in the country, particularly through his personal mentoring services. His writing has been highly praised by Hilary Mantel, Alan Bennett, Sebastian Faulks, Tony Parsons and Sarah Waters, among others. His students are equally enthusiastic – read their testimonials. Tim’s help got me to a point where I was ready to write my next draft. That next draft got me an agent.” Ben McPherson, A Line of Blood No one else could have taught me what Tim did. Without him I can safely say I would still be flailing around in piles of rejection slips.” Rebecca Thornton, The Exclusives You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6.30pm (BST). Details Book now Date: Thursday 31 March 2022 Time: 6.30pm-8.30pm BST Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee) or £85 (plus £4.20 booking fee) if booked in conjunction with Tim Lott’s writer’s toolkit, part 2 This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm BST | 7.30pm CEST | 10.30am PDT | 1.30pm EDT Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.David Redshaw certainly does not speak for everybody when he says “no one would want a return to the union militancy of the 1970s” (Letters, 7 February). I, for one, would welcome a return to a time in the UK, not that long ago, when there were no homeless people on the streets, housing was affordable and accessible, social workers were able to do actual social work in the community, beds were available in hospitals (for both physical and mental illnesses), teaching was an enjoyable occupation in well-maintained schools, there were enough nurses, doctors and police officers, and social security meant that there was little or no shame in needing to be supported by benefits. All this and more was then supported by a unionised workforce, earning decent wages and paying taxes into the system that benefited us all. This was the 1970s, when the unions were strong, and people had rights, as opposed to today’s insecurity, poverty and waiting lists for essential services, as our taxes pour into the pockets of obscenely rich company heads. Sushila Dhall Oxford • David Redshaw is wrong to assume that no one wants a return to union militancy. Does he imagine that bosses have turned a new leaf and are eager to share their profits? I like to think that I contributed to the militancy of the 70s and the pay rises it won. For working people, the only real power they have is to withdraw their labour (the alternative being to put a cross against a name they did not choose, every five years). Today, thanks to Margaret Thatcher and the failure of Tony Blair, striking requires jumping through endless “legal” hoops. As a result, we have seen a catastrophic decline in the value of wages. I yearn for the days when walking out the door was free of all sanctions. A future Labour government should take the handcuffs off the trade union movement (a fantasy, I admit, under the current leadership). Until that happens, the decline in wages and the increase in poverty will continue. Bill Geddes (Scottish Bakers Union, English Bakers Union, NUPE, UCAAT, CPSA, NALGO, Unison) Worthing, West SussexThe Charity Commission has published its long awaited report into Kids Company, in the latest twist in a six-and-a-half-year saga involving the closure of one of the UK’s best known children’s charities, unfounded sex abuse allegations, media and political outrage, mismanagement allegations and a lengthy court battle. What was Kids Company? The charity was set up in London in 1998 by psychotherapist and children’s rights advocate Camila Batmanghelidjh to provide practical, emotional and educational support for severely traumatised children experiencing poverty, violence and neglect. By the time it closed in 2015 it had become one of the UK’s best-known charities, boasting high-profile supporters from JK Rowling and Coldplay to David Cameron. What went wrong? By early 2015, it had expanded its operations to provide services for thousands of children in London, Bristol and Liverpool. Its finances soon came under strain. By July that year, the charity had agreed a rescue plan with ministers in return for a £3m Cabinet Office grant, to be matched by pledges from private donors. So why did it close? The day the £3m grant was paid, Kids Company was told it faced a police probe into allegations of sexual abuse at two of its sites, raised during a BBC Newsnight investigation. The charity’s board believed the allegations made fundraising for the charity impossible, and shut it down on 5 August. Five months later the Metropolitan police dropped the abuse investigation: it had found no evidence of criminality or safeguarding failures. A judge later ruled that were it not for the unfounded abuse allegations, a restructured Kids Company would have survived. What happened when the charity closed? Overnight, hundreds of staff lost their jobs and services relied on by thousands of vulnerable youngsters disappeared. Parts of the media, and many politicians, turned ferociously on Batmanghelidjh, accusing her of “mesmerising” powerful men. She became a tabloid hate figure, and Kids Company a byword for charity mismanagement. What was Kids Company accused of? The charity was accused of misspending charity funds on providing allegedly inappropriate small cash support payments to some children. Some questioned its purchase of trainers, clothes, birthday presents, holidays and housing support for some child clients. In 2016, an MPs’ committee declared the cash payments irresponsible and improper. It accused the Kids Company board of negligence, lax financial controls, pursuing a reckless business model and exaggerating the number of children it served. These criticisms and allegations were echoed in subsequent court proceedings brought against the trustees. Were Kids Company bosses taken to court for mismanaging the charity? Legal proceedings were brought against Kids Company in 2017 by the Official Receiver (at the behest of the government) to ban Batmanghelidjh and the seven trustees from holding senior roles in companies or charities for up to six years. In 2020, two reports amounting to 600 pages, along with 18,000 pages of evidence, were presented to the court to support its claim of trustee failings and mismanagement. What did the court conclude? The judge, Mrs Justice Falk, comprehensively dismissed the Official Receiver’s case; her forensic 220-page judgment exonerated the board of mismanagement. She praised Batmanghelidjh, and the trustees, who she described as “highly impressive and dedicated individuals”. The case was an expensive disaster for the Official Receiver and the government: it cost the taxpayer £9.5m. What did the Charity Commission find in its investigation of Kids Company? The commission made a formal finding of mismanagement, relating to failures to make payments to HMRC, and an instance when staff wages were one day late. It said the charity operated a “high-risk business model”, heavily reliant on Batmanghelidjh’s skills as a fundraiser. It criticised its failure to keep sufficient levels of financial reserves, though accepted this was not unusual in the charity sector. It questioned whether relatively high spending on payments to a small group of high-risk children was appropriate, but accepted the charity had the right to do it. It concluded no regulatory action should be taken against the trustees or Batmanghelidjh and agreed with the high court judgment there was no evidence the trustees were dishonest, acted in bad faith or sought inappropriate personal gain. Does this mean the whole saga is over? There is anger in some quarters that the Charity Commission did not acknowledge the scale of the injustice experienced by the trustees and Batmanghelidjh. There were claims that the commission seemed to underplay or ignore some of the judge’s findings, including her praise for the trustees’ conduct, and the suggestion the case should never have been brought by the Official Receiver in the first place. Batmanghelidgh questioned many of the critical findings, calling it a travesty and a rewriting of history. She has threatened legal action to overturn the report.Why has Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker of the house, thus far refused to demand a correction from the prime minister for seriously misleading the Commons about unemployment and crime figures, not just once or twice, but repeatedly (Johnson and Patel’s claims about falling crime ‘misleading’, says UK watchdog, 3 February)? Boris Johnson has claimed that both these figures have fallen significantly since the pandemic, but official statistics – gathered by the Office for Statistics Regulation, the Institute for Employment Studies and independent watchdogs such as Full Fact – show that they have actually risen significantly. Johnson has claimed that employment has risen by 500,000 during that period, but a Labour Force Survey shows that it has actually fallen by more than that – by 600,000 in fact. Johnson also claims that crime has fallen by 14%, when the official figures – which don’t exclude fraud and computer misuse as he does – show that instead of falling by 14%, the figure has risen by that amount. In other words, the prime minister inverts the truth when he speaks about these matters. As the BBC’s More or Less programme reported this week, the PM has been written to by the chair of UK Statistics Authority and by Full Fact – the latter on six separate occasions – pointing out these untruths, and asking him to desist from repeating them and to correct the record in parliament. He hasn’t done either of these things. Indeed, the same lies are still tripping off his tongue. According to Will Moy, chief executive of Full Fact, Johnson’s cavalier way with these statistics has been raised with the Speaker, whose response was merely to say that he expects ministers to live up to their responsibilities. What is that but an evasion, effectively a burying of his head in the sand? When a minister lies to the house, what is it that the ministerial code demands? It certainly isn’t silence, Speaker of the house. Dr Philip Hoy Church Enstone, Oxfordshire • The Speaker has said, in relation to the prime minister’s baseless slur against Keir Starmer, that “words have consequences” (Report, 8 February). What exactly have the consequences been for Boris Johnson? Rod Price Mollington, Oxfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Louisiana’s Republican-controlled state legislature has announced a far-reaching bipartisan inquiry into the in-custody death of Ronald Greene, a Black motorist who was killed following a violent arrest at the hands Louisiana state troopers in 2019. The announcement follows revelations earlier this month that the Louisiana governor, John Bel Edwards, a Democrat, was informed within hours of Greene’s death that Greene, who was unarmed, had died during a “violent, lengthy struggle” but made little public comment on the incident for two years. The inquiry, said the Louisiana house speaker, Clay Schexnayder, would examine the state’s response to the incident at “all levels”. “These events have raised serious questions regarding who knew what and when,” Schexnayder said in a statement. “The actions taken that night and the cryptic decisions and statements made every step of the way since then have eroded public trust.” Edwards has adamantly denied that he and his office were involved in any cover-up of the incident. The governor was in the midst of a closely fought election campaign at the time of Greene’s death, and withheld detailed public comment until years later after the Associated Press publishing graphic body-camera footage of the incident. The footage showed Greene, his faced bloodied, had been punched, shocked with a Taser, handcuffed and laid prone on the ground by a group of six Louisiana state troopers. At a news conference last week, Edwards declared for the first time that the incident was an act of racism, as a US justice department investigation into Greene’s death remains pending. Edwards has faced substantial criticism from the state’s Black caucus as well as civil rights campaigners for his handling of the incident. On Thursday Edwards issued a statement welcoming the investigation. “I am certain that any fair and impartial investigation will conclude that I made no attempt to impede or interfere with any investigation into Mr Greene’s death. Any allegation to the contrary is simply not true.” The Louisiana Democratic party chair, Katie Bernhardt, also appeared to welcome the investigation but cautioned against “political games” in the process. “The Greene family and countless others deserve justice. I hope this investigation prompts the much-needed changes in law enforcement offices across our state,” Bernhardt said in a statement. “I urge our legislative leadership to make sure political games do not consume this investigation. My most fervent hope is that the Greene family find the justice and peace they so deserve, and Black Louisianians see the reform they need to begin to trust law enforcement in our state.” Schexnayder said a new investigative committee would be made up of four Democrats and four Republicans and would begin public hearings in the coming weeks. It is likely that Edwards himself will be among the witnesses called for testimony. Lawmakers are also expected to request a range of documents, including text messages from Edwards that he has yet to release in response to a public records requested by news outlets, including the Associated Press. In an interview with the Guardian last week, Greene’s mother, Mona Hardin, who has called for the governor’s resignation, expressed outrage at his response to the text message revelations. “It’s a cowardly way for him to approach the murder of a man by his state troopers,” Hardin said. “He said the text message was standard procedure, but there was no follow-up on his end after the murder of a man? They carelessly and lightly really insisted this was ‘standard procedure’. But no one ever made any effort to be honest with me.” .Emmanuel Macron has announced a “renaissance” for the French nuclear industry with a vast programme to build as many as 14 new reactors, arguing that it would help end the country’s reliance on fossil fuels and make France carbon neutral by 2050. “What our country needs ... is the rebirth of France’s nuclear industry,” Macron said in a speech in the eastern industrial town of Belfort, in which he lauded the country’s technological prowess. The centrist French president, who is expected to announce his campaign for re-election this month, is conscious of a growing debate about energy ahead of this spring’s presidential vote as costs to consumers rise. Environmental issues are also a growing concern among French voters. Atomic energy provides about 70% of French electricity, and low-cost nuclear power has been a mainstay of the French economy since the 1970s, but recent attempts to build new-generation reactors to replace older models have become mired in cost overruns and delays. Presidential candidates on the right have supported more nuclear power plants saying France should have “sovereignty” over its electricity, while detractors on the left have warned of the cost and complexity of building new reactors. Environmentalists have raised safety concerns over radioactive waste that remains deadly for tens of thousands of years. Macron said French nuclear regulators were “unequalled” in their rigour and professionalism and that the decision to build new nuclear power plants was a “choice of progress, a choice of confidence in science and technology”. He also announced a major acceleration in the development of solar and offshore wind power. He said France had no choice but to rely on renewables and nuclearand that the country would also have to consume significantly less energy in the next decades. He said he would seek to extend the lives of all existing French nuclear plants where it was safe to do so. The announcement comes at a difficult time for debt-laden, state-controlled energy provider, EDF, which faces delays and budget overuns on new nuclear plants in France and Britain, and corrosion problems in some of its ageing reactors. Macron announced the construction of at least six new reactors by EDF by 2050, with an option for another eight. His recent focus on nuclear power marks a policy shift from the start of his presidency, when he had promised to reduce its share in France’s energy mix. The French government lobbied hard and successfully to get the European Commission to label nuclear power “green” this month in a landmark review which means it can attract funding as a climate-friendly power source. The Green presidential candidate, Yannick Jadot, said it was a moral imperative to progressively end France’s dependence on nuclear to protect the climate and French people’s safety. He said Macron’s project was backward-looking and would condemn France to a kind of “energy and industrial obsolescence”.Book now Though in content and story, many manuscripts are wholly different from one another, in draft form, they tend to carry the same mistakes. This is not to say that the essence or vision you, a writer, has for your story is irretrievable - far from it. By recognising common mistakes in your writing, you’re already on your way to avoiding them in the future. In this action-focused masterclass with Tim Lott, award-winning writer and mentor to many novelists, you will be taken through the 15 most common mistakes to be found in a novice manuscript. Beginning with the understanding that these mistakes can pose real problems for the strength of your writing, Tim will then suggest other methods for spreading your words and developing your story. From avoiding the murky middle of a first draft and not equipping your characters with believable motivations, to producing flatly functional dialogue and telling rather than showing, you will be privy to the difficulties that are currently hindering your writing - and how to overcome them. This course is for … Beginner writers who have either started a piece of writing, or who are sitting in the ideas stage Intermediate writers who want to hone their skills to produce stronger work Course content How to avoid muddling up your time frames How not to blow the big moments Why you can’t skip exposition - even though it’s boring Why an unmotivated character is an unconvincing character How to avoid pointless dialogue Plus ten more common mistakes identified and rectified The writer’s toolkit is a masterclass series with award-winning novelist Tim Lott. Designed to give aspiring writers the tools they need to produce their best work, classes are available to book individually or as a pair. Tutor profile Tim Lott is the author of eight novels and Penguin Modern Classic memoir The Scent of Dried Roses. He is one of the most sought-after writing teachers in the country, particularly through his personal mentoring services. His writing has been highly praised by Hilary Mantel, Alan Bennett, Sebastian Faulks, Tony Parsons and Sarah Waters, among others. His students are equally enthusiastic – read their testimonials. Tim’s help got me to a point where I was ready to write my next draft. That next draft got me an agent.” Ben McPherson, A Line of Blood No one else could have taught me what Tim did. Without him I can safely say I would still be flailing around in piles of rejection slips.” Rebecca Thornton, The Exclusives Details Book now Date: Monday 9 May 2022 Time: 6.30pm-8.30pm BST Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee) or £85 (plus £4.20 booking fee) if booked in conjunction with Tim Lott’s writer’s toolkit, part 1 This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm BST | 7.30pm CEST | 10.30am PDT | 1.30pm EDT Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Scotland’s finance secretary has been accused of failing to properly address rising fuel costs after mirroring the £150 council tax rebate offered by the chancellor in England. Kate Forbes told Holyrood on Thursday the Scottish government would give £150 to all households that get a council tax reduction and also homes in bands A to D not covered by that rebate from April. Alongside £10m to help households rationing fuel use or facing disconnection, she said these measures would help 1.85m households or 73% of Scotland’s homes. Its £290m cost is funded by the Treasury after Rishi Sunak announced a £150 council tax rebate for bands A to D to tackle the fuel costs crisis in England. Forbes said it was an imperfect solution since some homes which were not in fuel poverty would get the rebate. “But it is the only route we have to make sure we reach those for whom it will make a difference, quickly and simply,” she said. But her measures were roundly condemned by prominent anti-poverty charities that often work closely with Scottish ministers. They said it was “deeply disappointing” Forbes had mimicked Sunak’s measures rather than taking radical and targeted action. Peter Kelly, the director of the Poverty Alliance, an umbrella group for voluntary groups, unions and activists, said: “This was a missed opportunity to protect people living in poverty from the waves of hardship that threaten to overwhelm them, and a missed opportunity to right the wrong approach taken by the UK government.” Claire Telfer, for Save the Children, added: “A 54% increase in energy bills is a terrifying prospect for households on low incomes. Millions of parents will be lying awake tonight trying to figure out how to keep their families afloat. The steps announced won’t entirely ease those fears.” Scotland has the highest levels of fuel poverty in the UK: nearly 900,000 homes are forecast to suffer fuel poverty this year due to soaring energy prices, with nearly 600,000 in extreme fuel poverty. The measures are based on a home’s energy inefficiency and if spending on fuel bills leaves people with an income below the poverty line. Campaigners believe around half of homes in the Western Isles will be affected. Scottish Labour’s Paul Sweeney said that given inflation, tax bills and other costs were soaring, the offer was “timid, regressive and unambitious, and won’t do anything nearly enough to address the cost of living crisis”. He said the measures failed to address the funding crisis for councils, which deliver the bulk of these services. Ministers had the money and powers to greatly increase funding, such as a £400 winter fuel payment and top-up the Scottish welfare fund, he said. Frazer Scott, the chief executive of Energy Action Scotland, said the Treasury’s funding was inadequate but he castigated the Scottish government’s failure to better target help at the 600,000 households in extreme fuel poverty. “People will be forced to choose between heating and eating,” he said. “The very real tragedy is the declining health and wellbeing and excess deaths attributable to fuel poverty.” Chris Birt, for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, said: “This was a chance to do something different to the UK government, whose response the Scottish government rightly called ‘wholly inadequate’ just this weekend, and it is hard to understand why that chance wasn’t taken.” Forbes insisted the Scottish government was already spending significant sums on anti-poverty measures, despite its limited powers, including £41m on winter support for food and fuel costs; £10 a week for eligible children under six; £69m on low income families hit by the pandemic,and discretionary housing payments of £80m. Meanwhile, Forbes, 32, is due to become the first Scottish cabinet secretary to take maternity leave. In 2020, she became the first woman and youngest person to serve as Scottish finance secretary.As MPs wheeled their suitcases on to trains for a short recess, those with lingering doubts about Boris Johnson’s leadership tucked their letter-writing pens back into their pockets. They seem unlikely to come out again until the Metropolitan police determine whether the prime minister committed any criminal offence by attending a number of Downing Street gatherings. There have certainly been new errors and developments that have agitated MPs – the protesters shouting Jimmy Savile jibes at Keir Starmer, the promotion of the chief whip, Mark Spencer, who upset many with his conduct, and the revelation that the Met will ask more than 50 people, including Johnson, to give a formal legal response to their inquiries. “The reshuffle is transparently all about preparing for the Met inquiry,” one MP said. “The whole focus of governing the United Kingdom has been trained on keeping Boris Johnson in No 10.” But none of the recent developments have been the fatal tipping point that could lead to the 54 letters that would need to be submitted to the 1922 Committee to trigger a vote of no confidence. Graham Brady, the chairman of the committee of Conservative backbenchers, has told MPs he will not trigger any vote over recess, or even count the letters again until the House returns in 10 days. “The letters have dried up,” said one MP, who has been critical of Johnson. “I’m not aware of any new ones.” A promised move to improve engagement between Tory backbenchers and the government made progress on Thursday, with the announcement that 15 policy committees mirroring Whitehall departments would be created. Brady said they would work as a “sounding board” for new ideas, meaning it would be “less likely that colleagues will find themselves asked to defend the indefensible”. The move was met with a groan by some Tory MPs, however, who complained the committees would only be effective if Johnson and senior ministers heeded any of their recommendations. In his one-to-one meetings with MPs, Johnson has been asking them to give him time to turn things around, to demonstrate a renewed sense of purpose and a beefed-up operation. Though some described the prime minister’s attitude in the meetings as arrogant, most said he had been attentive and agreeable, even when they had laid into him in righteous anger. Some have been given even more special treatment: a prime ministerial visit. The launch of the levelling up white paper and the elective recovery plan saw Johnson take a whistle-stop tour of constituencies through Tory held-seats in Essex, north-west England and north Wales. MPs who had privately voiced doubts to Johnson about whether he had become an electoral liability – as well as those who had been demonstrably loyal – were shown in person how he could still pose for selfies and engage even the most disgruntled swing voter. “He was on top Boris form – relaxed, jovial but engaging,” one MP said, describing how Johnson had been stopped for pictures by everyone on the visit. At one event, an attendee had left his own wedding to meet the prime minister, who spoke to his bride on the phone. “I know it impressed some colleagues,” another neighbouring MP said. “It may have had the intended effect.” But another said it was “such an obvious set-up that I don’t know how they could believe it”. MPs also said they had been observing various leadership contenders and found them wanting. “They have been throughly unimpressive,” one said. “[Rishi] Sunak is showing his naivety, Liz [Truss] is a terrible prospect, and others, like [Tom] Tugendhat and [Mark] Harper, are being too obvious.” Johnson has also been granted a reprieve, in part, because others have been telling colleagues to hold fire – veteran MPs who believe that to go off half-cocked would result in the prime minister winning a bruising no-confidence vote. “It is essential that colleagues wait,” one former frontbencher said. “We cannot have it happen where he is able to mount any plausible defence.” One former cabinet minister who has been publicly supportive of Johnson said the prime minister’s position would be untenable if he was fined: “I think then, things are different.” Another MP said the Tories would be laughed at if they ever tried to call themselves the party of law and order. “People will look back and say: ‘Why did we ever allow ourselves to have these lockdowns imposed when the people writing the rules never took them seriously?’ I think that has big implications for our democracy, never mind Boris Johnson.”Binance, the cryptocurrency exchange, is making a $200m (£147m) investment in Forbes less than two years after it sued the business publisher for defamation. A Binance spokesperson said Forbes’s editorial independence would remain “sacrosanct” after the deal. Binance sued Forbes and two of its writers in November 2020 after the publication of a story that claimed Binance “conceived of an elaborate corporate structure designed to intentionally deceive regulators”. The cryptocurrency exchange called the story “false, misleading and highly defamatory” and claimed it had cost the business millions of dollars. The lawsuit was dropped by Binance in February last year. The proposed transaction is another step into the financial mainstream for cryptocurrency, which has moved from the fringes of finance to a $2tn global market at the forefront of Web3, the catch-all term for the latest iteration of the internet. However, growth in the cryptocurrency market has been rocky, underlined by the arrest on Tuesday of a one-time Forbes contributor, Heather Morgan, and her husband for allegedly conspiring to launder $4.5bn in bitcoin. Forbes said on Thursday that Binance would take a stake through a publicly traded special purpose acquisition company, an investment vehicle that helps companies gain quick access to a stock market listing. Both companies referred to the deal helping to bring about a wider understanding of the subject of cryptocurrencies and blockchain, the technology that registers crypto transactions. Forbes, which published its first issue in 1917, is renowned for its billionaires list, whose constituents include the Binance chief executive and founder, Changpeng Zhao, whose wealth is estimated at $1.9bn by the magazine. Zhao said: “As Web3 and blockchain technologies move forward and the crypto market comes of age we know that media is an essential element to build widespread consumer understanding and education. We look forward to bolstering Forbes’s digital initiatives as they evolve into a next-level investment insights platform.” Mike Federle, the chief executive of Forbes, said the publisher could become a “true leader” in information on digital assets. “Forbes is committed to demystifying the complexities and providing helpful information about blockchain technologies and all emerging digital assets,” he said. Two senior Binance executives – the chief communications officer, Patrick Hillmann, and Bill Chin, the head of its venture capital arm – will join the Forbes board of directors on the closing of the deal. A Binance spokesperson said: “I can confirm Forbes’s editorial independence will remain sacrosanct and entirely independent from Binance.”As many as 3,000 workers in five of Sanjeev Gupta’s Liberty Steel plants across England face losing their jobs after HM Revenue and Customs filed petitions to wind up their operating companies over unpaid taxes. Gupta’s GFG Alliance metals empire could be at risk if four Liberty companies fail to reach an agreement with HMRC and other creditors, after a year of struggles after the collapse of Greensill Capital, its main lender. Unions condemned the move as a devastating blow, saying the plants must be kept open because of Liberty’s strategic importance to the UK economy. The four companies under threat are: Speciality Steel UK, which employs close to 2,000 people at Rotherham and Stocksbridge in South Yorkshire. Liberty Merchant Bar at Scunthorpe in North Lincolnshire. Liberty Performance Steels Ltd at West Bromwich in the West Midlands. Liberty Pipes at Hartlepool in County Durham. The accounting regulator also announced separately on Thursday that it had opened an investigation into the audit of Liberty Commodities Ltd, another part of the sprawling network of GFG companies. The audit, covering the year ending 31 March 2020, was carried out by HW Fisher, a London accountancy firm. GFG declined to comment on the investigation. HW Fisher was approached for comment. Companies or other creditors can apply to the high court to wind up a company if it cannot pay its debt. If a winding up petition is successful the business’s assets can be sold and the proceeds paid to creditors. The petitions and investigation added to the difficulties facing Gupta as he seeks to keep his businesses afloat while engaging in drawn-out refinancing talks to replace the money borrowed from Greensill, founded by Australian entrepreneur Lex Greensill. Greensill, who later hired former UK prime minister David Cameron as an adviser, had bankrolled the expansion of Gupta’s empire. The UK’s Serious Fraud Office is also investigating suspected fraud, fraudulent trading and money laundering related to GFG’s financing and its links to Greensill. GFG and Gupta have denied any wrongdoing and have promised to cooperate with the investigation. The Rotherham and Stocksbridge sites are particularly important parts of GFG’s UK operations. They make tougher, anti-corrosive steel that is required by the aerospace industry and some other applications including oil and gas exploration. The plants had suffered from stop-start production amid plummeting demand caused by pandemic restrictions on flying, but in recent months demand is thought to have picked up. Nevertheless, the pressures on Gupta’s companies have been compounded by energy prices, which have surged at an unprecedented rate in recent months. Energy costs have meant the plants are operating at less-than-full capacity despite global high prices for steel, according to a source briefed on the operations. A Liberty Steel spokesperson highlighted “a very challenging backdrop in the UK with record high energy prices”. The UK’s main steel unions, Community, GMB and Unite, issued a joint statement on Thursday decrying HMRC’s actions, arguing that they risked pushing the plants under. The unions said: “This action by HMRC threatens thousands of jobs and is a devastating blow to our members and their families. Liberty Steel is a strategically important business, crucial to delivering net zero, and under no circumstances can our plants be allowed to close.” The Liberty Steel spokesperson also criticised HMRC, saying: “We are in continuous dialogue with all our creditors including HMRC to find an amicable solution that’s in the best interest of all stakeholders. “Short-term actions that risk destabilising these efforts are not in anyone’s interest, and undermine creditor recovery at a critical stage in our debt restructuring efforts that seek to secure the future of our businesses.” The company’s “priority has been to protect thousands of jobs in the UK” but it is “committed to repaying all our creditors”, the spokesperson said. HMRC declined to comment on the criticisms. A spokesperson said: “We take a supportive approach to dealing with customers who have tax debts, working with them to find the best possible solution based on their financial circumstances.”From low-rise jeans to reruns of the sitcom Friends, generation Z has a seemingly endless appetite for 90s and early 00s nostalgia. Now that extends to their romantic lives, as Tinder has introduced a blind date feature to boost its popularity among young people – by enabling them to meet partners in a way that resembles the pre-smartphone era. The new feature on the dating app matches people based on preferences, and enables them to make conversation before they are allowed to view each other’s photos. It will shortly be available in the US before being expanded globally. Tinder says the feature is intended to respond to demands from generation Z, usually defined as people born between 1997 and 2012, for more authentic connections as a backlash to online dating’s earlier emphasis on superficial judgments based on preened Instagram-ready photos on dating profiles. A survey of 1,000 18-24-year-olds in the UK commissioned by the app found that a fifth said they would like to try blind dating as it would enable them to meet people they might otherwise have overlooked. Tinder said: “Inspired by the OG way to meet someone new, usually at the hand of a meddlesome aunt or well-meaning friend, blind date gives the daters of today a low-pressure way to put their personality first and find a match they truly vibe with. “The experience reflects the modern dating habits of gen Z, who value authenticity, and also taps into their 90s nostalgia with a callback to dating in a pre-smartphone world.” The company said its early testing suggested that members who used the blind date feature made 40% more matches than when their profiles were visible. The blind date feature functions by asking users to complete a series of icebreaker-style questions, and then pairing them with others based on similar responses. Users then enter a timed chat in which they only receive these answers as prompts, including responses to questions such as “It’s OK to wear a shirt ____ times without washing it” and “I put ketchup on____”. When the timer runs out, users can like the other person’s profile, and if there’s a match they can see photos and continue chatting. Blind date is part of a new suite of interactive games on Tinder named Explore, which is targeted at gen Z consumers and with an interface that has been likened to TikTok. These include swipe night, a choose-your-own-adventure game, and hot takes, where users discuss controversial opinions. Tinder first launched on a US college campus in 2012, and was initially met with some suspicion. A now-infamous Vanity Fair article in 2015 warned that it would usher in a “dating apocalypse” and the end of romance. In the decade since, it has transformed how people meet romantic partners, and is the world’s most popular app for meeting new people.A man who wanted to join the protests in Canada’s capital over mask mandates called in a bomb threat so police would waste their time chasing it, authorities said, but he called the wrong Ottawa — a village in Ohio. The man, a 20-year-old from Akron, Ohio, called the Putnam county sheriff’s office twice Monday, said sheriff’s Capt Brad Brubaker. The first time he made a bomb threat, and then in a second call he said he had been shot, Brubaker said. That’s when the man found out he was talking with someone in Ohio. “He wasn’t paying attention and just called the first number he found,” Brubaker told The Lima News. “He said he was mad about mask mandates.” The sheriff’s office said it would ask the county prosecutor to consider charges against the man. The protests have caused gridlock in the Canadian capital since January, with scores of vehicles blocking streets in the downtown area. On Thursday police in the capital said that there had been a “concerted effort” to flood the city’s 911 and non-emergency policing reporting line. “This endangers lives and is completely unacceptable,” the force said, adding that it was a crime to unnecessarily call the two numbers. “We track calls and will charge anyone deliberately interfering with emergencies,” the police said.Windfall taxes are nothing new. Margaret Thatcher’s government was one of the most notable users of the tactic – with one-off levies on banks and oil companies for making excess gains in the early 1980s. Perhaps the fact that such duties find favour with the public surprises some who think economic populism is passé. But with gas prices trebling and the bosses of fossil fuel companies proclaiming “cash machine” profits, surely Labour’s Ed Miliband is right to call for a one-off increase in corporation tax on North Sea producers to fund lower bills for consumers. Big oil’s claim that it is paying its fair share to the Treasury is not credible, given that handouts from the state have often actually exceeded the tax take that the industry generates. Between 2018 and 2020, Shell and BP, which together produce more than 1.7bn tonnes of greenhouse gases a year, paid no corporation tax or production levies on North Sea oil operations and claimed tax reliefs of nearly £400m. Such firms say cash is needed to transition away from fossil fuels. Yet since 2016, BP has spent just $3bn (£2.2bn) on clean energy investment, against a whopping $84bn on oil and gas exploration and development. Some critics of windfall taxes argue that reducing profits would hurt pensioners whose payouts depend on dividends from big businesses. Mathew Lawrence of the Common Wealth thinktank says this is no longer true. He points out that the proportion of UK shares directly held by UK pension funds fell from almost one in three in 1990 to fewer than one in 25 by 2018. A windfall tax is not part of Rishi Sunak’s plans, but he could embrace it before his spring statement on 23 March. Unfortunately, the chancellor seems more intent on currying favour with climate sceptic Tory MPs. Reports say Mr Sunak is pushing for more North Sea oil and gas fields to be given the green light. Producing more hydrocarbons at home doesn’t increase our domestic energy security because the product is exported to international markets. One answer would be to nationalise production – but Tory MPs are unlikely to welcome such a policy. Britons are alarmed by global heating. Yet Conservative politicians jockeying to take over from Boris Johnson have a different electorate in mind: the elderly, rightwing Tory membership. Mr Johnson’s would-be successors should not sacrifice net zero targets meant to stave off planetary collapse for personal advancement. Many people appear to think companies are using the energy crunch to charge exorbitant prices and gouge earnings. To protect consumers, politicians should crack down on profiteers. To protect the planet, they should transition the economy away from carbon-based energy in favour of green substitutes. Both policies could be combined if firms were forced to pay for frying the planet. But there will be an electoral price for doing nothing.Such events are normally arranged weeks in advance, so it is unlikely that Sir John Major decided to make his speech about the decline of trust in British democracy on Thursday specifically to coincide with Boris Johnson and Liz Truss’s Ukraine-related diplomatic forays to Brussels, Warsaw and Moscow. The split-screen counterpoint between the two events was nevertheless very striking. In particular, it was revealing about the realities, and the fantasies, of this government’s international influence. On the one hand, in Moscow, the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, contemptuously derided his meeting with Ms Truss as a conversation of “the mute with the deaf”, containing “nothing secret, no trust. Just slogans…” On the other hand, in London, Sir John was simultaneously delivering a passionate warning that a loss of political trust at home leads umbilically to a loss of political reputation and influence abroad. The connection between the two could hardly have been more clearly illustrated. The efforts by the UK prime minister and foreign secretary to play a role with others to prevent Russia from attacking Ukraine are welcome. Peace, freedom and stability in eastern Europe are profoundly in the interests of all European nations, including Britain. Our security rests upon it. It was also inevitable, in the wake of lawless acts like the state-sponsored killing in London of Alexander Litvinenko and of the Salisbury poisonings, that Mr Lavrov would adopt an aggressively condescending approach to Britain. There was and is no justification for that. Yet at the same time, as Sir John observed, Britain has arrived late at the table. It was not the British prime minister who flew to Moscow and spent several hours talking to Vladimir Putin last week. It was the French president. As Sir John wistfully put it: “That would have been us in years gone by.” Perhaps it would have been, although postwar France has a long history of casting itself as a pragmatic interlocutor with Russia. The reality is that there are downsides as well as upsides to the wish of post-imperial powers to play mediating roles. The important point, however, is that Britain today is not remotely close to playing the influential role that its self-important “global Britain” rhetoric implies. Sir John was on strongest ground in his forthright denunciation of the Johnson government’s carefree approach to truth, laws and standards in public life – and its indifference to the international consequences. He was explicit that No 10 has broken lockdown laws and then issued false and misleading denials. He was also unambiguous, during questions, that Mr Johnson should resign if he is found to have broken the law. This is potentially a hugely important issue that could become a fault line in the Tory party. No 10 has again briefed this week that Mr Johnson would not resign. But No 10 is wrong, and Sir John is right. He is also right that lack of trust at home has consequences abroad. This is not well enough understood here, where there remains much complacency about the way Britain is seen. The combination of the Brexit vote and Mr Johnson’s election as prime minister shook international confidence – not just European confidence. This is still being compounded by the UK’s casual approach to the withdrawal agreement and the Northern Ireland protocol in particular. It would be shaken much further and more destructively if the Johnson government breaches the agreement and abandons the Northern Ireland deal. Mistrust towards Britain is not caused by Brexit alone. It has a longer history. But it is encouraged by Mr Johnson himself, at home and abroad. Britain still often enjoys, sometimes in defiance of the facts, a good international reputation as a stable, fair and rational nation. It is a reputation worth nurturing and worth deserving. Mr Johnson is a real and present threat to that. According to Sir John, “our reputation is being shredded”. His speech is a reminder, and one that is needed, of just how much is currently at stake.Approximately 80 years after it was looted by the Nazis, an expressionist painting has been returned to the descendants of a German-Jewish couple by the Royal Museums of Fine Arts in Brussels. Flowers, a 1913 still life by the German artist Lovis Corinth, was entrusted to the museums in 1951, because postwar investigators were unable to trace the original owners. After years of research, the painting has been returned, the first restitution of any artwork looted from a Jewish family in the second world war by the Royal Museums of Fine Arts, which covers six museums, with works spanning the old masters to Magritte. Thomas Dermine, Belgium’s secretary of state in charge of museums, handed the work to a lawyer representing the nine great-grandchildren of Gustav and Emma Mayer, a German-Jewish couple who fled Germany in 1938. “This restitution, the first by the Museums of Fine Arts, is a very strong signal: even decades later, justice can triumph,” Dermine said. The return of the painting was also “an opportunity to remind people of the horrors” to which nationalism and the far right could lead, he said. “To repair is to remember and to remember is to avoid the return of the worst.” The Mayers ran a successful business in Frankfurt before fleeing the Nazi persecution. They owned 30 paintings, which were left in storage in Brussels after a 14-month stay in the Belgian capital from 1938-39. Flowers is the only one to have been recovered. Lawyers for the family approached the museums in 2016, eight years after it launched an online database about 27 works of uncertain provenance in the collections as part of an effort to find owners. Imke Gielen, a lawyer with the Berlin firm Von Trott, who is acting for the Mayers’ descendants, said it was a historic day for the family. “They are delighted that at least one of the missing paintings has been identified after 80 years and has now been returned.” The nine descendants, who live in the UK, South Africa and US, have yet to decide what to do with the painting, she said, adding: “Today is the day of restitution which we celebrate and other things will come in the next few days. The family has to decide.” Gustav and Emma Mayer arrived in Brussels in June 1938, after fleeing through Italy and Switzerland. In August 1939, days before the outbreak of war, they made it to Britain and settled in Bournemouth. Their eldest son, Ernst, was interned with other German-Jewish refugees as an “enemy alien” on the Isle of Man. Gustav Mayer, in poor health when he left Germany, died in his mid-80s in 1940 of natural causes, although his death may have been hastened by the trauma of persecution and the difficult journey. His wife Emma died in 1944. They never saw their paintings again. In 1942 a few works from the Mayer collection disappeared when the Nazi special taskforce led by Hitler’s acolyte, Alfred Rosenberg, began its work of plundering cultural treasures that belonged to European Jews. By 1943 all the Mayer property in Brussels had been stolen. One highlight of the collection was a painting of a horseman on the beach by Max Liebermann, one of the leading impressionists in Germany. There were also other works by Corinth, as well as lesser-known Frankfurt artists. Michel Draguet, the museum’s director, said he felt no sadness that the work would leave the museum, where it had been on display in the modern art collection. “We never bought this painting, we were never the owners, we were the custodians for the Belgian state.” He and all his staff felt they were fulfilling the museum’s role in society, he said. Draguet had scored out the painting from the museum’s inventory, a brown foolscap A4-sized book, with the word “register” printed in French and Dutch on the front. The handover ceremony took place in a new exhibition room showing other works given to the museum in 1951, when Belgium’s postwar Economic Recovery Service, the body in charge of restitution of missing art, was disbanded. The owners of the original works, a mix of old masters and 19th-century landscapes, have either never been identified or there are questions about how they were acquired. One work by the 17th-century Bavarian artist Hans Rottenhammer, Diana and Callisto, was bought by a curator employed by Hermann Göring in 1941 from a Brussels art collector. Nothing of the work’s ownership before 1941 is known, raising questions about a possible forced sale. The Mayers’ descendants repaid the German government the “small compensation” award they had received in the 1970s for the loss of Flowers, Gielen, their lawyer, said. Meanwhile, aided by researchers, the family continue to search for the 29 missing paintings, which are registered on the German government database, lostart.de. For now, there are no leads. “We have no images; we have descriptions, not all of them are very detailed so unfortunately,” Gielen said. “None of the other works has been identified yet.” • This article was amended on 11 February 2022 to correct a misspelling of the Isle of Man as “the Isle of Mann”.A Cornish beachside hotel that built nine meeting rooms without planning permission claiming they were needed for the G7 summit has been ordered to demolish them because they have caused “very significant harm” to the landscape. The Carbis Bay hotel built the rooms in three single-storey buildings before hosting last summer’s meeting of world leaders. It said it had pressed ahead without planning permission because of the urgency of the project. The development led to protest marches on the beach with objectors pointing out that precious habitats and views had been ruined. There was also anger that the hotel claimed the rooms were needed to provide space to host bilateral G7 talks when the UK government said it had not asked for extra work to be carried out. The planning inspector Peter Jarratt highlighted objectors’ argument that the development “flew in the face” of the G7’s claimed green credentials. He said: “There has been a significant public response to the unauthorised development and to the submitted retrospective planning application for reasons including the inappropriateness of the development and to the failure of the applicant to follow the due planning process. Many representations – some 350 to 400 – were received by the council.” The National Trust, the South West Coast Path Association, the Cornwall branch of the Countryside Charity (CPRE) and the Cornwall Wildlife Trust all submitted objections. “The construction of the meeting rooms in three single-storey buildings … has significantly and adversely affected the character and appearance of the area,” Jarratt said. “I have found very significant harm to the character and appearance of the landscape. Although it is to the hotel’s considerable credit that it has hosted the G7 summit and now wishes to adapt the meeting rooms to holiday accommodation, the economic benefits arising from the development, despite attracting significant weight, are insufficient to outweigh the harm to the landscape.” He upheld an enforcement notice from Cornwall council ordering the development to be removed. It is expected that the bill for the demolition work and restoration of the landscape will cost hundreds of thousands of pounds. The hotel declined to comment.People who develop Alzheimer’s disease can experience sleep disturbances years before the condition takes hold, but whether one causes the other, or something more complex is afoot, has always proved hard for scientists to determine. Now, researchers in the US have shed light on the mystery, in work that raises hopes for new therapies, and how “good sleep hygiene” could help to tackle the disease and its symptoms. The findings show that humans’ 24-hour circadian clock controls the brain’s ability to mop up wayward proteins linked to Alzheimer’s disease. If the scientists are right, the work would explain, at least in part, how disruption to circadian rhythms and sleep disturbances might feed into the onset and progression of Alzheimer’s disease, and how preventing such disruption might stave off the condition. “Circadian disruption is correlated with Alzheimer’s diagnosis and it has been suggested that sleep disruptions could be an early warning sign of Alzheimer’s disease,” said Dr Jennifer Hurley, who led the research at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, in New York. Alzheimer’s takes hold when connections are lost between nerve cells in the brain. The disease is progressive and linked to abnormal plaques and tangles of proteins that steadily build up in the brain. The disease is the most common cause of dementia and affects more than half a million people in the UK, a figure that is set to rise. To keep the brain healthy, immune cells called microglia seek out and destroy troublesome proteins that threaten to accumulate in the brain. One type of protein targeted by the cells is called amyloid beta, a hallmark of Alzheimer’s. Writing in the journal Plos Genetics, Hurley and her team describe how they found a daily rhythm in microglia, which drove regular waves of protein-clearing. When the cells lost their circadian rhythm, the clearing routine faltered. “The disruption of the proper timing of amyloid beta clearance could be one of the reasons we see an increase in plaques that form in the brain during Alzheimer’s disease,” Hurley said. While sleep disturbances often arise before Alzheimer’s disease, Hurley and many other scientists suspect there is a complex interplay between the two. Disrupting sleep and circadian rhythms allowed amyloid beta to build up, Hurley said, but this in turn damaged brain cells that ran the circadian clock, causing further accumulation of amyloid beta. “We have known for a while that there is a rhythm in the clearance of amyloid beta in the brain,” Hurley said. “As we age, and more so in Alzheimer’s patients, this rhythm disappears. This loss could lead to the increase of amyloid beta in the brain.” But the findings point to therapies that could potentially reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s or lessen the severity of the symptoms. Hurley said it may be possible to stimulate the brain’s ability to clear out amyloid beta with simple interventions, such as exposure to light, or via more sophisticated therapies that boost the activity of the immune cells. “Taking care of our sleep or circadian rhythms – sometimes called good sleep hygiene – may be able to reduce amyloid beta burden over our lifespan,” she said. “Reducing amyloid burden could mean a reduction in Alzheimer’s symptoms or a delay in the onset or progression of the disease.”Sweeping new UK sanctions that can hit any company or individual that is either benefiting from or giving support to the Russian government have been tabled by ministers. The sanctions will come into effect only if Russia invades Ukraine, but the measures, tabled on Thursday, dramatically broaden the range of people who might be affected. Previously, they were restricted to those Russians deemed by ministers to be destabilising Ukraine, or threatening its sovereignty. The regulations imply ministers could hit a range of Russian oligarchs residing in the UK, or possessing assets in British Overseas Territories. “Being involved in the support of the government” as defined by the regulations, includes being involved in a business of a Russian government-affiliated entity, a business of economic significance to the Russian government or working for a business of strategic significance to Russia. The government of Russia is defined as the presidency of the Russian Federation, public bodies subordinate to the presidency, the chairman and deputies of the chairman of the Russian government, the Russian Central Bank and any Russian government ministry. Strategic sectors are defined as chemicals, construction, defence, electronics, energy, financial services, transport and digital technologies. The regulations were tabled just before parliament went into recess. The Foreign Office said they will be subject to an eventual affirmative vote by MPs but can come into force in the interim. The Europe minister, James Cleverly, insisted ministers had temporary powers to bring the sanctions into force without a vote by MPs. He told the Commons: “This will amount to the toughest sanctions regime against Russia that we have had and mark the biggest change in our approach since leaving the European Union. “We are moving at pace to ensure, where possible, that sanctions regimes are in place ahead of any invasion … We will continue to take actions that dissuade Russian aggression towards Ukraine, and we will always do so in close coordination and co-operation with our international allies.” There was criticism from opposition MPs at the last-minute tabling of the sanctions laws before the recess, amid claims that the scale of the measures had proved problematic for government lawyers. In the Commons, the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, urged ministers to press ahead with “other ignored or delayed measures against Russian oligarchs including the economic crime bill, the reform of Companies House, the register of overseas entities bill, the foreign agent registration law, and the new counter-espionage laws”. Alyn Smith, the SNP foreign affairs spokesperson, pointed out in a letter to the Foreign Office that “the list of those sanctioned under the current sanctions regime has not changed since July 2020. It is concerning that, although legislative mechanisms already exist to sanction individuals involved in Putin’s aggressive manoeuvres, they have so far not been utilised. This gives the impression to members across the House that the [Foreign Office’s] current strategy is one of tough rhetoric but limited concrete action in meaningful deterrence.”