Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.It has taken 14 years but a minor miracle is about to happen, probably within months: the state’s stake in NatWest will fall below 50%. We will no longer have to refer to the former Royal Bank of Scotland as “majority owned” by the government. Hallelujah. NatWest’s full-year figures for 2021, to be announced on Friday, won’t in themselves trigger further disposals of government-owned shares, but they should confirm that the climate is ripe to continue a sell-down programme that has been buzzing along in the background for the past year. At the start of 2021, the state’s ownership, managed by UK Government Investments, was 62%. Now it is roughly 52%, with the reduction coming via three means. First, sales back to NatWest itself. Second, sales to other investors via a “book-build” placement process. Third, a “trading plan” unveiled last July that drip-feeds shares into the market and avoids the inevitable small discount that has to be conceded in a lumpy placement. The only effective limitation on these bit-by-bit methods is the standard one about prices having to represent “value for money for taxpayers”. That is not currently an impediment because chancellors long ago accepted that the public purse was never going to recoup the full £46bn pumped into RBS during the depths of the 2008-09 banking crisis. Some £1.1bn was raised by selling a chunk of shares at 190.5p last March, and the same again in May at almost exactly the same price. Since then, NatWest’s share price – in common with most banks’ – has improved very nicely. The closing price at the end of last week was 253p. There is every reason for the government to keep dribbling shares into the market. The main interest for other shareholders in this Friday’s report is whether the spectacular recovery in banks’ valuations can be sustained. In NatWest’s case, it’s been quite a ride since the pre-vaccine low of 95p-ish in September 2020, a time when banks were piling up provisions as they prepared for a locked-down economy to impair their loan books on several fronts – notably business loans, personal loans and credit cards. Instead, furlough and Covid support schemes held down defaults and the surge in unemployment didn’t materialise. Last July, in its half-year report, NatWest was able to write back about £600m of impairments “as a result of the improved economic outlook”. Another £242m was released at the nine-month stage. Will more reversals happen at the full-year stage? Actually, analysts say no – probably because the whoosh of recovery (the UK economy grew 7.5% in 2021, we learned last week) is in the rear-view mirror and we’re now looking at rising interest rates, higher taxes and a cost-of-living squeeze. Therein lies the real interest in NatWest’s numbers: management’s view of the medium-term future. On one hand, banks will be enjoying the rise in interest rates, which relieves pressure on their lending margins. On the other, squeezed household budgets and reduced consumer confidence tends to reduce demand for credit. Back in October, chief executive Alison Rose saw “challenges in the economy and for our customers” but her tone was positive overall. Any change to that nuanced outlook will be of wider interest because NatWest is the first big UK lender out of the blocks in this year’s reporting season. One suspects she’ll defer any excitement over the government’s looming sub-50% holding until the milestone has been passed. Instead, the focus will be on dividends and share buy-backs, where the City expects a large helping of both on the back of pre-tax profits forecast to be £3.1bn. But the outlook statement is the thing: NatWest, along with Lloyds, offers a good guide to the underlying health of the UK economy, and the mood may be shifting.The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has labelled his government’s byelection results “disappointing across the board” after earlier vowing to win back voters who handed Labor the seat of Bega in Saturday’s byelection. As early counts showed the government had suffered double-digit swings in two of four Super Saturday byelections, the government has resigned itself to losing Bega for the first time since the seat was created in 1988. By midday on Sunday, with 25% of the vote counted, Labor’s candidate Michael Holland had picked up a 14% swing which will see the opposition win the seat barring an overwhelming shift back to the Liberal government when postal votes are counted. At a press conference on Sunday, Perrottet did not seek to sugarcoat the loss, calling it “particularly disappointing” while adding that byelections were traditionally difficult for incumbent governments. “There is certainly messages for us to look at in terms of what we are doing on the ground,” he said. “In addition to that, I think ultimately when you are in a pandemic you are going to make decisions from that time to time will be unpopular. Our job as a government is to take our state through and we are doing that. “Every seat is different. But obviously Bega was particularly disappointing yesterday.” On Sunday the Labor leader, Chris Minns, said the result was a message for the premier to “lift his game and listen to the people of NSW to do better at his job”. “It is no good for hundreds of thousands of people to register their unhappiness with the direction of the government and then for the senior levels, including the premier of NSW, to simply say nothing has changed, we don’t hear the message at all,” he said. “We want the NSW government to do better. That may sound strange for the opposition to say that but we are in the middle of a pandemic and our focus is on the people of NSW.” On Sunday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, pointed to the retirement of some “very, very successful local members” when asked about the swings against the Coalition in the state byelections. “Gladys Berejiklian, a former leader, John Barilaro, a former Nationals leader and you can expect that in those seats there was a very strong following for both of them,” he said. The four Super Saturday byelections had been seen as the first test to Perrottet’s leadership since he became premier following the resignation of Berejiklian in September. In counting on Sunday, Labor appeared to have won Bega from the government and retained the seat of Strathfield, while the government was on track to retain Monaro and Willoughby, despite the latter recording an 18% swing away from the government with 32% of the voter counted. Official victors were unlikely to be declared in the seats for some time, with an unusually high proportion of postal votes cast, which will not start to be counted until 19 February. However, early results pointed to Labor’s Michael Holland winning Bega, with a 14% swing to Labor in votes counted on Sunday night. Losing the seat would plunge the government further into minority, with 45 of the 93 lower house seats, however they would retain a one-seat working majority thanks to the support of former government MPs turned crossbenchers Gareth Ward and John Sidoti. It would be the first time Labor has won Bega, which was previously held by the former transport minister Andrew Constance, who resigned to contest the next federal election. After congratulating Holland, Perrottet insisted he would “always do what is right over what is popular”, vowing to win back the votes the government had lost. “I want to make this commitment to the people in every one of those seats today, those who haven’t voted for the Liberals and Nationals ... I will continue to work day in and day out to win back your vote and win back your trust,” he said. “We will always do what is in the best interests of the people of our state.” Speaking on Saturday night, Holland said he would represent the community as the first Labor MP for Bega, describing the vote as a “plebiscite” on the state government. “It’s been an incredible swing to our party,” he said. “It’s been a reflection of the community’s response to the current government and our need to be heard with our concerns. “It’s time to celebrate a bit of history.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Liberal candidate, Fiona Kotvojs, however, did not concede and said she would wait for postal and pre-poll votes to be counted. Minns said voters were telling the government they were not happy. “This was a message sent by the electors directly to the premier of NSW to lift his game and to make common sense decisions and not trust his ideology or his gut,” he said. “We need to be honest about the message also for NSW Labor. It is not yet a mandate for office for us. We’ve got 12 months to do it. We’re determined to do it. That fight starts tonight.” Labor looked likely to retain the seat of Strathfield, where the former UN lawyer Jason Yat-sen Li had been campaigning against the Liberal candidate and businesswoman Bridget Sakr. Sakr – whose 11-year-old daughter died with three others when they were struck by a drunk driver in 2020 – was considered a strong candidate who some believed could seize the seat following the departure of the former Labor leader Jodi McKay. Yat-Sen Li praised the Strathfield community for making it through a tough two years and vowed to bring “competence, integrity and value” back to the government. While the Liberals’ Tim James was expected to retain Berejiklian’s former seat of Willoughby, early results showed an 18% swing to the independent candidate Larissa Penn. Labor did not contest the seat. Meanwhile, Nichole Overall looked likely to become the first woman to represent the people of Monaro, with the Nationals on track to hold the seat of the former deputy premier and party leader John Barilaro, despite a 7.7% swing against the party in early counting. “We always know how difficult byelections are and when you’re facing four at the same time I think it is a big impact,” Overall said. Polling stations were unusually quiet on Saturday after the NSW Electoral Commission sent all registered voters a postal vote pack. Usually they need to be requested. With the deadline for postal votes extended until 25 February, and postal votes not being counted until 19 February, official results will not be known for some time.The so-called “super Saturday” byelection results may be bad for the New South Wales government, but they are not surprising. While the full results won’t be known for weeks thanks to an increase in postal voting, it was clear by Saturday evening that the government had lost Bega for the first time since the seat was created in the 1980s. In Willoughby on Sydney’s lower northern shore it appears that only the ultra-wide margin established by Gladys Berejiklian saved the government from what would have been an embarrassing loss to independent Larissa Penn. No incumbent government wants to face byelections, of course, and swings were always likely given the loss of Berejiklian as well as two popular local MPs in Andrew Constance in Bega and John Barilaro in Monaro. But whatever expectation management was being played in the lead-up to the vote, the loss of Bega and the sheer size of the swing so far in Willoughby is a clear warning sign to a government that has rarely appeared so vulnerable during its decade in power. For NSW premier Dominic Perrottet, the results are a troubling reflection of how voters have responded to his leadership since he took over in October. What has become increasingly clear is that his foot-to-the-floor approach to “living with the virus” has cost him electorally. In some ways, that’s unfair. Perrottet might have been the first and loudest proponent of a path to Covid normalcy, but other premiers and prime minister Scott Morrison have eagerly gotten in line behind him since. Given the clear electoral plus for governments which faced elections during the pandemic in Australia, Perrottet showed a level of bravery in pushing not just NSW but Australia to move beyond the unrealistic Covid-zero narrative and into the world “not as we want it to be but as it is”, as he likes to say. But the manner in which he did it, briefly sidelining the immensely popular chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant and appearing not to heed health advice about Omicron’s transmissibility in the early days of the outbreak, have created an impression with voters which will be difficult to shake. Perrottet still has 12 months to win over sceptical voters before the general election, and he has tried hard to modify his tone in recent weeks for example, by placing greater emphasis on the challenges facing health workers. But first impressions are hard to shake, and decisions made in the early days of his leadership amid the Omicron surge continue to dog him. As recently as Friday the head of Australia’s peak aged care body linked Perrottet’s decision to lift Covid restrictions on 15 December to the deaths of hundreds of aged care residents, while the secretary of the nurses union labelled Perrottet “disrespectful and tin-eared” over his insistence during the outbreak that the hospital system was handling the surge in cases. Add to that the general sense that Perrottet is leading a government that after 11 years in power is beginning to show its wear. Just this week the government received a series of extraordinary lashings from the state’s auditor general over a dodgy grants program and the treasury department’s withholding of key information associated with a controversial $40bn rail corporation set up to inflate the government’s bottom line. For Labor and leader Chris Minns, the gain in Bega and swing in Monaro (Labor did not contest Willoughby) will be a boon for a party that appears finally to be finding its feet after a decade in the wilderness. Remember it was less than a year ago that former leader Jodi McKay resigned after a dismal showing in the Upper Hunter byelection. It’s not all good news, however. The government held its ground in McKay’s former seat of Strathfield in Sydney’s west, a result some in the Liberal Party are hoping shows Perrottet is more popular in the areas hardest-hit by the Covid-19 lockdowns he vowed to do away with. But when parliament resumes on Tuesday there’s no doubt it will be Labor with their tails up, and the sight of hundreds of nurses taking part in the first statewide strike action in almost a decade over pay and conditions will not help the government’s cause. If the optics of an electoral drubbing three months after taking the top job aren’t bad enough, Perrottet also has a legislative problem on his hands. The government has effectively been in minority since early last year, after two MPs were sidelined over separate scandals. Those two MPs have remained an electoral buffer inside the parliament, continuing to vote with the government, but the loss of Bega means Perrottet no longer has any room for error. Under Berejiklian the government struck an informal agreement with crossbench independents Alex Greenwich, Greg Piper and, later, Joe McGirr. Nothing was ever signed and their support on contentious legislation wasn’t guaranteed, but it had the practical effect of meaning they sided with the government more often than not. But the agreement was a personal one between the crossbenchers and Berejiklian. After Perrottet took power in October, the crossbenchers might have expected a similar request to come from the new premier. It still hasn’t, though. Perrottet met with the three independents as recently as Thursday and it’s understood the subject came up only in the context of reports the government has been courting the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers party for support. No request was made of the independents, though. After the result in Bega began to trickle through, Perrottet remained publicly bullish, pointing to the government’s stronger-than-expected showing in Strathfield, and vowing to “win back your vote and win back your trust”. How he does that will be fascinating to watch.The documentary photographer David Hoffman took this picture of the market in Cheshire Street near Whitechapel in east London in 1976. He had been living in the area since the start of that decade having moved down from York. To begin with, he worked as a truck driver to pay the rent, but, wanting to take pictures full time, he then lived in squats just off Whitechapel Road. The plan, he recalls, “was just to photograph stuff that I thought was interesting or would be important to record. And then I’d wait for people to find me and hopefully pay me money for the pictures.” There were a number of street markets in close proximity in those years, one in Brick Lane, another in Sclater Street, characterised, Hoffman recalls, by differing levels of desperation. “You would have some people trying to sell a single shoe or a broken pair of glasses,” he says. In the 1970s, the markets were mostly kept going by a determination “to find a way to sell anything and not be broke”. As in this image, they presented, at every turn, little tableaux of lives and homes turned inside out. Looking back, Hoffman wishes he’d paid a bit more attention to what was on offer: “There would be occasional daguerreotypes going for 50p or big bits of Victorian pottery that would probably now be worth a fortune.” Hoffman’s market photographs, collected in a new monograph, preserve a moment in time. The markets are now dominated by Bangladeshi styles and flavours; back then, the first Bengali restaurants were opening in Brick Lane, some supplanting the Jewish tailors and stallholders, who were moving out. Part of Whitechapel Road became a conservation area in 1997, though the market there resists gentrification. Whitechapel Markets 1972-1977 by David Hoffman is out this month from Café Royal Books (£6.50) • This article was amended on 18 February 2022. An earlier version was illustrated with an image, supplied to us by the publisher, of Scaler Street market, Shoreditch, London, said to be taken in 1977. In fact the scene was photographed in 1990. The image has been replaced with another Hoffman photograph.• We regret that our headline (‘I didn’t take virus seriously’, admits statistician, 6 February, p12) did not accurately reflect the remark made by Sir David Spiegelhalter. As the article itself made clear, the Cambridge University scientist had told BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs that he was over-optimistic at the start of the coronavirus pandemic and did not take it “seriously enough”. • The US TV presenter Bill Maher is not a “Fox News host”; his show Real Time is broadcast by HBO (Sure, let’s be wary of abuse of power, but do we really want to outlaw office romance?, 6 February, p47). • Xu Weiping, head of the development company ABP, was incorrectly referred to on second and subsequent mentions in an article as Weiping. In Chinese, family names come first so we should have called him Xu (Boris Johnson’s flagship London dock scheme on brink of collapse, 6 February, p21). • An article (Battle lines drawn over fight for the future of UK’s biggest pension funds, 6 February, p50) referred to “the fewer than 1 million people in the UK who are still able to pay into defined benefit schemes”. It meant to say “private” defined benefit schemes. • A recipe for potatoes with olive oil, garlic and rosemary (Nigel Slater, 6 February, Magazine, p27) advised readers to “finely chop half the rosemary... and add to the onions”. That should have said, “add to the potatoes”. The onion instructions came later. Other recently amended articles include: The Observer view on the EHRC decision on Scotland’s gender recognition reforms Sexual Revolution by Laurie Penny review – playing fast and loose with the f-word How Radio 2 veteran Ken Bruce became a No 1 hit Shock in France after giant trawler sheds 100,000 dead fish off coast Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Nyetimber Rosé, Sussex, England NV (£31.49, Waitrose) Drinking pink champagne on Valentine’s Day is, I realise, hardly the most spontaneous or original act of love. It is the drink the Valentine’s industry tells us we can’t do without – a vehicle for the wine business to prey on our insecurities and carve out a piece of that lucrative territory held by florists and greetings card companies. Well, cynicism be damned: of all the daft fabricated traditions on this daftest and most commercialised of festive occasions, pink champagne is the one I’m happiest to indulge. This is a style that has improved beyond measure in the past 20 years. Winemakers have been treating it much more seriously than they used to, and making a lot more of it, too (today rosé accounts for 10% of all champagne production; it was a mere 2% in 2000). Something similar has happened on this side of the channel, too: English fizz makers are mastering wines with the sensual pink tint and, in Nyetimber’s impeccable case, gorgeous tumbling red fruit flavours. Domaine Julien Sunier Wild Soul Beaujolais Villages 2020 (bbr.com; robersonwine.com) Other seductive pink sparkling wines to charm your beloved tomorrow include the pillow-soft, aromatic, mellifluous (and mellifluously named) Fuchs &amp; Hase Pet Nat Rosé from Austria (£20.40, peckhamcellars.co.uk); the punchy herby cherry-berry Co-op Cava Rosado Brut NV (£6.95, The Co-op) and the plump, satin-textured and tropically fruit-fragrant Ruinart Rosé Champagne NV (£69, jeroboams.co.uk). Do red sparkling wines count? Few would fail to be won over by the easy natural charm of Casa Belfi Rosso Bio Frizzante, which comes from Prosecco country, is made in the traditional way where the wine re-ferments in the bottle, and which has a gentle supple food-friendly cherry crunch and bite. For those looking for a Valentine’s without bubbles, in France the Valentine’s industry would push you towards a bottle from a particular village in Beaujolais: St-Amour. Domaine Billards 2019 (£15.99) is a bright, berry-filled delight. But, while it may not have the loving name on the label, Domaine Julien Sunier’s Beaujolais-Villages bottling has a real silky, slinky allure. Taste the Difference Gewürztraminer, Alsace, France (£9, Sainsbury’s) Can a wine be sexy? The term does get used rather a lot in the wine-selling and wine-writing world, although generally it’s as a bloodless, blokeish term of appreciation, rather than something more interestingly kinky. But some wines really do have a certain x-rated je ne sais quoi. There is, for example, something very sexy about really great pinot noir reds from Burgundy. That has a lot to do with their sheer silk-sheeted texture. But it’s also in the way these wines, especially older wines, have something elusively animal in their fragrance, which gives them the same kind of mysterious, elemental pull that you find in really good, handmade French perfume. Something similar happens with Alsace’s gewürztraminer. When it’s young, it’s all about heady, dizzying rose-petal perfume, as you find in Sainsbury’s very attractive bottling. Try a mature bottle from a great producer such as Zind-Humbrecht or Marcel Deiss, however, and you’ll find yourself having a whole other, more adult multi-sensory experience. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachThe two pages allocated to coverage of the first full day’s events in the Winter Olympics were tainted by an inexplicable pillorying of the Norwegian winner of the women’s 7.5km+7.5km skiathlon, Therese Johaug (“Tainted start as first gold of Games is won by banned doper Johaug”, Sport). Rightly suspended for 18 months for a positive drugs test and missing out on the 2018 Olympics, this amazing athlete has served her time and she won the event in magnificent style. How did her victory taint the start of the Games? Is there a presupposition of recidivism in respect of an athlete who has broken the rules or do we, as an enlightened society, wipe the sheet clean after a fresh start? Her prowess was certainly acknowledged in the report but I have never fully understood the meaning of “damning with faint praise”. Now I do. David Parton Seaford, East Sussex Disenfranchised by Dorries Pity me, a poor disenfranchised voter living in the constituency of Nadine Dorries (“And in the prime minister’s corner… Dorries, Dorries and more Dorries”, News). We have an MP defending the indefensible; excusing the inexcusable; thickening the sickening smear on Keir Starmer; behaving like a Trump soundbite. She has taken no voter soundings. I have heard nothing in my conversations with friends and neighbours other than total revulsion at Boris Johnson’s behaviour. Yet Dorries is the banner waver for this dreadful man. Her interview with Charlie Stayt was horrifying. MPs in this parliament seem interested only in their own skins and futures. Dorries is a prime example. My vote counted for nothing last time because our constituency suffers from serf syndrome, the condition that has plagued ordinary people for centuries. Lucky Tory constituents who have an MP with the courage to recognise the social damage this man has caused and will continue to cause unless he is replaced. Michael Newman Shefford, Bedfordshire Give prisoners the vote Gordon Cropper rightly says that “the prison service is an unpopular posting for civil servants” and “low in the estimation of politicians” (“Punishment without care”, Letters). This could be addressed by giving prisoners the vote, as most of the rest of western Europe does. David Murray Wallington, Surrey I’ll tell you who they were… I read with interest both the article on Kenneth Branagh’s film Belfast and subsequent letter (“There is no ‘they’ in Northern Ireland”). I don’t entirely agree with the letter writer’s comments on the issue of “they”. To me as an 11-year-old child living in a “mixed” estate in a small town in Northern Ireland, there were three components to “they”: • The “Tartan gang”, thugs who ran up our road shouting obscenities to the Catholic families, breaking our windows and threatening to burn us out; • Our Protestant neighbours, once dear friends who retreated indoors and, when meeting us many months later, snubbed us. The most hurtful part was when my very best friend whom I had known since little, blanked me when I tried to speak to her a couple of months later. The Catholic families were dislocated in so many ways; • Agents of the state, the army and police who stood at the bottom of our road, motionless, passive while we were terrified, even though our mother assured us we would be safe as “the RUC and army would protect us”. They did no such thing and we had to empty our houses and flee, allowing the marauding gangs to “pick a Fenian’s house” for their friends and families. No counselling for us. Also the letter writer uses the innocuous-sounding phrase “put out” in relation to people being intimidated and forced to flee their homes. “Putting somebody out” today means inconveniencing them but, believe you me, for my family and our Catholic neighbours it was a lot more than than that; it was ethnic cleansing on religious grounds. Superb I am sure it is, but I for one won’t be watching Mr Branagh’s film, as there will be far too many bad memories for me. Name and address supplied What about the tenants? Zoe Wood’s article exactly encapsulates the government obsession with property ownership (“Thousands of renters in England could miss out on council tax cut”, News). At the core of its housing policy lies the dogma of possession: an “affordable” house is one that we can buy, albeit with help from the taxpayer; the idea that we need accommodation that is affordable to tenants is alien to the central dogma. It is entirely in line with this idea that many of the rebates will go to owners rather than tenants. That the underlying policy results in a catastrophic rise in the cost of buying a house and an even more catastrophic shortage of rentable property appears irrelevant. The owner, landlord, whatever, is all-important and damn the rest. Roger Iredale West Coker, Somerset So much for office romance Stephanie Merritt draws on her own experience to demonstrate her reasons for being “on the side of workplace romances” (“Sure, let’s be wary of abuse of power, but do we really want to outlaw office romance?”, Comment). As a Gen Xer who “owes her existence” to a workplace romance, she writes in sympathy of those who lament the time before #MeToo, when “office flirtations” were less tightly regulated. Merritt’s article centres around Jeff Zucker, who resigned from his job as president of CNN after his sexual relationship with a colleague was exposed. Merritt says the relationship was consensual, so there should be no problem. As he was president of a multinational news channel, reducing this to an “office romance” between “consenting adults” overlooks the gendered power relations this “scandal” reveals. Every outpouring of grief and support for Zucker is evidence of a sycophantic hero-worshipping that serves to keep everyone under the spell of a white male leader. The drama surrounding Zucker’s resignation from CNN is not about “romance”. It is a perverse symptom of free market capitalism, celebrity culture and addiction to power that has gone off the deep end. Lorna Donoghue London, SW2 Lovely Jubbly, Your Maj Somewhere in the corner of heaven reserved for sitcom scriptwriters, John Sullivan is reading about the “Platinum Jubbly” commemorative china and wishing he could have lived just long enough to write a Platinum Jubilee special of Only Fools and Horses (“I can’t wait to celebrate the Queen’s lovely Jubbly”, Comment). You can just see Del and Rodders down Peckham market flogging the “limited edition” and “unique” tableware in time for the celebrations. Perhaps Sir David Jason, in his Del Trotter persona, will visit Buckingham Palace in June and present Her Majesty with a selection of the items. That would surely give her, and the nation, a laugh. Paul F Faupel Somersham, CambridgeshireLouis Theroux’s Forbidden America Sunday, 9pm, BBC Two “I actually enjoy racist humour and misogyny … I think it’s awesome.” This is the sort of rhetoric Louis Theroux faces in a new series about the internet’s effect on controversial subcultures, starting with the far right. Attempting to maintain his composure (but often failing to do so) he spends time with self-proclaimed “internet troll” Anthime Gionet, who says “antisemitic is a made-up term”, as well as “political commentator” Nicholas Fuentes, who earns thousands of dollars in donations from fans of his disturbing online rants. Things turn meta, and more uncomfortable, when they both rip Theroux apart for being a “pretentious liberal journalist” on their own live streams. Hollie Richardson Chloe 9pm, BBC One “I’ve dug myself into a bit of a hole … but it just feels good.” Anyone else bracing themselves for the moment when the jig is up for Becky (a brilliantly complex Erin Doherty)? Tonight, she works out who Chloe was having an affair with before her death – it’s fairly obvious who, but still highly enjoyable to watch unfold. Meanwhile, her new relationship with Elliot gets more complicated (he is the widower of the woman she had an Instagram obsession with, after all). Episode four of the addictive thriller airs Monday. HR Call the Midwife 8pm, BBC One More reassuring than hot cocoa in an old chipped mug. Sister Frances takes charge of a young teenage mum from foster care; Timothy returns from university feeling poorly, before clashing with Dr Turner; Sister Hilda looks after a heavily pregnant woman suffering from a painful condition; and Nonnatus House faces its biggest threat yet. Ali Catterall Trigger Point 9pm, ITV Come for the next explosion, stay for … well, the explosion after that. Anyone else starting to get easily distracted when it comes to the slow parts in between? Tonight in a nutshell: Lana works with New Scotland Yard to track down the Crusaders – but it leads her to suspects close to home. HR The Curse 10pm, Channel 4 Now their opportunistic blag has turned into a record-breaking bullion heist, doofus crooks Albert (Allan Mustafa), Phil (Hugo Chegwin) and big Mick (Tom Davis) just have to lie low and avoid the fuzz. If only it were that simple. Episode two of the farcical 80s London-set crime yarn rattles along with energy and madcap charm. Graeme Virtue Walter Presents: The Truth Will Out 11.30pm, Channel 4 The second season of this dark Swedish crime drama arrives and Peter Wendel’s cold case unit is looking more threadbare than ever. Former members have fled for pastures new and Peter (Robert Gustafsson) is still tormented by his brother’s apparent suicide. But was Urban’s death all it seemed? A reunion for his unit poses new questions. Phil Harrison Film choices The Most Beautiful Boy in the World 9pm, BBC Four He may be familiar currently as the white-haired, bearded old man who had a fall in Midsommar, but Björn Andrésen was once idolised around the world after playing the young Tadzio in Luchino Visconti’s 1971 film Death in Venice. The 15-year-old Swede, as Kristina Lindström and Kristian Petri’s intimate documentary reveals, was pitched into a “living nightmare” of celebrity and dubious male attention due to the role – and it’s a period with which he still seems to be coming to terms. He has a heart-breaking story to tell, which he does with almost painful diffidence. Simon Wardell Film choice The Innocents 11.50pm, Talking Pictures TV Among the many adaptations of Henry James’s horror novella The Turn of the Screw, Jack Clayton’s crisply shot 1961 film deserves its reputation as one of the best. It’s all in the ambiguity, with Deborah Kerr bringing her febrile upper-class energy to the role of governess Miss Giddens. Hired to look after an orphaned boy and girl in a country house, she suspects ghostly forces – the spirits of two dead servants – are at work on the young children, manipulating and corrupting them. Or is the unworldly vicar’s daughter just imagining it? SW Live sport Women’s Super League: Man City v Man United, 12.15pm, BBC Two From Academy Stadium. The rivals meet for the third time this season. Six Nations Rugby Union: Italy v England 2.15pm, ITV Second-round match from Stadio Olimpico in Rome. Super Bowl LVI: Cincinnati Bengals v Los Angeles Rams, 11.35pm, BBC One Showpiece match of the gridiron season at SoFi Stadium in LA.Sugarcane London, 517 Wandsworth Road, London SW8 4PA (020 7498 8758). Starters £4-£6, mains £8.50-£10, platters for two £30, desserts £5.50, wines from £20 Sugarcane London is a small, tidy Caribbean café on the Wandsworth Road serving, among other things, very good jerk chicken. The skin is crisped and blackened and has a sweet, aromatic warmth from an enthusiastic assault by a seasoning mix heavy with the wonder that is allspice. This is a restaurant review, so obviously we care about these things; the food matters and it will get its moment. But for now, there is another story that needs to be told: that of the man responsible for the jerk chicken and all the other deep, enfolding dishes coming out of the tiny open kitchen. I first heard about Tarell Mcintosh, self-styled as Chef Tee, courtesy of his neighbours. A few weeks ago, the restaurant was broken into. The shutters were wrecked, equipment and stock filched, the till emptied. Sugarcane London, one neighbour told me, had been a labour of love for Chef Tee, who had precious few resources when he started out and now had nothing. The local community, his neighbours and customers, crowdfunded the money he needed to get the place back on its feet. We talk earnestly about the importance of neighbourhood restaurants. We talk about their significance to communities. But this suggested a next level kind of love: a next level kind of importance. With good reason. As Chef Tee explained in the press release he put out in 2020 when the restaurant first opened (and which, to my shame, I completely missed), he grew up in care and wanted to do something for other care leavers. He is now 27, but has packed a lot into that short life: a bunch of degrees and time as a teacher, alongside jobs at restaurants such as Negril and Blues Kitchen in Brixton. He loved working and reworking Jamaican recipes at home, but by the point the pandemic arrived had decided to retrain in midwifery. Then one morning, during a head-clearing lockdown walk, he came across what had once been a corner shop, but was now empty. He convinced the landlord to give him the lease. He bought secondhand kitchen equipment that would just about do the job. He painted the signage himself because he didn’t have the money to get anyone else to do it, and nailed together the frame of a beach shack within the shop. There are wooden struts painted red and blue, and colourful sheets of corrugated iron playing the part of sloping roofs. There are wooden tables and chairs. Within a few weeks he had enough money to employ four care leavers. As he wrote, “I’m a helper, a changer, and this is what Sugarcane London is about. I am trying to use my company as a vessel for others.” Accordingly, the words “become a part of our story” are painted in his own hand across the front. I thought I would, not just by reporting the gloomy break-in news, or the better fable of the crowdfunder, but by eating there. Because that story starts to wobble if the food doesn’t stand up to examination. It really does. This is Chef Tee’s gentle journey around the islands. From Trinidad comes soft, flaky roti with a deep, sweet and sticky spiced gravy for dunking into and, as ever, if no one is looking, a little light sippage. Although, even if they were looking, no one would really care. It’s not that kind of place. Sip away. Alongside the half jerk chicken for £9, we have the jerk ribs, which have been braised until ready to leave the bone they called home, appropriately drenched in a sweet, hot glaze. Ask for more napkins. We have the curry goat, apparently “cooked in the Dutch pot for four hours the way my nan taught me”. His nan taught him well. There is a fiery power to the gravy, which makes my scalp sweat, and lots of bones to be nibbled clean. The same would be true of the 24-hour slow-braised oxtail, full of fresh spinach leaves now wilting gently in the heat, except that the meat has all but fallen away to make the deepest of stews. I suck at the bones anyway. There is jerk rice and a big bowl of kale and callaloo, to make sure you’ve eaten your greens. This is all comfort food, made by someone who knows a bit about having to find a place of safety and now wants to offer you one, too. We try their cocktails: a Dark ’n’ Stormy for £6.50, and something the colour of candy canes made with pink gin and pink Ting for Valentine’s Day. Both display a generous approach to measures. Mind you, if a little light inebriation is desired, you could miss out the cocktail list and head straight for dessert, which includes a section entitled “Alcohol-soaked cakes”. The ineffably light and crumbly chocolate cake comes doused in almond liqueur. On the side is a pot of their own custard, containing a depth charge of dark rum. Or there’s the bread-and-butter pudding with more dark rum. Chef Tee likes rum. At the bottom of the menu, it says, “No service is added to your bill so please tip so I can buy my staff rum.” Tonight, he says, is one of the first times the kitchen has handled service without him while he works the tables. “They’ve done a terrific job.” They’ve earned both their rum and their tips. Chef Tee is a gentle but charismatic figure, who somehow manages the important business of showing the love to his regulars while getting the dishes out and servicing the delivery drivers who turn up at the door. We fall to talking; there is no space in a small, intimate room like this for any pretence. He knows why I am here and I make it clear how well we have been fed. Chef Tee admits that from the very dark moment in the immediate aftermath of the break-in, business is now good; support from the community has been amazing. I tell him what he has done has been equally amazing. He nods gently and, without any side, says simply, “I’m a care leaver from a disadvantaged background. I’m black and gay, one of the youngest restaurateurs in the country who opened his restaurant during the pandemic by himself with just £3,000. I should be a statistic. Instead, I’ve broken the narrative and the barriers. Despite everything against me, I’m still standing.” In a space this small everyone can hear our conversation. Spontaneously, his customers give him a round of applause. Quite right, too. Jay’s news bites The Creameries in Chorlton, Greater Manchester, has a new identity. Founding chef Mary-Ellen McTague has handed the restaurant over to her head chef Mike Thomas, who has relaunched it as a southern European restaurant called Campagna at the Creameries. The menu will include palourde clams with chickpeas, cuttlefish stew with braised fennel, pappardelle with beef shin ragù and a hazelnut torte with zabaglione cream. On Sundays there will be a three-course menu for £30. Visit thecreameries.co.uk. The industry body UKHospitality has warned that the sector will need to raise prices over the coming year to cope with rising costs for food and energy and the end of the reduced VAT rate introduced during the pandemic. The organisation surveyed over 340 businesses representing 8,200 outlets. Nearly 50% of respondents said they expected menu price increases of over 10% in 2022, with 15% of them anticipating a rise of more than 20%. Flor, the restaurant and then bakery opened in London’s Borough Market by James Lowe and John Ogier of Lyle’s in 2019, has ceased trading. Flor was backed by restaurant group JKS which retains the site. They have announced it will now become a second outpost of the Iranian kebab-focused restaurant Berenjak. At berenjaklondon.com. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1 • This article was amended on 15 February 2022. An earlier version mistakenly gave James Lowe’s first name as “Jason”.The most comprehensive analysis of the UK’s anti-vax community reveals that just 0.32% of the population is active in the movement, contradicting its claim to represent “the 99%”. The first analysis of its kind shows that the anti-vax movement is far smaller than expected, with about 220,000 unique active users identified within a network of 427 groups on the messaging app Telegram, its preferred platform. Analysts, however, expressed concern about the “high crossover” between anti-vax ideologies and QAnon, the online conspiracy theory whose supporters stormed the US Capitol and whose violent tendencies prompted the FBI to label it a domestic terrorism threat in 2019. The analysis, by Logically, a tech company that tackles misinformation by using factcheckers and open-source intelligence, also found that the conspiracy groups’ network structure reveals “sophisticated and repeated organisational tactics” throughout the UK. Jordan Wildon, analyst at Logically, said: “Group membership was lower than originally expected. There are still a lot of people involved, but given how loud they are and how much attention they receive, they give the impression that they form a much larger group.” He added: “Alongside that, the notion that they are “the 99%” helps draw others into the movement as they consider themselves to be part of the majority which, as our findings show, couldn’t be further from the truth.” Dominating the UK anti-vax community are 13 national networks including the Great Reopening, supported by prominent coronavirus conspiracy theorists such as David Icke – who has claimed that the world is run by a race of lizard people – and Jeremy Corbyn’s brother, Piers. Another is Alpha Men Assemble, whose supporters have run military-style training sessions in preparation for a “war” against the state, and who were among those who accosted the Labour leader Keir Starmer last week. To identify which part of the UK had the most proactive anti-vax community, analysts investigated a sample of 152 Covid-conspiracy Telegram groups and found that 81% – or 44,914 members – were “unique”, that is individuals who had posted rather than bots (software designed to simulate a human activity). The highest number of active unique users was identified in the south-west of England, London and the south-east, followed by the north-west and east Midlands. Each network, according to the research, had as many as 80 regional affiliated Telegram groups and was able rapidly to disseminate livestreams from UK protests, or inflammatory and misleading articles on Covid. The YouTube channel Resistance GB broadcast the attack on Starmer by anti-vax protesters live last week. Piers Corbyn, one of the movement’s most high-profile figures, shared a video of his supporters mobbing Starmer to his Telegram channel. Examining the structure of the online anti-vax community, researchers found that smaller, regional groups were crucial in orchestrating “direction action, strategies on a smaller scale and recruitment”. Wildon said that the structure of Telegram, increasingly under fire for hosting violent extremists, had had a “huge impact on the shape of the UK Covid disinformation space” with its creation of an ecosystem where conspiracy theories could be easily exchanged. He added: “After platforms cracked down on QAnon and Covid disinformation, the rise of Telegram has created a microcosm with much fewer boundaries between groups and ideologies and a far more rapid form of dissemination between them, both at an international level and a national one.” Experts have coined the term “cultic milieu” to explain why UK conspiracy theories – such as those involving 5G masts and Covid – QAnon-fuelled anti-lockdown protests in the US, and David Icke’s return to prominence as a figurehead of disinformation have tended to weave together since the first lockdowns were introduced in 2020. Joe Ondrak, head of investigations at Logically, said that the exporting of the QAnon conspiracy to the UK via the #saveourchildren hashtag had allowed for a particular mix of “paedophile, satanic deep state meta-conspiracy to serve as an epistemological frame for Covid”. That, Ondrak said, partly explained why “paedo protector” is a common insult thrown at police at anti-vax and anti-lockdown protests, with the term shouted at Starmer during the protests last week.The question My partner has suffered from depression for decades, but only saw the doctor once, stopped taking the medication after a few months, and refuses to go on it again. They won’t talk to anyone or seek help professionally or from family – not even me. In the last two years, Covid has had a major impact on their mental health, and their behaviour on top of this is now affecting me massively. In the past, I’ve been told I’m very positive and happy. I’m certainly not that now. But I don’t want to go on medication myself. I try hard to get things right, and I’m not perfect – but nothing I do is good enough for them. They talk at me as though I’m stupid. It is not in my nature to be aggressive, but sometimes I have to defend myself. I’m being constantly made to feel guilty that everything is my fault. There’s no logic to their thoughts. They don’t have any close friends or any hobbies, and they seem to resent me when I do things, but they won’t do them with me. I would like to see change – how though? After so many years it seems unlikely. Philippa’s answer It is as though you are both stuck in a game of who is right and who is wrong, each of you jostling for the superior position. Resentments mount up and yet you are both locked in. Neither of you is changing, neither is leaving. Many counsellors use something called the Karpman Drama Triangle to make sense of what is happening in a relationship. The point of it is to put to one side what you are arguing about and examine instead your patterns of relating to each other. Imagine a triangle: the pointy bit at the bottom is labelled Victim, and the other two corners are labelled Persecutor and Rescuer respectively. At the moment, you are dancing around the triangle from Rescuer to Persecutor to Victim and back again. What seems to me to be happening is that you get into the Rescuer role by trying to persuade your partner to get help for their depression. It sounds like they experience this as persecution and they get defensive and persecute back and then you feel like a victim. So, how to escape from these three unhelpful roles? First, how not to persecute: you can ban yourself from using certain phrases, such as “You always…” “You are…” “You should…” In other words, don’t tell them what they are like, don’t define them and don’t give unasked-for advice because these types of remarks are likely to be experienced by them as persecutory, however well-intended the sentiment behind them is. Secondly, when you are trying too hard to get things right for them, that’s when you are in the Rescuer role. This could be perceived by them as patronising. We get into rescue mode when we do things for people that they are capable of doing for themselves and it can be experienced by them as infantilising. Don’t even try to be perfect, being you is enough. Thirdly, when you play the victim, you are giving away your power. Recognise when you are playing the martyr and stop. You have friends and hobbies, you can get your sense of who you are from others and from things you enjoy. If you allow yourself to be dragged down by your partner, you will resent them for it. If you don’t allow it, you won’t. And you know what they say about resentment? “Resentment is like drinking poison and expecting your enemy to die.” Real victims are helpless and cannot take responsibility for their predicament. Playing the victim is different – you are choosing not to take responsibility. Even when your partner belittles you, you don’t have to play the victim to their persecution. When I’m insulted, I can use the following way of diffusing the situation instead of getting aggressive. For example, in response to the insult, “You’re stupid”, I could say, “Oh, you think I’m stupid, thanks for letting me know.” In other words, I don’t agree or disagree with what has been said, but show them I’ve heard. When we feel heard we don’t have to shout louder. Echoing back what you’ve heard so you don’t ignore them will calm things down. If they say something like, “Doctors can’t help me” you don’t have to argue, you can just respond with, “Ah, you feel doctors can’t help you.” After you’ve both agreed that they believe doctors can’t help, you might say, “I would be so much less anxious if you gave the doctors another try.” This will be experienced by them differently than the more combative, “You should…” because you’d be defining yourself and not them. There is much less logic to any of our thoughts than we’d like to believe. Logic rarely solves disputes but when there is a mutual understanding of feelings, it is far easier to reach a solution. This means instead of trying to win using logic, try instead to understand by listening to feelings, yours and theirs, as this is the path to compromise and getting unstuck. Short answer, you can change how you react to them and see what happens or you can leave. But if you do leave, beware the Karpman Drama Triangle doesn’t get the upper hand in subsequent relationships. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukThe spiralling cost of living will have a “crippling” impact on young people, experts have warned, as a new report found that under-30s are disproportionately being forced to bear the brunt of the costs of social care reform and Covid. Research by the Intergenerational Foundation thinktank, to be published on Monday, claims that younger workers are being unfairly targeted by the government in a “tax by stealth” caused by freezes on income tax brackets and the student loan repayment threshold, as well as April’s national insurance rise. Low-earning young people will be hit hardest by the changes, claims the report, having a significant impact on their take home pay, disposable income and potential to save for housing and pensions. Researchers calculate a graduate earning £27,000 a year will see their deductions rise by about 20% over the next four years – from 18% of their pay to 22%. They predict their discretionary income will drop by almost 30% and their disposable income by 4%. By discretionary income the researchers were referring to the amount of money an individual has left over to spend or save after taxation and essential spending. This is different from “disposable income” which is the amount of income a person has after taxation. They calculate that younger workers will pay more than 10 times more in national insurance contributions each year than workers aged 65-plus. Labelling under-30s the “packhorse generation”, the thinktank claims they are being targeted by the government, which it says is using high inflation to pull more low-income, and especially younger, workers into taxation sooner. Angus Hanton, co-founder of the Intergenerational Foundation, said the policies will have a “crippling” impact on young peoples’ lives. “Our figures suggest many young graduates will see about a 30% drop in their discretionary income within the next four years. So it’s really going to bite. And that’s before you take into account probably a 50% energy bill hike in April,” he said. “It will hit young people harder than older generations – partly because they’ve got less margins of safety. But also, largely because the government are taxing earned income so heavily and unearned income so lightly.” Hanton accused the government of being “intergenerationally unfair” in its policies. It will, he believes, lead to many young people feeling resentful. “After all they have sacrificed to protect older generations during the pandemic, lower-earning younger generations will be forced to shoulder the cost of government promises to increase social care spending and reduce Covid-19 debt, when both spending decisions were made to protect older generations,” he said. Instead, he added, they should charge national insurance on landlord and dividend income, which he says would be fairer and calculates would raise £24bn a year. Alana McSkimming, 23, would like to move into her own place, but is living with her parents because she cannot afford to rent or buy in the face of rising living costs. The marketing executive from Woking feels “stuck”. “I’d like to move out, I’d like to go out on my own, but the cost of living means I would be spending every single thing I earn,” she said. “There would be no disposable income, no savings and realistically I wouldn’t be able to move out on my own.” After graduating in 2019, it took her a year to get an apprenticeship and in August she got her current job, working remotely from home. She believes there is “huge generational inequality” – with many young people unable to get on the housing ladder as their parents might have done – and fears the generation after her will be even worse off. She doesn’t believe government policies are targeted to benefit young people. “You feel like you’re never really taking that next step in life, you’re never growing up because you’re never able to have a place to call your own,” she said. “You don’t feel you’re reaching milestones your parents would have reached.” The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) published a report on Thursday that said students in England were being hit by stealth cuts and tax rises and accused the government of using high inflation to “quietly tighten the financial screws”. A Treasury spokesperson said: “We recognise the pressures people are facing with the cost of living, and are providing support worth around £20bn this financial year and next to help.” • This article was amended on 18 February 2022. Owing to an error in information supplied by the Intergenerational Foundation it was stated that their researchers predict that a graduate earning £27,000 a year will see their disposable income drop by almost 30%. In fact the researchers were referring to that percentage drop in relation to discretionary income, meaning the amount of money an individual has left over to spend or save after taxation and essential spending. The percentage drop they predict in relation to disposable income is 4%.It would hardly be hyperbole to say that since its founding in 2004, Facebook has taken over the world – counting more than 50% of the global population as its user base. But after years of domination built on advertising revenue, the company has nearly overnight tried to knock down that empire and build anew. In October 2021, more than 15 years and 2.8 billion users after the then student Mark Zuckerberg launched the social media platform from his college dorm, Facebook announced it had become “Meta” and was refocusing on the company’s virtual reality endeavors. But can a Silicon Valley wunderkind successfully pull off a world-changing technology for the second time? Experts say that with regulatory concerns, technological setbacks, and branding troubles, the company’s path into the metaverse is not without its roadblocks. User base waning The attempt to reorient comes at a time when growth has become a major problem for Meta’s key business, Facebook. In its most recent quarterly results, Meta revealed that Facebook had recorded its first decline in daily active users – a key metric for investors – since it was founded in 2004. The fall from 1.93 billion users between July and September last year to 1.929 billion in the three months to December was driven by declines in Africa and Latin America, although growth dropped in the US too (not for the first time). But the company is also losing young users, who are a key demographic for the advertisers who provide 97% of Meta’s revenue, documents leaked by the company whistleblower Frances Haugen have shown. Meta and its subsidiary Instagram are facing growing competition from the video platform TikTok, analysts at research company Forrester say. “Meta has a Gen Z problem,” said Mike Proulx, a vice-president and research director at Forrester. In response, the company has launched Reels, Meta’s answer to the Chinese-owned platform. But the road to profit is long, said Proulx: “Not only does Meta have to try to win back a declining share of its key Gen Z audience but it must also figure out how to better monetize Reels in the process. Continuing to lift TikTok’s features won’t cut it.” Building the metaverse under a magnifying glass Enhanced regulatory scrutiny of Meta has all but ruled out one solution to its growth problems: buying another large social media platform. Although an enforced split of the business is a long way from happening, a Washington DC-based district judge ruled last month that the US Federal Trade Commission has a “plausible” legal claim against Meta, rooted in the argument that the company has stifled competition by buying up its fledgling rivals Instagram and WhatsApp. Meanwhile, Lina Khan, chair of the FTC, and Jonathan Kanter, head of antitrust at the Department of Justice, have announced a review of merger guidelines – with tech among their areas of concern. Facebook’s recent VR acquisitions are already under review. Rebecca Allensworth, professor of law at Vanderbilt University, said the regulatory outlook for Meta had changed substantially since Facebook bought Instagram for $1bn a decade ago. “First, because the American antitrust agencies are looking at hi-tech mergers generally with a lot more scrutiny now, and because one of those agencies [the FTC] is now in court arguing that Meta in particular used acquisitions anti-competitively.” The forthcoming FTC case and growing regulatory scrutiny do not prevent cash-rich Meta (it has at least $48bn to spend) from attempting to pull off a mega deal, but it underlines that Zuckerberg is operating in a hostile environment. Additional scrutiny The scrutiny of Meta is not limited to its potential acquisitions. A seemingly endless series of public controversies in recent years guarantees that every part of its expanding operations is under close review. “Zuckerberg and his coterie were able to invent Facebook largely out of the glare of public attention,” said Paul Barrett, deputy director at New York University’s Stern Center for Business and Human Rights. “Now, his every move will be scrutinized by rivals, potential imitators, and a far more robust tech media corps.” Those controversies include the explosion of misinformation around the 2016 US elections, the Cambridge Analytica scandal, Facebook’s role in the persecution of the Rohingya in Myanmar, and most recently the revelations made by Haugen – including the platform’s grave health effects on young people. In light of such scandals, regulators and users alike will be ready with questions for Meta as it moves into yet another space: will users’ privacy be protected? How will it address hate speech and harassment in the metaverse? Does it have a plan for misinformation? “People will demand to know whether he’ll avoid some of the mistakes that have contributed to the many Facebook/Meta controversies,” Barrett said of Zuckerberg. More competition, and a big reputation When Facebook embarked on its initial ascent in the mid-2000s, it had little competition in its way. Apart from MySpace, founded just the year before, there were few other widely known social platforms. Today, Meta enters a crowded industry with established players. Game systems like Roblox and Decentraland already allow users to share worlds with one another. Can Meta – which has already invested $10bn into its metaverse – buy its way into the field? Past examples do not bode well. Apple tried to get into social media with a platform called Ping, which shut down after two years. Google attempted and failed with its own social platform called Google+. Even Meta itself fell short with its latest attempt to expand outside of social media, shutting down its cryptocurrency venture Diem (formerly called Libra) last month after repeated regulatory struggles. “They have tried to diversify revenue streams before, and frankly it did not go very well,” said Ari Lightman, a professor of marketing and digital media at Carnegie Mellon University. “Unfortunately when you get this large, you get kind of pigeonholed and it becomes difficult to move from one place to another.” The headwinds have not stopped Zuckerberg from trying. Besides the huge financial investments into the Metaverse, the company has transformed its branding and employment practices to reflect its new priorities. It has posted thousands of jobs for engineers to build hardware and software for the metaverse, pushing some employees to leave their jobs and apply elsewhere in the company. Meanwhile, it has poached a number of employees from VR projects at competing firms. The dramatic pivot to the metaverse has spooked investors, leading Meta’s stocks to plummet following the recent earnings report. The company lost more than $230bn in market value. But Zuckerberg seems unfazed, even as he seemed to acknowledge the setback. “This fully realized vision is still a ways off,” Zuckerberg said of Meta’s metaverse investments in a call with investors. “And although the direction is clear, our path ahead is not yet perfectly defined. “But I’m pleased with the momentum and the progress that we’ve made so far and I’m confident these are the right investments for us to focus on going forward,” he added.What is it about hair – or a lack of it – that brings out the bad puns? ‘Bald facts’, ‘Cutting remarks’ and ‘Living lets its hair down’ on consecutive pages? Even the cover of the Observer Magazine of 27 February 1983 (‘The long and the short of it’) was at it. Surely lockdown has brought serious challengers to ‘the longest beard, now preserved in the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, that once belonged to Hans Langseth and measured 17.5ft at his death in 1927’. Likewise the longest British moustache – 68.5in– sported by John Roy of Weeley, Clacton. Less of a handlebar and more of a spiral-horned antelope. One of the articles reported that ‘washing-up liquid is a terrible idea, say trichologists. It rubs the cuticles up the wrong way and leaves the hair very fuzzy-looking’. Not ‘soft as your face’ then, as Fairy Liquid said at the time? ‘Hat designer Stephen Jones is bald by choice. Not only does he find his hairless style a refreshing challenge to convention but, by making his head smaller, it also enables him to try on his designs for such famous names as Jerry Hall and Grace Jones.’ Sure, Stephen. Hard not to think of Billy Connolly’s routine when talk turns to jojoba, ‘the latest wonder ingredient for adding some lustre – derived from a shrub grown mainly in Arizona and Mexico and a natural substitute for sperm whale oil’. Presumably not for the sperm whale, though. There were some deeper points, too. ‘Mass unemployment’s bred its own style,’ argued one piece. ‘The punk says, “If no one will give me a job, why should I look as though I’ve got one?” And boys and girls cropped, backcombed, bleached, dyed and harnessed their hair back in homage to artifice and outrage. Money is tight and DIY has come into its own in hair just as it has with clothing.’ Finally, they got to the root of the problem.Europe stands on the brink of war. The biggest conflagration since 1945 is now an all-too-real prospect. For many people, this seems incredible. How did we come to this? Are the terrible lessons of the Nazi era, of the Cold War invasions of Hungary and Czechoslovakia, of Bosnia, Kosovo and of previous suppressions of free peoples by tyrannical leaders all now forgotten? Hopefully not. And yet history, confounding reason, appears set to repeat itself. As this dread maelstrom spins, the US, Britain and the Nato allies are united in three key respects. First, their intelligence services agree Russia has sufficient military capability around Ukraine’s borders to mount a full-scale invasion, seize the capital, Kyiv, and force a change of government that better suits Moscow’s interests. US president Joe Biden suggests an attack could come as early as Wednesday. Second, the western powers are unanimous in blaming this desperate situation on Russia’s president. Vladimir Putin, and only Vladimir Putin, they believe, will decide if, when, where and how an invasion takes place. At this point (and contrary to what Biden told the allies), it’s unclear whether Putin has made a final decision. This is crucial. It means he may yet be dissuaded. It also means he, pre-eminently, will be to blame if the worst happens. Third, the 30 Nato countries all agree they will not directly intervene militarily to assist Ukraine. This controversial stance is certain to be re-examined endlessly, whatever happens in the coming days. Ukraine is not a Nato member. There is no legal obligation to help. No one (or almost no one) wants a third world war, as a slightly panicked Biden put it last week. Yet the possibility of being obliged to look on impotently as a young, newly independent, sovereign democracy with an inalienable right to choose its friends and alliances is trampled underfoot sickens the stomach. If this is indeed the outcome, the consequences will be far-reaching. What is the western alliance for, many will ask, if not to defend freedom against unprovoked aggression? Such inquests are unavoidable and necessary – but will have to await events. Right now, a number of pressing priorities arise. Given the pessimistic intelligence evaluations concerning Putin’s intentions, it is imperative the government move with the utmost urgency to ensure the safe evacuation of British citizens (and non-combatant military personnel and diplomats). In this respect, the Foreign Office has particular responsibility. There must be no repeat of the chaos that surrounded last year’s withdrawal from Afghanistan, when hundreds of Afghans and dual nationals who had every right to expect assistance from Britain were abandoned to the Taliban. As revealed by the Observer, thousands of emails pleading for help went unanswered as the Foreign Office was overwhelmed. This must not happen again. It’s not enough simply to advise Britons to leave. Emergency evacuation flights should be laid on as necessary. Coordinated western diplomatic efforts must also be stepped up to persuade Russia to back off. Biden’s phone call with Putin on Saturday should be swiftly followed up. Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, is best placed to do so. When he met Putin in Moscow last week they discussed how to settle some of the main areas of dispute, such as the future status of the eastern Donbas region. Macron should be encouraged to spearhead a diplomatic drive to avert disaster. If diplomacy is to succeed, it must have the full backing not only of the UN but of all of Nato’s leaders. That includes Boris Johnson, who has been outspoken in threatening Russia but has had little to say by way of constructive solutions. Much the same may be said of Britain’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, whose disastrous diplomatic debut in Moscow last week may have made matters worse. In casting himself as a Churchillian wartime leader at a pivotal moment in world affairs, the prime minister evidently hopes to distract public attention from the police investigation into lockdown partying in Downing Street. This is a vain hope. Johnson has been a marginal figure on the international stage as the Ukraine crisis has unfolded, accurately reflecting post-Brexit Britain’s diminished influence. If he thinks the embattled streets of Kyiv offer him an escape route, he is mistaken. It is of paramount importance, too, that Putin is forcefully reminded of the severe economic consequences Russia will face if he ignores international law, common sense and basic decency by attacking the people of Ukraine. Punitive sanctions on his regime, and him personally, must swiftly ensue – and Germany, Hungary, Austria and other waverers must fall into line. Britain, too, must finally act to curb Russian money-laundering in London. It is to be profoundly hoped that Russia can yet be prevented from making a catastrophic mistake. For whatever doubts exist about Nato, about US motives, and about the wisdom of war-fighting in general – and there are many – the west did not seek nor does it want this fight. Ultimate responsibility plainly lies with Putin and with Putin’s lies. This is Putin’s conflict.Howard and I make a second visit to the plots since remedial work began and the padlocks changed. We can’t get in so we wander through the woods at the back and stand peering over the fence, like foundlings. The days are just a little longer. Daffodil shoots are starting to show in the woods. Bluebells can’t be too far away. There is a chill, but early signs of spring in the air. It is almost an ache, the separation. Locked out of love. The plot isn’t only about growing fruit and veg and flowers for me – though I carefully source our seed and take extreme care in how we work. Our gardening is a collaboration with soil. Listening to the land. A plant partnership. Husbandry. We are still at a standstill. I can’t bring myself to sort through the shelves and bags and bags and bowls of seed. They will wait until we’re granted parole. Or until Henri has finally lost her patience. We are starting discussions with an organic farmer friend of Jane Scotter about sourcing some of his cow manure. Edging close to ready for when the starter gun goes off. It’ll be like a land rush in the American West. All that’s missing are covered wagons. For now, allotment love has shifted back to the pots of bulbs on the roof terrace. I whisper quiet encouragement. Check on them every day. Like rabbits’ ears starting to stick through, the early narcissi are first to show: a true garden sign of spring. The plot may be delayed. But the year will shift soon enough. We will again gather together. We will dare to share our planting plans, think about working parties, perhaps a summer barbecue. Howard and I will hunt for pea and bean poles. For now, we take comfort in new growth, new life. We will commune over the garden wall and wait. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comDespite increasingly frantic warnings from Washington about an “imminent” attack, all-out war in Ukraine is not inevitable. Far from it. Russian president Vladimir Putin’s military pressure tactics are working. The west has been forced to listen to his grievances. Fighting could start soon. But US intelligence is not exact, and Moscow is adept at spreading disinformation and fear. Just as likely, this standoff could last months. Meanwhile, diplomacy still has a chance. The best hope remains the path to peace outlined last week by French president Emmanuel Macron during talks with Putin in Moscow. How shaming, and dangerous, that Boris Johnson’s government is so unsupportive. Brexit Britain, detached by choice from the EU and in thrall to US policy, is undermining European diplomatic efforts to defuse the crisis. The UK used to act as a transatlantic bridge and interlocutor. Now it’s become a barrier to understanding, doomed to irrelevance. Last week’s spectacle of Britain’s prime minister and foreign and defence secretaries, representing a once influential, respected nation, traipsing around Europe issuing vacuous threats was embarrassing. In Moscow, foreign minister Sergei Lavrov mocked the “slogans” spouted by Liz Truss, his UK counterpart. In Brussels, Johnson was grimly portentous – and clueless about what to do. Johnson’s choice of awayday destinations is instructive. So far he has served Christmas turkey to British troops in Tallinn, nabbed a substance-free photo op in Kyiv, and visited fellow EU-hating populists in Warsaw. Not exactly mainstream diplomacy. Gaffe-prone Truss, heir to Castlereagh, Balfour and Bevin, did not drive her Margaret Thatcher tank to the Kremlin, but she might as well have done for all the good her visit did. British policy on Ukraine remains clumsily focused on “deterrence”, not solutions. This basically means shouting at Russian president Vladimir Putin to back off – or else. Yet Britain has no “or else”. Through no fault of their own, its depleted, underfunded, poorly equipped armed forces make little difference to Kremlin calculations. The most potent unilateral UK weapon – effective measures to curb the laundering of stolen Russian money – has yet to be fully deployed, the result, perhaps, of the Conservative party’s avidity for red gold. When this government talks deterrence, it’s relying on others, principally the US, to do what it cannot or will not do itself. For all its posturing and fist-waving, Britain is barely in the diplomatic hunt. Few people other than worried leaders of the all but indefensible Baltic republics – who will take any help they can get – listen to London any more. Johnson and his cronies are reduced to snarky sniping from the sidelines as headline-grabbing French diplomacy leaves them trailing in the snow. Emmanuel Macron, Johnson’s bete noir and chief Brexit adversary, made important advances last week in face-to-face talks with Putin, sketching the outlines of a possible deal. Judging by Downing Street’s reaction, Johnson would prefer war to success for the French president. Anonymous officials and government sources variously accused Macron of betraying Nato, rewarding aggression, electioneering, and “waving a white flag” – Savile-style slurs happily amplified by Tory-backing, Francophobe commentators prating about appeasement and “Macron’s Munich moment”. When such a low is reached, it’s clear that post-Brexit failings, personal grudges and snide blame-games, coupled with isolated Britain’s chronic lack of ideas, clout, and responsible leadership, wax dangerous in the extreme. British attacks are not solely aimed at Paris. Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, loth to blow up gas supply lines from Russia, is criticised, as is the EU. Yet sour grapes aside, much of this cross-Channel barracking is calculated. It’s deliberately intended for American consumption. By confusing spite with independent thinking, such bilge supposedly demonstrates to a panicking US president, Joe Biden, that whatever those cowardly, sneaky Europeans may be up to, Britain remains Washington’s stalwart friend – even when Washington, blowing noisy trumpets, is drowning in its own hype. This, in short, is Johnson’s made-in-Brexitland foreign policy: hug America, screw Europe. It’s a distasteful appeal to a shared though vanishing Anglo-Saxon heritage. It’s cynical, self-harming, dishonest, divisive and, most dangerous of all, it’s a gift to Putin. It’s not Macron who threatens western unity. It’s Big Dog. What’s so terrible, for example, about neutrality for Ukraine? It’s obvious, despite rhetoric about open doors and sovereign rights, that US-led Nato does not want Kyiv to join the club. So say so candidly. It’s true the Minsk ceasefire deal after the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea, championed by Macron, is a fudge that means different things to different people. But it’s also a crucial product of the only peace process in town. So fudge some more. Buy some time. De-escalate. Are the Russians justified in complaining that Nato broke pledges to steer clear of Moscow’s post-Soviet borders? Yes, suggests Macron, inching towards Putin’s demand for “indivisible security” – meaning one state’s security does not undermine another’s. There is plainly scope for compromises here, especially if Putin keeps his reported promise to freeze the military buildup and pull troops out of Belarus. Trouble is, the US, egged on by Johnson’s tatty Churchill tribute act, rejects outright changes to Europe’s “security architecture”. It also favours Kyiv’s interpretation of what the Minsk agreements say should happen in the disputed Donbas region. And although the US promises to discuss limiting its deployment in Europe of new nuclear-capable, medium-range missiles – an alarming, largely undiscussed reprise of Washington’s 1980s cruise and Pershing missile cold war escalation – it insists that Putin back down first. That’s unrealistic. To sum up. Pariah Putin, an international hooligan, triggered the Ukraine crisis and is now exploiting it. Macron, representing France and the EU, is trying hard to resolve it. And ill-judged, hardline and hostile American and British attitudes may yet cause him to fail. Is this because Washington and London know what’s best for Europe? No. It’s because the US, projecting its national interests through Nato, and the feckless, lying windbag in Downing Street, cannot bear the thought of an empowered, strategically autonomous Europe successfully managing its own security. This is England. This is Brexit. This is dismal.Constabulary powers in the UK derive from the principle of policing by consent. Articulated by the first commissioners of the Metropolitan police in 1829, it is the principle that the power of the police is granted not through the instruments of the state but by the consent of the public. Police derive their legitimacy solely through the approval and respect of the communities they serve. The publication of the Macpherson inquiry report into the Met’s handling of the murder of the black teenager Stephen Lawrence in 1993 was a seminal moment for British policing. It exposed just how far its biggest police force had strayed from the principle of policing by consent and the extent of the appalling levels of institutional racism that had allowed the investigation into a racist murder to be so comprehensively bungled. The report’s findings should have led to a fundamental reset but, in recent years, the full extent of the institutional prejudices that live on in the Met have revealed themselves. Today, black people are nine times more likely to be stopped and searched by the police, up from five times more likely at the time the report was published in 1999. There have been yet more terrible failings. The rape and murder of Sarah Everard by a serving Met officer, jokingly dubbed “the rapist” by colleagues. The convictions of officers for sharing images of two murdered black women, Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman, and using “degrading and sexist” language about them. The failure of Met officers to take seriously the drugging and murder of men lured, using an online dating platform, by Stephen Port, which a jury found allowed more killings to proceed. The undercover Met officers who lied to women and conducted long-term sexual relationships with them. The misogyny, bullying and sexual harassment revealed in a police watchdog inquiry into Charing Cross police station, dismissed as “banter” by officers. Many were hopeful that Cressida Dick would bring a change in culture at the Met when she was appointed as the first female and openly gay commissioner five years ago. However, Dick has been a poor and defensive leader, putting loyalty to her rank and file – even when there is serious wrongdoing – far above her responsibility to win the consent of the public for policing in London. She has denied there is still institutional racism in the police and dismissed the findings of institutional corruption made by the independent panel that looked into the murder of Daniel Morgan. Rather than engage with the criticism of the police, she has depicted opponents as “armchair critics”. She has failed to grapple with the fact that policing attracts recruits with unsavoury motives who can take the opportunity to abuse power that a police uniform creates. And she has failed to reform a culture in which loyalty to fellow officers is prized above all else, including professional standards. There are insufficient incentives for officers to build positive relations with local communities and whistleblowing is too often career-ending. Little wonder, then, that she has overseen a decline in trust in policing in the capital, particularly among women. Dick’s resignation, announced last week, is therefore long overdue. However, it would be a mistake to think replacing her is sufficient to reform the problems we see in policing, not just in London but across the country. The public inquiry into the Mid-Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust helped set in train a series of reforms to improve patient safety; policing desperately needs a similar light to be shone on its toxic cultures. There must be a statutory inquiry into the state of policing by public consent in England and Wales.A British writer, presenter and former model says he is shocked to find himself at the centre of an unprecedented wave of book banning in the US. A Mississippi mayor has told the Madison County Library to remove LGBTQ+ books from its shelves or lose funding. One of the books singled out as an example was The Queer Bible, a collection of LGBTQ+ history essays edited by Jack Guinness. Ridgeland’s Republican mayor, Gene McGee, has refused to release funds to the library until “homosexual materials” are withdrawn. Tonja Johnson, executive director of the Madison County Library System, said when she told McGee that the library served the whole community, he replied that he only served “the great Lord above”. Guinness discovered his anthology had been caught up in the book ban on Twitter. “I couldn’t quite believe my eyes,” he told the Observer. “When you write a book, you kind of imagine people might read it, but you don’t imagine anyone will ban it. Referring to it as ‘homosexual material’ – that’s the sort of phrase my grandmother would have used to talk about my jeans.” Guinness, once described by GQ magazine as “the coolest man in Britain”, worked as a model after university for fashion labels such as Dolce &amp; Gabbana, Gucci and Dunhill and became a famous face on the capital’s social scene. He was friends with Pixie Geldof, DJ Nick Grimshaw and musician Florence Welch, and used to be Alexa Chung’s flatmate. He soon segued from modelling into work as a presenter and as a writer for Vogue, GQ and the Guardian. Since starting the Queer Bible as a website in 2017, he has been included in Attitude magazine’s trailblazers list of exceptional LGBTQ contributors to the arts. He is also now a member of London mayor Sadiq Khan’s diversity in the public realm commission. The Queer Bible is a book of essays “by queer heroes about their queer heroes”. Contributors include Sir Elton John, Graham Norton, designer Tan France, skier Gus Kenworthy and model Munroe Bergdorf. It is adapted from the website, which showcases LGBTQ+ people and stories. “I identified gaps in my knowledge about figures in queer history. People have had to hide their identity in the past to protect themselves, or stories have been straightwashed to fit into an accepted narrative.” Guinness and other Queer Bible contributors joined crowdfunding efforts to replace the $110,000 (£81,000) withheld by the mayor. The target has now been reached. He says he’s as surprised as anyone to find himself a campaigner. “I never imagined this would happen. I created The Queer Bible selfishly for myself because I wanted to read about queer heroes. Now I’m taking part in a campaign to fight a Mississippi mayor. It’s a surreal place to be and I feel very honoured. What keeps me going is that that this isn’t about me. It’s about using my platform so other people can tell their stories.” The American Library Association has recorded an unprecedented rise in campaigns to ban books in the last year. New legislation introduced in states such as Texas and Oklahoma has made it easier to remove books about black and LGBTQ+ stories on the grounds that “they may cause upset or stress”. Parents are behind many campaigns after getting hands-on experience of curriculum texts during pandemic home schooling. “It’s terrifying to think that one individual, due to their personal beliefs, can withhold texts from an entire community,” said Guinness. “I grew up under section 28, which forbade the promotion of homosexuality in schools. An entire generation grew up without information about their history or any understanding that they were not freaks. “Banning any book is also a slippery slope. In certain countries, LGBTQ+ people do benefit from equal rights but this shows how easy it is for things to slip. There is a shift, an idea of criminalising or deleting certain communities. Today it’s the queer community – tomorrow it could be your community.”You’d be forgiven for thinking there isn’t much going on here. Because that’s the point. A modern version of the full face, it’s a look that should have admirers saying, “You look great!” as opposed to “Your makeup looks great!” Try a golden Miracle Balm from Jones Road – it doubles up as an understated eye shadow and a hint of colour on the lips. A creamy blush will leave a natural flush and make a beeline for the new foundations that make your skin look like, well, skin. That’s the key to this look – keeping it sheer. 1. Huda Beauty Glowish Vegan Blush £18, feelunique.com 2. Victoria Beckham Beauty Cheeky Posh in Rollerskate £36, victoriabeckhambeauty.com 3. Dior Miss Dior Palette £110, dior.com 4. Jones Road Miracle Balm £34, jonesroadbeauty.com 5. Estée Lauder Double Wear Sheer Long Wear Makeup £35, esteelauder.com I can’t do without… A gentle, foaming cleanser that really does the business In the days when I knew much less than I know now, I probably would have given this cleanser a wide berth. The word ‘gentle’ used to set alarm bells off in my head. To me, it was a euphemism for: ‘I don’t actually do much.’ Gentle often meant poor results. I needed products that made bolder statements. But over the years I’ve come to understand that skincare should always be gentle – your skin barrier demands it – but you shouldn’t have to compromise on efficacy. Another thing that would have made me run a mile is the word ‘foam’. Too reminiscent of the paint-stripping stuff I was recommended as an acne-prone teen. Foam, they said, was the ultimate sign of a good cleanse. And if you had breakouts, it was because you just weren’t cleansing enough. Thankfully, these myths have long been debunked. And thank goodness for that because I would have missed out on this cleanser, which, frankly, is a triumph. Yes, it’s gentle and yes it foams, but forget what you once thought. The formulation is fantastic. It cleans brilliantly, leaves no residue and, thanks to the vitamin C, is also brightening. When I noticed my supply was close to running out, I went to order it online and it was sold out. I had a mild panic. It is now back in stock so I will be bulk buying. When you try it, you’ll do the same. Beauty Pie Super Healthy Skin Gentle Foamy Face Wash, from £9.96, beautypie.com On my radar… For you and your home, tempting fresh scents Deep soak This gorgeous new bath scent – grapefruit, bitter orange and lime – smells incredible. It’ll leave your mind invigorated and your skin hydrated. Jo Loves a Bath Cologne, £35, joloves.com Back to nature Looking for something that goes against the usual ‘Valentine’ fragrances? Then try this citrussy and woody wonder. Inspired by nature, it is fresh, green and grown up. Cartier Declaration, £67, johnlewis.com Up in smoke My default setting for candles tends to be smoky or green. But this tuberose candle is irresistible. The clever addition of sandalwood stops it from being too cloying. Bella Freud Loving Candle, £50, cultbeauty.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoLabour will put the fight against crime at the heart of its campaign for May’s local elections amid signs that the scandal enveloping Boris Johnson over alleged lockdown-busting gatherings in Downing Street is badly damaging the Tories’ reputation as the party of law and order. The move by Keir Starmer’s party comes as Conservative MPs say they are being told by local councillors and constituency associations that they don’t want the prime minister to go on the campaign trail or appear on party literature before the polls on 5 May because the issue of rule-breaking parties inside No 10 is so toxic. One Tory MP told the Observer: “My association members told me it would be better if the PM stayed away and that they wanted it to be all about local people campaigning on local issues. They think our only chance of doing OK is to keep those associated with partygate out of sight altogether.” Last week – in a sign that Johnson is seen by Tory strategists as more of an election liability than an asset – the Conservatives put out a party political broadcast that made no mention of him at all, referring only to what it claimed was a list of the government’s achievements, such as the vaccine programme. Labour, however, is determined to remind people of Johnson’s part in the scandal, and highlight the questions that the controversy raises about respect for the law and commitment to tackling crime. The shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, said there was a clear link between Johnson’s lack of respect for rules in No 10 and his party’s failure to prioritise tackling crime in local areas. “Boris Johnson shows a total lack of respect for the rule of law in Downing Street and a total lack of respect for people who are suffering when the law breaks down in their communities,” Cooper said. “We will be campaigning strongly on crime in the local election campaign because our communities deserve so much better.” Alarmingly for the Conservatives, the latest polling figures from Opinium show Labour is now in the lead on the issue of crime. Thirty-two per cent of people said that they thought Starmer’s party would handle the issue best, against 29% who preferred the Conservatives. No 10 has confirmed that the prime minister, along with about 50 other people, had been sent a questionnaire by the Metropolitan police about parties in Downing Street which they are expected to complete “truthfully” within seven days. Labour says Johnson and his party have also resorted to misrepresenting crime figures to hide their poor record. Earlier this month, the head of the UK Statistics Authority reprimanded the prime minister and the Home Office run by Priti Patel for saying that crime had fallen by 14%, when this excluded the fastest-rising category, fraud and computer crime. Sir David Norgrove said he would be writing to the PM and home secretary to highlight what he called their “misleading” use of statistics. When fraud and computer crime are factored in, the latest official data shows that crime is now 14% higher than before the pandemic, with the rate of cases which result in charges having fallen to a record low of just 6% of reported crimes. Police figures also show that since the end of lockdown last summer, recorded crime has increased significantly, including steep increases in violent offences, which are now 20% higher than in the same period before the pandemic. At the same time, the proportion of cases leading to charges of violence against the person has fallen from 14.6% in 2016 to just 5.4% in 2021. That means prosecutions for only one in 20 violent crimes. Charge rates for robbery have fallen from 12.2% in 2015 to 6.9% in 2021, those for theft have fallen from 8.3% to 4.3%, and those for rape have fallen from 5.9% to just 1.3%. The local elections across England, Wales and Scotland will be a huge electoral test for the Tories and a moment of high risk for Johnson, if he has not by then already been ousted from Downing Street in a confidence vote by his own MPs. Cooper said Labour was determined to show it was the “true party of law and order” by promoting its own policies, including putting neighbourhood “police hubs” back in communities to tackle crime. A newOpinium poll for the Observer shows Labour is now also neck and neck with the Tories when voters are asked which party would be best at running the economy, another area where the Conservatives have traditionally been strong. Some 30% say the Tories would run the economy best, against 29% who say Labour. Overall, based upon on a new methodology used for the first time by Opinium last week, Labour is on 37%, with the Tories on 34%. The Lib Dems are on 11%, Greens on 6%, SNP on 3%, Plaid on 1%, and others on 8%. Opinium says the new methodology gives a more accurate picture of where voters sit. But the company says that the figures do not represent any fall-off in support for Labour – if the old methodology had been used, the headline figures would have put Labour up three points on a fortnight ago on 42% and the Conservatives down two on 32%.What time are you up? 5.30am. I’ve always risen early – it’s nice, you get lots done before you’re hassled by everyone else. What were Sundays like growing up? My dad was from the north – where I grew up – but Mum was of Central European stock, so in the week we’d eat non-British things. On a Sunday, Dad claimed his heritage with roast beef and a Yorkshire. It was the only time I saw my parents drink – Dad would buy a bottle of wine. My sister and I might have apple juice – otherwise we’d drink water. What’s on the box? I haven’t watched telly since the 80s, but if we’re knackered, we’ll stick a film on. Em [Wise’s wife Emma Thompson] has won an Oscar or two, so we’re sent DVDs from the Academy. It’s pot luck, because you don’t know what you’re watching, but often we’ll see stuff before it’s out in the cinema, which is lovely. A Sunday tipple? I get confused with Sunday lunch and drinking. I think: ‘If I start now, do I keep drinking?’ I prefer lunch to start at 4pm, then we can put the fire on, and I can have my weissbier at normal beer time. Cocktail hour slipped when our daughter was tiny. It came forward by a couple of hours, but 5pm is my cut-off – any earlier and I’m in trouble. A Sunday roast? My dear lady wife is a big fan of a Sunday spread. The last Sunday lunch I cooked was ossobuco – the bit of the cow from the knee down. It makes the butcher grumpy because he’s got to saw through the bone to make 2in slices. There’s a nice chunk of meat on it, and wonderful bone marrow in the middle. I sear it, then cook it for 4-5 hours in onion, celery and white wine, and garnish it with gremolata, which is parsley, lemon zest and raw garlic. If you’ve got it right, it just melts. Then you suck out the beautiful bone marrow. I’m thrilled if other people don’t want to, because then I can eat theirs. Greg Wise supports the Good Grief Trust (thegoodgrieftrust.org)With that, we’ll wrap up the live news blog for today. Here were the day’s main news developments: The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has ordered the evacuation of the Australian embassy in Kyiv, warning the situation in Ukraine has reached a dangerous stage. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has labelled his government’s byelection results “disappointing across the board” after earlier vowing to win back voters who handed Labor the seat of Bega in Saturday’s byelection. There were 47 Covid deaths announced across Australia on Sunday, as Western Australia’s premier Mark McGowan warned that Covid rules could tighten further. Shoes, women’s fashion and stationery are just some of the goods Australian shoppers face difficulty finding on shelves as an international shipping crisis sparked by the Covid-19 pandemic shows little sign of abating. Olympian Jemima Montag has broken a longstanding Australian record in the 20km walk. Thanks for following along. Have a great evening. The expansion of McDonald’s over the next two years will see a big push into regional Australia, which experts say bodes well for local economies but not their population’s health. Of 100 new McDonald’s Australia restaurants set to open in the next two years, about a third will be opening in regional and remote areas. Cameron Newlands, a senior director of the restaurant group, said growth in population as well as investment from government and business in regional areas was driving where they would open. “Anywhere north of 5,000 [people] is something we’d consider,” Newlands said. “But other characteristics like traffic flow, tourism and growth potential are just as important.” But the move could be controversial in towns that have battled to keep the fast-food giant out of their backyards. Tecoma, on the edge of Melbourne, fought unsuccessfully to stop a McDonald’s development and Tamworth council faced controversy when it approved its fourth Mcdonald’s outlet in a town that suffers high rates of obesity. Megan Belot, the president of the Rural Doctors Association of Australia, said the expansion was not a positive outcome for rural patients who already have an increased risk of obesity. “It’s nice to think that there’s going to be more jobs and opportunities for our younger people to work in a place like McDonald’s, but realistically we don’t need fast food in our smaller rural communities,” Belot said. Read more: An aerial photo of the anti-vaccine mandate protesters in Canberra. Police have ordered them to leave the Canberra showgrounds by today. This image was taken at about 12.30pm today. Nationals deputy leader David Littleproud says he has tested positive for Covid, on the eve of federal parliament returning on Monday. Littleproud tweeted that he got a PCR test after he “woke up feeling unwell”, which returned a positive result. “I have had vaccinations and a booster and will now comply with ACT health orders,” he said on Sunday afternoon. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has labelled his government’s byelection results “disappointing across the board” after earlier vowing to win back voters who handed Labor the seat of Bega in Saturday’s byelection. As early counts showed the government had suffered double-digit swings in two of four Super Saturday byelections, the government has resigned itself to losing Bega for the first time since the seat was created in 1988. By midday on Sunday, with 25% of the vote counted, Labor’s candidate Michael Holland had picked up a 14% swing which will see the opposition win the seat barring an overwhelming shift back to the Liberal government when postal votes are counted. At a press conference on Sunday, Perrottet did not seek to sugarcoat the loss, calling it “particularly disappointing” while adding that byelections were traditionally difficult for incumbent governments. He said: There is certainly messages for us to look at in terms of what we are doing on the ground. In addition to that, I think ultimately when you are in a pandemic you are going to make decisions from that time to time will be unpopular. Our job as a government is to take our state through and we are doing that. Every seat is different. But obviously Bega was particularly disappointing yesterday.” Read more: I’m about to finish up for today, so I’m going to hand over the blog once again to Elias Visontay who will continue to bring you the news into the evening. Thanks so much for keeping me company today! Some uncertainty remains among economists around this week’s key labour force figures for January due to the impact of the Omicron Covid-19 variant on activity, the AAP reports. The jobs market has been making a strong rebound from last year’s Delta strain lockdowns, which has seen the unemployment rate tumble to a 13-year low of 4.2%. The Reserve Bank of Australia and the federal government are both predicting the jobless rate to fall below 4% this year, a level not seen in some 50 years. However, economists don’t expect that to happen just yet. The Australian Bureau of Statistics will release the January labour force report on Thursday. It’s uncertain whether people gave up looking for work in despair over another virus outbreak, particularly such a highly infectious variant as Omicron. So even if the January employment numbers are more subdued, a fall in the participation rate – those in work or seeking employment – could actually see another drop in the jobless rate. Economists’ forecasts centre on the unemployment rate nudging down to 4.1%, although expectations range from 4% to 4.4%. Predictions for employment point to a flat or unchanged result, but again forecasts range from a 60,000 fall to a 59,000 rise. I reported on WA’s Covid-19 case numbers earlier (68 cases, at least 38 of which are locally acquired). But here is the official post with today’s figures. We can see that there are currently no patients in hospital with the virus. Further to my earlier post, here is the South Australia Covid-19 update today. Senator Bridget McKenzie and minister for the environment Sussan Ley have released a joint press release announcing that the Liberal and Nationals government has allocated another $50m from the emergency response fund (ERF) to continue to protect communities from the effects of natural disaster. According to the release, the new Coastal and Estuarine Risk Mitigation Program is aimed at reducing the often devastating impacts on local communities of natural disasters and coastal hazards, such as storm surges and coastal inundation. In the statement, Ley acknowledged the impact that climate change is having on increasing the risk of coastal storm surges, flooding and associated coastal inundation. “As climate change heightens the risk of such events, we are taking action to strengthen the resilience of our coastal environments and reduce the impacts on communities, property owners, local tourism economies and native species,” she said. The AAP reports that two women in South Australia, both in their 80s, tragically died after testing positive for Covid-19. There are 211 people with Covid receiving hospital treatment, including 17 in intensive care and five require a ventilator. South Australia has 13,621 active virus cases and 151 people have died with Covid since the start of the pandemic. Premier Mark McGowan says the government will consider restrictions as cases increase, AAP reports. Currently WA has an indoor mask mandate and vaccination requirements to enter certain venues. “We haven’t actually made a decision on when [further restrictions] will come in, but at some point in time they will come in,” McGowan said on Sunday. WA continues to add to its stockpile of rapid antigen tests but McGowan says PCR testing will remain the preferred method so long as the state has capacity. The so-called “super Saturday” byelection results may be bad for the New South Wales government, but they are not surprising. While the full results won’t be known for weeks thanks to an increase in postal voting, it was clear by Saturday evening that the government had lost Bega for the first time since the seat was created in the 1980s. The Guardian’s Michael McGowan writes that, for the Coalition, the results are a troubling reflection of how voters have responded to Dominic Perrottet’s handling of Omicron. Read the article in full here: You would have to spray aerosol sunscreen for a few minutes per limb to achieve the SPF protection that’s labelled on many products, the Cancer Council warns. Our friends at the AAP have the full story: The Cancer Council and the Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency have together urged Australians to choose lotion over aerosol sunscreen as much of the spray is lost in the wind, rendering it less effective. Their research into the impact of wind on the application of sunscreen has found the proportion of aerosol sunscreen lost due to typical wind conditions ranged between 32% and 93%. The study found that four of the five sunscreen products tested would require more than one bottle to provide adequate full-body coverage in 20km/h wind conditions. A person would need to spray an aerosol sunscreen in some cases for “up to 250 seconds per limb” to achieve the SPF protection as labelled on the product, the council said. Chair of Cancer Council Australia’s national skin cancer committee, Heather Walker, said the council welcomed the Therapeutic Goods Administration’s recent announcement of a review into the efficacy of aerosol sunscreens. “With aerosol sunscreens, it is very difficult to obtain the amount of sunscreen to the body that is necessary to get good UV protection, potentially leaving Australians’ skin inadequately protected from harmful UV radiation and increasing their skin cancer risk,” Walker said. New Zealand Covid cases have jumped sharply to 810 today, almost doubling from the previous record high (which was 454, yesterday). The leap suggests New Zealand is hitting its exponential growth curve. A written statement from the Ministry of Health said: The sharp increase in new cases today is another reminder that, as expected, the highly transmissible Omicron variant is now spreading in our communities as we have seen in other countries. Our expectation is that cases will continue to increase over the coming weeks and we’re asking people to do all they can to slow the spread of the virus and protect themselves and their whānau [families]. McGowan is asked about the news that Touriam Australia is launching an international advert called “Don’t go small, go Australia”. But, the journalist points out, WA won’t be included in the campaign since the state’s borders aren’t open yet, and asks McGowan whether the federal government was going rogue on WA. McGowan: Well eventually we will open to international tourists and we will have the financial capacity above and beyond the other states to attract international tourists because we kept Covid out. We have the best financial performance of any state or government in Australia so we will have the capacity to put in bigger, better tourism campaigns and bigger, better campaigns to attract international students ... we will no doubt join it at some point in the future. When the journalist remarked the tourism campaign had a “bit of a strange title”, McGowan chuckled “I couldn’t possibly comment”. McGowan says the original plan to open the borders on 5 February would have meant “opening the border with no protection when the eastern states were peaking”. He notes that the rate of Covid-19 infection in those states are now going down but that the “vaccine rate is the main issue”. All we are trying to do is save people’s lives. Older people, immunocompromised people ... When you look at Australia compared to the rest of the world ... our performance has been hugely better and in Western Australia obviously we have had two people here acquire the virus and pass away. Getting people vaccinated works and that’s why we’ve done it, that’s why we’ve made the decisions we’ve made. McGowan is asked about reports that the new date for bringing down the border that will happen within days or a week. He says that there “hasn’t been any decision on that”. What we will do is review this matter over the course of February and we are currently looking at it, as you know. The review is based upon the growth in vaccinations, which is going up very quickly, we are basically at 50% third dose. WA health minister Amber-Jade Sanderson says the state government is also launching the “Managing Covid-19” campaign to help “prepare and empower West Australians with information on how to manage living with the virus”. This is particularly important given we are experiencing high caseload and have recently implemented new testing and isolation protocols to respond to this. It’s essential that people understand what they need to do and when stopping the campaign communicates the definition of a close contact, testing and isolation and how businesses can prepare to manage Covid if a staff member returns a positive result. It will run across television, radio, print and digital, including metropolitan and regional areas and on culturally and linguistically diverse and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander channels. WA premier Mark McGowan is talking about the state’s rapid antigen test supply. McGowan says that PCR testing facilities have the capacity for 35,000 tests per day. He says the state government has 8.8m RAT test in stock and that number is growing each and every day. This coming week, our stocks are expected to hit 11.2m RATs. Based on our current orders we anticipate having more than 100m RAT tests by the end of April. Of the 68 new cases, 38 are locally-acquired, 25 are travel-related, and a further five cases are being followed up by contact tracers. WA Premier Mark McGowan is addressing journalists in Perth. The woman was aged in her 50s was from the Tiwi Islands and had underlying health conditions. She passed away on 11 February at Royal Darwin hospital and her death was confirmed by NT Health last night. There have now been 10 Covid-related deaths recorded in the Northern Territory since the start of the pandemic. Labor’s Chris Minns, the New South Wales opposition leader, has called on premier Dominic Perrottet to “take a message” from the significant swings the Coalition suffered across multiple seats in four byelections on Sunday. Minns said: This is a big message to the NSW premier to lift his game and listen to the people of NSW to do better at his job, to understand what the experts are saying, not just supporters of his own hunches or ideology but instead listen to experts. It is no good for hundreds of thousands of people to register their unhappiness with the direction of the government and then for the senior levels, including the premier of NSW, to simply say nothing has changed, we don’t hear the message at all. We want the NSW government to do better. That may sound strange for the opposition to say that but we are in the middle of a pandemic and our focus is on the people of NSW.” Minns, who was speaking from Bega, said despite Labor appearing to have taken the seat from the Liberal party and retain its seat of Strathfield, said “there is no victory celebrations for us”. He said: It is back to work today. We have an important job on behalf the people of this state ... I think it is important we do not draw from the NSW voters a message that they did not send. There is no mandate for NSW Labor. We have to earn that and we will do that over the next 12 months and that process starts today. Covid continues to spread in Tasmania. There were 371 new cases announced on Sunday. There are currently 10 Covid patients in hospitals across the state, with just one person in intensive care. The below tweet – which is not from an official government account – breaks down the latest numbers, which are identical to the state health department’s daily numbers release here. Health authorities in Queensland have announced four new Covid deaths on Sunday. There are 496 people in hospital with Covid across the state, 45 of whom are in intensive care. There were 7,311 new Covid-19 cases announced on Sunday. I’m going to hand the blog over to the brilliant Elias Visontay to bring you the news over lunch! Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has said his government will commit $200,000 to local organisations supporting the LGBTQI+ community after national debate around the federal government’s religious discrimination bill. “The recent unnecessary, hurtful public debate around legal protections for young LGBTQ+ Australians has had a significant impact on their wellbeing and that of their families and loved ones,” Andrews said in a statement. The extra support will help organisations such as Switchboard Victoria, Thorne Harbour Health and Drummond Street, Transcend and Parents of Gender Diverse Children manage increased demand for mental health services, referrals and peer support. Our friends at AAP have more on Adelaide’s North-South corridor announcement this morning. The Morrison government is injecting an additional $2.26bn into Adelaide’s so-called North-South corridor, a project that will deliver 78km of non-stop motorway once complete. The new funding will bring the federal government’s total commitment to the project to $6.8bn. “Our government, together with the Marshall government, is getting on with delivering what is the most significant infrastructure project ever undertaken in South Australia,” prime minister Scott Morrison said in a statement on Sunday. “The investment in this project alone is expected to support around 4900 jobs and slash travel times by up to 20 minutes between the River Torrens and Darlington and help ensure South Australians get home to family and friends safely.” SA premier Steven Marshall said the partnership with the Morrison government enables projects that make a real difference to the everyday lives of South Australians. “This once-in-a-generation project is going to create a record number of jobs for South Australians and underpin the construction industry for the next ten years,” Marshall said. The Tasmania Fire Service has issued a watch and cct bushfire warning for Pipers Brook, Lebrina, Wyena and Golconda in Tasmania’s north. This fire is travelling north-west, towards Ferny Hill Road in Golconda, and is expected to impact these areas by within the next two to six hours. “Weather conditions predicted ... include unpredictable gusting winds and are expected to challenge fire crews on the fire ground,” the TFS said in a statement. Olympian Jemima Montag has broken a longstanding Australian record in the 20km walk, AAP reports. Montag has eclipsed Jane Saville’s record set in 2004 with a stunning performance at the Oceania and Australian 20km race walking championships. Montag clocked one hour 27.34 seconds in Adelaide on Sunday morning, a time some 10 seconds inside Saville’s previous benchmark. “It feels surreal at the moment,” Montag said. Montag finished Sunday’s race more than four minutes ahead of her Tokyo Olympic teammate Rebecca Henderson (1:31:44). In the men’s 20km walk, Declan Tingay captured his maiden national title – he clocked 1:20:44 to also earn selection for the world championships. Victorians could join other Australians for the easing of Covid-19 rules, with Premier Daniel Andrews eyeing changes to check-in codes, AAP reports. “The use of QR codes is under very active review at the moment, as are all of our rules and we hope to make some announcements quite soon,” the premier told reporters on Sunday. Now that we’ve hit the peak of Omicron, now those cases are coming down, we do have some room to make some refinements and adjustments. Andrews said Victoria aimed to be in lockstep with NSW on rules and the state’s northern neighbour was planning to ease check-in requirements by the end of February. Victoria’s density limits also being reviewed, he noted. QR coding at the moment is not being used for the purposes of contact tracing because there is no contact tracing. “What it’s used for at the moment is to validate that a person has the green tick [vaccination] and can be in certain locations. For consistency’s sake, QR coding still operates in some settings where you don’t need to be vaccinated, like the local supermarket. Perrottet once again reflected on the government’s loss in Bega. He acknowledged that the community was hard hit by the bushfires, implying that could have played a role in last night’s outcome. It’s the community in Bega that’s gone through a very difficult time off the back of the bushfires. And I will look into that ... I certainly felt that on the ground. I met with many people in that community who are still doing it tough. I mean, the recovery in those areas from the bushfires is still ongoing and the feedback on the ground, is it will take many years. So I – we can certainly – certainly reflect on that. Perrottet reflected on his government’s handling of the pandemic. He criticised the Western Australian premier Mark McGowan for taking the populist approach to restrictions, saying he was a “highly popular premier with a lockdown mentality”. Now, that works in the short term, it doesn’t work in the long term. And ultimately in a pandemic or in any situation like the one we found ourselves in you have got to make sure you are always doing what’s right. Importantly you have got to communicate that, you have to take the community with you. A journalist asked Perrottet if he took any personal responsibility for the break down in communication in Bega given that he wasn’t there meeting people in the days leading up to the byelection. He pointed out that he had been in Bega previously, but also defended his absence, saying “my job is to government for the state”. But he said he takes responsibility for the result. I’m the leader of the government and my job is to communicate clearly where our state is going, and on – and ensure we continue to move forward. That’s exactly what we are doing. Ultimately as a leader it falls on me. It is my responsibility. But I am incredibly confident in the direction of our state. I’m incredibly confident in our people to move forward. Perrottet also added that byelections are “notoriously hard for governments”. Perrottet says there are “certainly lessons to be taken” from the Liberals’ likely loss of Bega. There is certainly messages for us to look at in terms of what we are doing on the ground and we are doing a lot ... In addition to that, I think ultimately when you are in a pandemic you are going to make decisions that time to time will be unpopular. Our job as a government is to take our state through and we are doing that ... Every seat is different. But obviously Bega was particularly disappointing yesterday. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking in Sydney about the government’s byelection results, including the likely loss of Bega to Labor. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 47 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 458 In hospital: 50 (with four people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 22 Cases: 6,686 In hospital: 1,614 (with 93 people in ICU) NT Deaths: one Cases: 757 Queensland Deaths: four Cases: 7,311 In hospital: 496 (with 45 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: two Cases: 1,165 In hospital: 211 (with 17 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 371 In hospital: 10 (with one person in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 18 Cases: 7,223 In hospital: 465 (with 62 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 68 In hospital: 0 There are now 50 people in hospital with the virus. Four patients in the ICU, of which two require ventilation. Some advice from the Liberal party’s James Paterson ahead of Valentine’s Day tomorrow: A moment of lightness (actually I can’t tell if this is a funny story, or a sad sign of the times) for your morning: The BBC has reported that authorities in New Zealand have been playing Barry Manilow’s greatest hits, along with the Macarena, in an attempt to dislodge anti-vaccine mandate protesters camped outside the parliament building. Apparently the demonstrators responded with the song We’re Not Gonna Take It by the Twisted Sisters. Federal minister Keith Pitt has played down the impact of Saturday’s results on the federal election in a few months time, AAP reports. “Generally these things don’t reflect into a federal result. Voters know the difference between each level of government,” Pitt told Sky News’ Sunday Agenda program He also brushed off comments by NSW treasurer Matt Kean who said the recent dramas around the federal government didn’t help the Coalition brand heading into the four byelections. “If Mr Kean is looking for someone to blame he might want to have a look in the mirror.” The byelections came after a week in the federal parliament where five Liberal MPs crossed the floor on a Labor0amended sex discrimination bill, as part of the Religious Discrimination Act, and alleged leaks from the cabinet. But Pitt insists the ministry is a very strong unit, while adding that Coalition MPs are entitled to cross the floor, whereas they would be expelled if they were in the Labor party. But he was disappointed by those who crossed the floor because they did not tell their colleagues or the prime minister of their intentions. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese said this government is driven by “disunity, dysfunction and dishonesty” and needs some time in opposition. I want to talk about one more comment that Scott Morrison made during the presser in Adelaide this morning. The PM was asked about how inflation rates were affecting people overseas and whether that was of concern to him and Australia. And somehow the conversation very quickly turned to the election and “issues facing liberal democracies like Australia” more broadly. Morrison then said: Yesterday we had a protest by the union movement against the Aukus agreement. There are only two principle opponents against the Aukus agreement, and they both have a one-way bet each way on Albo. The comments came after defence minister Peter Dutton suggested during question time this week that China had picked Anthony Albanese as its election candidate. The comments were criticised by former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull who said they had “no basis in fact”. As Guardian Australia’s Daniel Hurst wrote: “For weeks Scott Morrison and his defence minister have been suggesting voters must not be lulled into a false sense of national security bipartisanship. Only the Coalition, their argument goes, can be trusted not to ‘appease’ China.” Morrison was also asked to reflect on the byelection results yesterday, which saw the Liberal party lose the safe seat of Bega to Labor for the first time in history. Instead of commenting on Bega, though, Morrison focuses on Liberal candidate Bridget Sakr’s performance in Strathfield. To be clear, Labor looks to retain the seat with a 0.6% swing against them. But in a night of losses and significantly larger swings against the Liberal party, you can see why Morrison would default to talking about this as a win. One reporter flags that US president Joe Biden has said that if Russia invades Ukraine, they will be met with a transnational response. Asked whether Australia would be part of that response, Morrison said “there is no suggestion that Australia would be involved in that way”. Morrison is back to announce a $40m program to support Australia reopening its borders to international tourists. He says the campaign with Tourism Australia will launch today. Morrison says the government is also lifting the biosecurity provisions that relate to cruise ships. States and territories will now be able to make their own decisions about how to open up their cruise ship operations. Morrison says that won’t happen immediately, but they are putting Australia in the best place to open up that business again. Morrison is in Adelaide by the way, with premier Steven Marshall, talking about the North-South Corridor, a route for north and south bound traffic, including freight vehicles. The project has been made possible through collaboration between the state and federal governments, hence why the prime minister is there. Morrison said that the “autocratic, unilateral actions of Russia to be threatening and bullying Ukraine is something that is completely and utterly unacceptable”. He also noted the Chinese government criticised Australia overnight for working with our allies “to provide greater humanitarian relief”, and “yet remain chillingly silent on Russian troops amassing on the Ukrainian border”. “The coalition of autocracies that we’re seeing seeking to bully other countries is not something that Australia ever takes a light position on and not something that my government ever has. My government has always stood up to anyone who seeks to bully or coerce Australia, and the bullying that we are seeing on the borders of Ukraine is unacceptable,” Morrison said. Prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking live about the evolving situation in Ukraine. Back to Keneally’s comments on Insiders. Speers asked the shadow home affairs minister about defence minister Peter Dutton’s comment that China wants Labor to win the election. Has that comment, has that suggestion damaged Australia’s national security, do you think? Keneally replied: This is a desperate government, so desperate to distract from its own incompetence that it is now weaponising national security ... This weaponisation of national security – it is divisive and dangerous. It flies in the face of the advice of the Asio director general Mike Burgess when he said using fear of foreign interference to stoke division in the community is as corrosive as foreign interference itself. So this is a divisive and dangerous tactic by Peter Dutton, and we really do need to understand that it undermines our national security agencies and it undermines our national security framework. This discussion was followed by a LOT of back and forth between Speers and Keneally, as Speers tried to work out where Labor stood on the controversial statement-of-belief clause in the government’s religious discrimination bill. For context, the clause would protect religious statements even if they offend, insult or humiliate others on the basis of protected attributes. The Guardian’s Paul Karp has written more about it here. Keneally kept pointing to the fact that they sought to amend this part of the bill. What, our concerns about statement of belief came down to the fact that it would in fact quite likely make it harder for people of faith and other people to achieve protection from discrimination because of the way it interacts with state and territory law. But, as Speers pointed out, it was unclear what Labor’s statement of belief would do, to which Keneally replied that she wasn’t sure Labor would necessarily have one. When pressed again she said: David, we are not going to govern from opposition. The Prime Minister put forward this legislation. Things get trickier when Speers asked Keneally whether Labor believes schools should be allowed to hire and fire teachers based on whether they are gay or transgender under the law. Keneally started by saying that “Labor also supports the right of religious schools, faith-based schools to be able to hire staff, whether it is teachers or other staff, that support the mission and the values of the school.” When pressed, she said that most religious schools don’t seek to discriminate against gay and transgender staff, adding that she doesn’t think they should. Ultimately, Keneally kept coming back to the point that “teachers and other staff are in a slightly different category than children”. And so it’s straightforward with children, we think there are some slight complexities with teachers and staff that should be looked at by the Australian Law Reform Commission.” Speers starts by asking the shadow minister whether Labor will remove the ability for religious schools to discriminate against and turn away gay and transgender kids, if they win the election. Keneally says no: David, let’s look at what Labor did in the parliament this week. We do believe that people of faith deserve protection from discrimination and extending the law to do that and we think that should not come at the expense of increasing discrimination to other groups of people. We also believe that students at school should be protected and that reflected in the amendments we moved and supported. So we would like to see the government now accept that amendment that has been supported by the House of Representatives with those five Liberals crossing the floor, and they should just get this bill done. The prime minister promised some years ago to people of faith he would provide this legislative protection. He promised in writing that he would protect children. He is – if he is going to break that promise, he needs to explain it to the Australian people. Kristina Keneally is up on ABC Insiders. The ABC Insiders panel are discussing the government’s controversial religious discrimination bill, which was debated and then indefinitely shelved in parliament this week. The Guardian spoke to Rev Josephine Inkpin, the first transgender priest to be inducted into a mainstream church in Australia. “It has been a gruesome week. It’s like you’re in a war, really, and there’s a little ceasefire at the moment, but there’s a promise of a new battle to come,” she said. ABC Insiders with David Speers is about to start. Speers will be speaking to shadow minister Kristina Keneally. As always, I will be live blogging the interview. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne has said the government has temporarily suspended operations at the Australian embassy in Ukraine and directed staff to leave, given the region’s deteriorating security situation. In a statement, Payne said the government will instead be moving its operations to a temporary office in Lviv, and renewed calls for Australian in Ukraine to leave immediately, adding that “security conditions could change at short notice”. Another huge story this morning is the evolving situation in Ukraine. The US president Joe Biden has spent over an hour on the phone to his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, in what is widely seen as a last-ditch effort to fend off a Russian invasion of Ukraine. The US has warned the invasion could start as early as Wednesday. According to a statement from the White House, Biden said the US “was prepared to engage in diplomacy”, but told Putin that the US and its allies would impose “swift and severe costs on Russia” should Russia undertake a further invasion of Ukraine. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said Australian citizens in Ukraine should leave the country as soon as possible as the situation continues to escalate. “Our advice is clear, this is a dangerous situation ... you should seek to make your way out of Ukraine,” Morrison said in Sydney on Saturday. Good morning! It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here to bring you the news today on Sunday 13 February 2022. Let’s catch up: One of the biggest stories this morning is the NSW state byelection results. The Liberal-National government has been plunged even further into minority after the safe Liberal seat of Bega swung to Labor for the first time. Labor candidate Michael Holland looks to be elected, having nabbed a 13% swing on election night. The seat was formerly held by the Liberals’ Andrew Constance, who announced his resignation from politics last year. The Nationals look like they will hold on to John Barilaro’s former seat of Monaro, and the Liberals have held on to former premier Gladys Berejiklian’s seat of Willoughby, but with a small swingsagainst them in both seats. Labor looks set to retain the seat of Strathfield with a 0.6% swing towards the Liberal party.Removing a white face mask as she took the witness stand behind a Plexiglass shield, Sarah Palin likened herself to the biblical David taking on the mighty Goliath of American media, the New York Times newspaper. The 58-year-old’s appearance in a Manhattan courtroom this week was a far cry from her heyday on the campaign trail, whipping up crowds with incendiary rhetoric as a US vice-presidential candidate in 2008. But in making her pitch to a jury – the only nine voters who matter this time – Palin still had a star power, and reflex for bashing the media, that served as a reminder of how she paved the populist way for Donald Trump. And when the former governor of Alaska was asked whether she might run for office again, she teased a back-to-the-future scenario for the Republican party and America. “The door’s always open,” she told the court. Anyone wondering, “Whatever happened to Sarah Palin?” has not been paying attention to headlines of late. She declared that she would get the coronavirus vaccine “over my dead body”, duly tested positive for Covid-19 and went dining out in New York anyway, flouting public health guidelines. The infection did cause a delay in her defamation trial against the New York Times, which published a 2017 editorial that incorrectly linked Palin to a mass shooting six years earlier (it corrected the editorial the following day but she contends that the correction did not go far enough). Once the trial got under way, Palin told jurors she was “mortified” by the mistake and called the Times “the be-all, end-all, the loud voice in American media”. She said: “It was devastating to read a false accusation that I had anything to do with murder. I felt powerless – that I was up against Goliath. The people were David. I was David.” But she faces an uphill battle against a paper that has not lost a defamation case in more than half a century. She must convince jurors that the Times acted with “actual malice”, meaning that it knew the editorial was false or had reckless disregard for the truth. The court has heard Palin – she and husband Todd divorced in 2020 after 31 years – describe herself as a single mother and grandmother who “holds down the fort” for her family in Alaska when not advising candidates about “the good, bad and ugly” of politics. She also recalled the surprise over her eruption on the national political stage in 2008, saying: “I don’t think they were prepared for me.” That is an understatement. Palin was a wildly improbable choice back then as running mate for Republican John McCain in the contest with Democrat Barack Obama, bidding to become the first Black president, and his running mate, Joe Biden. The ascent of Palin – going outside what had been deemed an acceptable talent pool in terms of experience and judgment – is now seen as a pivotal moment in American political history, opening a Pandora’s box of divisive, nativist, anti-intellectual, celebrity-driven smash-mouth politics. Steve Schmidt, then a senior adviser to the McCain campaign, was the first to float the idea of Palin as running mate. In an interview with the Guardian, Schmidt said his exact words were: “We should take a look at Sarah Palin. I don’t know a lot about her other than she’s the most popular governor in the country with an 87% approval level.” So it was that in August 2008 McCain invited Palin to his ranch in Sedona, Arizona, to consider the bold move. Schmidt recalled: “Mark Salter [another adviser] and I are there with McCain, and McCain says, ‘Come on, boys, let’s go talk to her.’ “I said to him, ‘It’s completely inappropriate for us to be in this meeting. This is a presidential-level decision. Only you can make the determination she’s prepared to take the 35-word oath and become president.’” So Schmidt and Salter did not attend. “The singularly greatest regret of my life,” Schmidt acknowledged this week. “It’s the dumbest thing I’ve ever done.” He is convinced that, had they been in the room, they would have immediately realized how unprepared and unqualified Palin was and done everything in their power to talk McCain out of it. “No one will ever know what the discussion was,” continued Schmidt, a co-founder of the anti-Trump Lincoln Project. “There were two people in the room: him and her. I’m fairly certain if there was a substantive conversation that I was party to I would’ve chained myself to the back of the bumper to stop her from being announced. “I’ve never encountered a person and I’ve never experienced in my political career someone so abjectly dishonest. You could not get a straight answer on a question on the most basic informational level, which was my initial warning sign about her in the hours after McCain picked her.” McCain’s impulsive and fateful decision – for which he later expressed regret – is chronicled in a new book, Insurgency: How Republicans Lost Their Party and Got Everything They Ever Wanted, by Jeremy Peters. He writes: “McCain turned to his wife, Cindy. ‘John, it’s a gamble,’ she said. “This made McCain’s face light up. ‘Well, I wish you hadn’t said that,’ he said. McCain, an avid craps player, balled up his fist and blew on it, then shook it like he was about to roll a pair of dice. ‘Fuck it,’ he said. ‘Let’s do it.’” The gamble backfired as McCain still lost the election and, in the eyes of critics, tainted his legacy by accelerating the Trumpification of the Republican party. During the campaign Palin’s ignorance became clear as she stumbled over basic questions such as what newspapers and magazines she read. She accused Obama of “palling around with terrorists” and used the term “shuck and jive” to portray him as evasive and dishonest. (She later wrote on Facebook: “For the record, there was nothing remotely racist in my use of the phrase ‘shuck and jive’.”) Peters, a journalist at the New York Times, said in an interview: “She is the tip of the spear for Donald Trump and everything he unleashed in American politics. Like Trump, her appeal to her supporters was as much about who her perceived enemies were and as it was about her herself. “She also had a really intuitive sense of how to go into combat with those enemies, especially the media. She was the canary in the coalmine when it came to doing lasting damage to the reputation of the mainstream media, which had already been taking a beating but had never been made into a real political enemy to the extent it would be under under Trump.” Palin’s loose talk of the media “making things up” and claims that it should “quit lying” foreshadowed Trump’s popularisation of phrases such as “‘enemy of the people” and “fake news”. Peters added: “She also had a real sense for social media and using that to basically say whatever she wanted and get attention that wouldn’t require her to go to the mainstream media, because the mainstream media would then just cover whatever she said on Facebook.” Palin went on to campaign for the Tea Party, a conservative revolt fuelled by rage against elites, distrust in government and racial hostility to Obama. It was another harbinger of the “Make America Great Again” white grievance movement. Palin had a five-year stint as a contributor to the conservative Fox News channel on a reported $1m contract, endorsed Trump for president and, emulating his past career as a reality TV star, made a surprise appearance on The Masked Singer, rapping and dancing in a pink bear costume. Now, should she pull off an unlikely legal victory over his old foe the New York Times – a judgment that could have a chilling effect on freedom of the press – Trump would probably be the first to congratulate her. What he may never grasp is the political debt he owes her. Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota, said: “Would there be a Donald Trump without Sarah Palin? It’s hard to imagine Trump coming out of nowhere. Sarah Palin paved the way for Donald Trump.” Last year Palin hinted at an Alaska Senate run against Republican moderate Lisa Murkowski. If Trump regains the White House in 2024, she might find another comeback path. Jacobs admitted: “I find it impossible to make predictions about a Republican party that has veered so far to the extreme, so far towards irresponsibility. “This is a party without a measure of itself. It’s a chaotic party that no longer has core principles so yes, I could see Palin ending up in the cabinet if she were able to rehabilitate herself and find a way to become relevant again.”A blackbird feeding a fledged youngster in early January. Red campions flowering four months early. And the earliest recorded sighting of a rare beetle. Wildlife experts and gardeners are reporting a series of highly unusual early sightings of flora, fauna, insects and birds across Britain, some of them weeks before when they would normally appear, in a further sign that rising global temperatures are having a significant impact on British wildlife. Spring has been creeping forward steadily for decades. Plants flowered a full month earlier in the UK between 1987 and 2019 than they did prior to 1986, a recent report published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society B journal found. But this year, following a relatively mild and dry winter, experts say they have seen anomalies that could be a sign of shifting behavioural patterns in nature due to climate change. “Right now, you’d normally see a few things starting to stir, like snowdrops poking their heads above the soil and coming into flower,” said Jack Wallington, a landscape designer and author based near Hebden Bridge, West Yorkshire, adding that many developments feel about a month earlier than usual – despite being 300 metres up on an exposed hillside. He has also spotted “buds on trees and shrubs swelling up”, while daffodils are “rocketing”. Meanwhile, several perennials (including Calamagrostis brachytricha, Veronicastrum and Astrantia) are actively growing, which, he said “is probably about a month earlier than I would expect to be seeing them”. At the same time, the Wildlife Trusts are reporting a range of earlier than usual sightings, including barn owls preparing to nest weeks early in Ulster, red campions flowering in January in Montgomeryshire, marsh marigolds flowering weeks early in Gwent and the earliest ever sighting of a black oil beetle in Staffordshire. “We’ve definitely seen some anomalies this year,” said Kathryn Brown, director of climate action at the Wildlife Trusts. While it is too soon to officially measure whether spring is earlier than usual, she said the broader trends are plain to see. “We do know very clearly that spring is coming earlier and earlier every year and that’s due to climate change,” she said. “There’s a whole range of different impacts of that happening.” Meanwhile, as well as recording a blackbird with a fledgling in Bournemouth, the British Trust for Ornithology reported that a great crested grebe had been spotted with young in Fordwich, Kent, in January, describing such a sighting as “remarkable”. Ulf Büntgen, a professor of environmental systems analysis at the University of Cambridge and lead author of a Royal Society report into plant flowering published this month, which used more than 400,000 observations from 1753 onwards, said the timing of first flowering varies from year to year, mainly driven by temperatures. But in the long term, he said, their research shows that a 1.2C rise in temperature brought spring forward by a month. In future, he warned, “ecological mismatch” could have a damaging impact: “If the trends continue like this, that could have more profound effects, severe effects, on the functioning and productivity of ecosystems, because things that depend on each other in terms of timing – insects, plants, other animals – get disrupted.” Lorienne Whittle, citizen science officer at Nature’s Calendar, the Woodland Trust’s reporting project, said earlier springs are becoming “the new normal”; 2019 and 2020 were particularly early. So far this year, she reports sightings of birds nesting, frogspawn and butterflies emerging. Using the “spring index” calculators – first flowering of the horse chestnut and hawthorn and the first sightings of an orange-tip butterfly and swallow – between the early 1900s and now, she said spring has moved forward more than eight days. Juliet Sargeant, a West Sussex-based garden designer and 2016 Chelsea flower show gold medal winner, said she has noticed shrubs coming into leaf earlier. While there had been a general progression towards earlier springs, “this year has been so mild, we’ve had almost no winter to speak of, so far”. But the weather’s unpredictability meant that gardeners had to remain “particularly vigilant” for overnight frost, she added. The Royal Horticultural Society said it had seen soaring visitor numbers to its five gardens as people made the most of the spring-like conditions, with a 90% increase across all of its gardens in the first week of February compared with the same period last year (when they were open but under Covid restrictions). The society’s chief horticulturist, Guy Barter, said Christmas roses, bulbs, crocuses and early flowering shrubs such as camelias are “looking particularly great this year because they haven’t been spoilt by the rain and frost”. Mark McCarthy, manager of the National Climate Information Centre at the Met Office, said that, from a meteorological perspective, spring doesn’t start until 1 March, but that so far this winter had been about a degree warmer than the average, “with a relative absence of notably cold and frosty conditions”.Hayley Flynn has lived in Manchester since 2008 and runs Skyliner Tours, which specialises in walks inspired by the city’s hidden heritage Food I’m a fan of relaxed, daytime dining, so Trove in the Ancoats district, sister bakery to the Levenshulme original, is my favourite place for Scandinavian-inspired pastries (pictured), home-brewed chai and bestselling sourdough. The people behind it also run nearby Erst, the natural wine bar and restaurant, focusing on fresh, contemporary food. For dinner, The Spärrows, beyond the arches of Victoria train station, is a homely little place. The house speciality is dumplings and spätzle, a fresh-egg pasta from central Europe. I love their slow-cooked beef goulash Tyrolese. Inspiration I love wandering the public-realm borderlands around the edges of the city. I take inspiration for my walks from the old Victorian alleyways that are part of our erased-by-time heritage. My favourite forgotten space is Pomona Palace, a former botanical garden just beyond the Castlefield area. People don’t realise there are lots of inspirational open spaces within just 10 minutes of the city centre. Neighbourhood The Northern Quarter, between Piccadilly and Victoria railway stations, celebrates 30 years of renaissance this year. The council first commissioned artist-in-residence, Liam Curtin, to create art to trigger organic growth there in 1992. I use that art to tell the story of Manchester’s equivalent of a New York district. The Northern Quarter is now the city’s social hub, centred on traffic-free Stevenson Square. It’s often used as a film set; Dale Street was recently used for filming Morbius, the Spider-Man spin off. I take tours along the Tib Street public art trail with the poem Flags by Lemn Sissay set into the pavement, and the wall murals telling stories of traders from old Smithfield Market. I keep uncovering snapshots of history here, like the mosaic sign on Port Street’s ice-cream parlour. The Northern Quarter is also home to a couple of stalwarts of alternative Manchester: Piccadilly Records and the indoor market at Afflecks. Green space There are some hidden-gem public spaces, such as Parsonage Gardens just off Deansgate, and Peel Park in Salford, one of the UK’s oldest public parks, dating from 1846. In the coming year or two we’ll have the new park at Mayfield, which is uncovering parts of the River Medlock. Heading up Oxford Road, meanwhile, there’s All Saints Park and neighbouring St Augustine’s Church by Manchester Metropolitan University. Nightlife The Edinburgh Castle in Ancoats is a friendly, cosy pub, but the back room has a great, almost mystic atmosphere – like a Parisian absinthe parlour. It’s my perfect pub. My other favourite is YES on Charles Street, with live music in the Pink Room, bar food by Doner Summer vegan kebabs, a beer garden and roof terrace. It hosts the best alternative karaoke night in the downstairs Karaoke Dungeon. My go-to tune? Jesus He Knows Me from Genesis’s We Can’t Dance album. Stay I really like the newly revamped Kimpton Clocktower Hotel (doubles from £107 B&amp;B), near the Palace Theatre on Oxford Street. The former Refuge Assurance Company building is Grade II-listed, dating back to 1890, and the hotel retains lots of original features. The bar and restaurant, The Refuge, is a beautiful place that doesn’t put on any airs and graces. That sums up Manchester for me: a global city that still feels local for those who live there.The folk singer Woody Guthrie famously scrawled “This machine kills fascists” on his acoustic guitar. Such dramatic sloganeering is the privilege of youth and a grand illusion; with age comes acceptance that music – art in general – carries no serious threat. Or does it? In the 1980s, the Stasi, East Germany’s much-feared secret police, decided that the best way to fight the creep of capitalism was not with bombs and rockets but with a stealth weapon of unstable potential: poetry. Philip Oltermann’s engrossing The Stasi Poetry Circle recounts a history so outlandish and unlikely that you feel it must be true. The author was inspired to investigate after running his own poetry group for pensioners at a day centre in London’s King’s Cross . How had a brutal spy agency alighted on poetry, “this vaguest of disciplines”, as a tool for training its employees? His research brings him into contact with soldiers and border guards who attended monthly meetings of “writing Chekists” at the Adlershof compound, a place so secret it didn’t even feature on a map of Berlin. Here, they would mull over the finer points of verse while bearing in mind the writer Friedrich Wolf’s stern credo: “The material of our age lies in front of us, hard as iron. Poets are working to forge it into a weapon. The worker has to pick up this weapon.” You can almost hear the sound of pens being chewed. Overseeing this inky mission was the circle’s leader, Uwe Berger, who, after some searching, believed he had found his star student. Alexander Ruika was a recruit who had followed his colonel father into the Guards Regiment, an elite training ground for Stasi recruits. What separated Ruika from his fellow versifiers was his use of figurative language, the “mastery of metaphor” that Aristotle believed was the mark of genius. Oltermann traces his early successes – a string of awards, publication in prestigious literary magazines – but also hears a dissenting voice in his poems that suggests Ruika was not a model Chekist but “the Hamlet of the Stasi poetry circle”, a soul at war with himself. His ambivalence becomes almost a test case in this account – how to reconcile the free fluidities of poetry with the ideological constrictions of communism. Be prepared for a sting in the tale. Contradiction also animates the story of Berger, the man at the centre of the web. A mediocre poet who won vast acclaim, he had refused to join the Socialist Unity party and yet had accumulated significant influence within the state. A total of 620,000 informers were listed on the Stasi’s books between 1950 and 1989, their role to report on dodgy tendencies and opinions among the populace. The GDR was, in effect, a nation of curtain-twitchers. Berger had been approached to join them as an “informal collaborator” and apparently took to the work with alacrity, turning out a steady flow of lies, half-truths and obfuscations. In 1982, he was rewarded by the Stasi with a silver “brotherhood in arms” medal for his efforts, though in a memoir he wrote after the Berlin Wall came down he makes no mention of it or of his reports. He implied that his work as an informant came to an end once he took over the poetry circle at Adlershof, whereas we now know this posting marked a sinister new chapter in his snitching career. Oltermann’s intention is to understand not merely the mind of the spy but the spied-upon, with a sympathy that makes the book close kin of the German film The Lives of Others. He adduces the Kafkaesque example of Annegret Gollin, a writer arrested and sentenced to prison “on the basis of a single poem that was never published”. An adventurous, independent-minded young woman who liked dancing and hitchhiking – a “tramper” in the suspicious terminology of the Stasi – Gollin was a rebel spirit who felt estranged from the party and the counterculture. Having moved to Zwickau aged 23, she joined two poetry circles where her nonconformist views were soon noted; she was eventually shopped to the Stasi and interrogated over the exact meaning of a poem, Concretia, about the proliferation of concrete high-rises. As Oltermann observes, it was as if she had been caught “building homemade explosives” rather than writing a few lines of verse. After several interviews in which she had to explain her work, Gollin was sentenced to 20 months in prison for “public vilification of an organ of the state”. Her son was packed off to a children’s home. Reading these stories of bureaucratic paranoia inclines you to wonder if the Stasi’s poetry programme wasn’t merely a willed distraction from the reality on its doorstep. After all, how could a nation right on the fault line of the east-west nuclear war zone possibly lose sleep over the smallholdings of poetic endeavour? And yet spying took a stranglehold on East Germany. As the population shrank the numbers of people employed by the Stasi multiplied; in the 1960s, it doubled in size and doubled again in the 1970s. Later, Oltermann focuses upon the career of poet-novelist Gert Neumann, whose books were so cryptic that nobody in the culture ministry could properly understand them: he was “a locksmith by trade and he wrote like one”. Nonetheless he was subjected to close surveillance and harassment that essentially amounted to gaslighting. When the Stasi felt that even this wasn’t enough it recruited his mother to spy on him. (Film idea: The Lives of Mothers.) How Neumann’s story intersects with that of Alexander Ruika is one of the happier episodes in this grippingly well-written book. • The Stasi Poetry Circle by Philip Oltermann is published by Faber (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIt feels like an inversion of the natural order of things to be on Michael Crick’s doorstep. In almost 40 years as a political reporter Crick has made the kerbside ambush of his subjects, outsize furry microphone to hand, something of a personal art form. During his long stints as political editor of BBC’s Newsnight and as political correspondent at Channel 4 News it was said that there was no more alarming sentence for a government minister than “Michael Crick is waiting for you outside”. For a select few – Jeffrey Archer, Michael Heseltine, Michael Howard – those words have only been eclipsed for anxiety by “Michael Crick is writing your biography”. Crick’s house is a friendly double-fronted Edwardian terrace just off Clapham Common, south London. He bought it with his mother, Pat, 31 years ago, moved in with her for a while when his first marriage ended and since her death in 2010 has lived here with his partner, Lucy Hetherington (daughter of the former Guardian editor Alastair), and their daughter, who is now 15. He greets me grinning and a bit stir-crazy from 10 days of asymptomatic Covid quarantine, the itinerant gumshoe confined to quarters. We sit at opposite ends of a sofa in the bay window of a book-crammed through room. Crick, a boyish 63, is an obsessive collector not just of uncomfortable facts, but of much else besides. He has “just about” (said through gritted teeth) every Manchester United match day programme since the war. He also hoards political toby jugs. A lineup of the latter on his mantelpiece includes, prominently, the subject of his latest book, Nigel Farage, gurning in a spivvy suit and a gangster’s fedora. He had been thinking of writing a book on Farage for seven or eight years before he got down to it over lockdown. The first bit of digging he did back then was into the details of a letter a teacher once sent to the head of Farage’s school, Dulwich College, when Farage was proposed as a prefect, complaining of the future Ukip leader’s “publicly professed racist and neo-fascist views”. In the course of 300 interviews with Farage’s friends and enemies since then, Crick has pieced together the definitive portrait of a character he describes as “the most significant [British] politician of the century so far…” If that billing sounds, to liberal ears, like a deliberate provocation, Crick makes a powerful case in the nearly 600 pages of One Party After Another. Farage emerges from Crick’s book both as the ultimate chancer – cheating death and political all-comers and wives and Eurocrats – and the instinctive disruptor of our political times, singlehandedly shifting both the focus and manner of debate. Some of Crick’s motivation is always setting the record straight, like a frustrated schoolmaster. “Farage has done his own memoirs twice, a lot of which needed correcting,” he says. And then, of course, he knows a story when he sees one. “He was always guaranteed box office for a news reporter. You would ask five questions, you’d get five great answers.” This was in contrast to some of Crick’s more tongue-tied political subjects over the years, who have rarely been moved to speak even when our intrepid reporter has been chasing them along the pavement. (There are YouTube compilations of Crick’s best gotcha moments. His own favourites, in no particular order, include the moment he trapped Tony Blair in a lift; the time MEP Godfrey Bloom bashed him over the head with a copy of the Ukip manifesto after Crick pointed out it contained no black faces; and his delicious line to the notably taciturn Iain Duncan Smith: “Aren’t you are taking this ‘quiet man’ thing a bit far?”) By contrast, Farage has always been happy to answer what Crick has thrown at him; he sees him as a consummate communicator. “Some, like Heseltine, are great on the platform, but hopeless with people. Farage can do both,” he says. The early reviews of the book have fallen over themselves to praise Crick’s tireless information gathering, his peerless grasp of telling detail, while expressing frustration at his refusal to pass sentence on his subject. “Quite how far-reaching Farage’s legacy will be – how damaging or beneficial, or a combination thereof – it’s far too soon to judge,” Crick writes. “It is too limp of the author not to come to his own conclusion,” Andrew Rawnsley suggested in this paper. Crick rejects the argument that a reporter can ever be too even-handed. Given the weight of evidence, though, is there not a clear case that Farage’s “breaking point” concentration on immigration is destructive and dangerous? “Yes, of course,” he says. Before continuing: “I don’t think Farage is a racist, though there is plenty of evidence that he was a both a racist and an antisemite in his teenage years. And he does, I think, like [his hero] Enoch Powell, pander at times to racists.” On the other hand, he says (there is always another hand), “the issue of cross-Channel migrants, say, is a legitimate issue and for a long time nobody else was mentioning it”. And then: “One good effect of Ukip is that it actually took support away and eventually won the battle with the BNP.” Though he catalogues every dispiriting tactic in Farage’s power-hungry manipulation of populist sentiment, there seems to be a lot he also admires. “I admire his persistence and his energy,” he says. “I don’t admire his pandering to racism, I don’t admire his ruthlessness. He was Stalinist in the way he ran Ukip. But clearly he does have a charm. I’ve had some good laughs with him.” The thread through Crick’s biographies, which began with his meticulous and sometimes gleeful dismantling of the many lies of Archer, is this fascination with extreme contradiction in certain personalities. “I write about charming monsters,” he says. “I think two-thirds of really successful high-achievers are charming monsters. Alex Ferguson [the highly reluctant subject of another Crick book] is a perfect example. When he is charming, he’s a delight, totally thoughtful and considerate. And yet he can be an absolute bastard, utterly ruthless, cut off people who were his friends, exactly as Farage has done. That combination has taken many people to power. I’ve no doubt even Hitler, Stalin and Saddam Hussein had certain charms.” Does he think writers are drawn to explain the attractions of human behaviour they fear or lack in themselves? “I suppose so,” he says. “Are there aspects of me that are like some of these people? Well, in very small ways. I can certainly be very difficult at times.” He hoots with one of his frequent, likable self-deprecatory laughs. “I’m not sure many people would identify any charm.” Another part of the attraction of Farage as a subject, I think, is that it gave him a chance to say “I told you so”. Like anyone with a background outside the south-east of England – Crick did much of his growing up in Manchester – the Brexit referendum result came as little surprise to him. “About three weeks beforehand, I was telling people that Brexit was going to win,” he says. “But I don’t think many of my colleagues at Channel 4 News – or at the BBC – believed it, because they mainly mixed in liberal circles and they didn’t want to know that there were vast numbers of people out there who had serious misgivings about immigration and about Europe.” That kind of wishful myopia, he suggests, is one of the reasons he recently decided to end his 10-year stint at Channel 4 and take up a role at the Daily Mail’s “in depth” Mail+ project, contributing a characteristically entertaining and informed weekly online video report, as well as a Friday column. “I ended up having arguments [at Channel 4],” he says. “Under the then editor [Ben de Pear], I felt the programme was on an anti-government, anti-Brexit crusade. It made it very difficult to do your job. And to me it was wrong. I was brought up in the tradition of David Nicholas, who was editor of ITN when I first joined 40 years ago, and who just turned 91. He used to say, ‘If we get an interview with God, then the first thing the newsdesk has got to do is get on to the devil’s office and give him the right to reply’.” It seems perverse to respond to that perceived partisanship to take up a job at the Mail, the news organisation that arguably has done most to polarise debate before and since the EU referendum. Was one of the attractions giving two fingers to the “liberal establishment”? “No,” he says. “The attraction was it [Mail+] was a new venture. And they came along and offered me this great job.” Good money? “Yes and for two and a half days a week. It’s bloody hard work. For the first time in a long time I don’t have a producer, so I do all the films on my own, but I have a lot of fun and total freedom.” The flexibility also allowed him to devote more time to his book and to indulge his anorak’s passion for constitutional politics by helping to set up an academic unit at Manchester University, which will monitor the selection process of MPs. Crick has been a political animal for as long as he can remember. His parents, both teachers, met when they were both officers at the socialist club at Cambridge University. His father gave up that cause, but his mother, who collected miners’ badges in old age, remained committed. “She died before Corbyn came to prominence, but she would have been a big Corbyn supporter,” Crick says. “Whereas my father’s politics are now much more like mine, more centrist and a bit cynical.” Crick describes Boris Johnson as “easily the worst prime minister in 100 years”. But he also tends to agree with his old man “that if you think the Johnson government is incompetent, then a Jeremy Corbyn government would have been 10 times worse”. Crick’s first book, on Militant tendency, remains the seminal account of how a fringe political force can manoeuvre itself into power. His plan was always to go into politics, but when he was offered a clear run at the safe Labour seat of Bootle in 1990, he declined, acknowledging “it was more fun to be a journalist”. Crick was a scholarship boy at fee-paying Manchester grammar school, where he wrote “the Fifth Column” for the school magazine. Several of his political friendships were formed at Oxford, where he was editor of the student newspaper Cherwell and president of the Oxford Union (as well as gaining a first in politics, philosophy and economics). Hearing him talk about those years is to be reminded of the incestuousness of Westminster. He was a contemporary of former Tory ministers Dominic Grieve, David Willetts, Damian Green and Alan Duncan. As union president, he succeeded Philip May, whose girlfriend, the recently graduated (and “very glam”) Theresa, spoke at his first debate. She was one of three acquaintances who became prime ministers, along with Malcolm Turnbull in Australia, with whom he keeps in touch, and Benazir Bhutto. What does he think about that apparently indestructible conveyor belt to power? He thinks both that it’s inevitable – Oxford has always attracted an intellectual elite – but also that its influence is waning. He has in any case always tried to maintain a scrupulous distance from politicians. “I’ve had a handful of friends who are politicians – I used to go to football matches with Chris Grayling – but the number who’ve been here [to Clapham] in 30 years is probably about three. I’m a bit like Farage in that respect; I regard myself as a sort of anti-establishment person and yet I want to be inside it in a way. I’d never join a gentlemen’s club, but I’m not averse to going to them. I do the old boys’ column for the school magazine.” He gives another of his frequent hoots of self-mockery. “There is,” he insists, “a long tradition of establishment revolutionaries.” Some of the most fascinating material in the new book is Crick’s account of Farage’s formative relationship with his parents: the alcoholic stockbroker father and the mother who was a very enthusiastic nude model for the Women’s Institute in Surrey. If you were to seek similar insights into Crick you would no doubt want to dwell on the two sticking points of his childhood: his inevitable marginalisation within the family after the arrival of triplet sisters and the fact that his parents split up when he was 18. “I carried on living with my father in the holidays; my three sisters went to live with my mother,” he says. His father was “very much more academic” than him and a rugby man rather than a football fan. Part of Crick’s rebellious streak saw him follow his beloved Manchester United, home and away from about the age of 12, hitchhiking alone or on the train; he once tried to have his name changed to George Crick in honour of his hero, George Best. When Rupert Murdoch’s BSkyB tried to take over the club in 1999, he took months off from Newsnight to work on a (successful) rearguard action. There was in his early journalism a powerful sense of moral outrage about him. He was, by the accounts of contemporaries, a natural in the role of the martyred messiah in a school mystery play. I remember covering Jeffrey Archer’s perjury trial for the Observer. However early I arrived in court, Crick, his pencils metaphorically sharpened, would already be in place. You wouldn’t say he has lost his edge since then, but perhaps become more alive to cases for the defence. I remind him of something he said to the Telegraph in 2007 not long after his marriage ended following his admission of an affair. The interviewer wondered if those events made him feel more sympathetic towards Archer? “Yes, I suppose so,” Crick answered at the time. “Indeed, to people in general. Ten years ago, I would have been horrified by the idea that I would have had an affair and I wouldn’t have been very understanding with myself. I am a lot more understanding of people when that happens.” Reading his current book, I sense that empathic impulse has advanced with age? “Well,” he says, “yes. Life is certainly complicated. And Farage is a case where his life has been very complicated. As with the prime minister, his affairs are part of the political story.” (Or as one quoted aide to Farage puts it, less delicately in the book: “He’d shag anything that let him.”) If Crick remains fascinated by recklessness, he also knows that stories never end when the cameras retreat. I’m not surprised to discover he sees all the subjects of his books as lifelong projects. He religiously keeps up with Archer’s novels, for example. When he saw Archer, a man he did more than anyone to incriminate and ultimately incarcerate, recently at a book launch, he couldn’t resist sidling up to say hello. He has long coveted a plan to make a radio documentary about the novelist and his conman father (and Archer’s “unknown” half-sister, a baroness who was married to an American presidential candidate). What did he say? “Well,” Crick recalls, laughing, “I said, ‘I know you and I’ve had our differences, but can I take you out to lunch?’” Archer didn’t say no outright, so Crick believes it will happen. I sense he half-fears, half-relishes the idea that he might find himself in a similar kind of long-term dance with Farage. “I was,” he says, “a bit sad that I had to finish the book in the end.” He felt there were still things to discover, not least perhaps a little more about Farage’s curious relationship with Julian Assange, which Crick examines without ever fathoming. He has no doubt that there will be dramatic future chapters in Farage’s career (he points to a poll he discovered that suggested 54% of Tory party members would favour him as their next leader). That’s the other thing about these charming monsters, however much you expose them to the light – and no one works harder at that illumination than Crick – they don’t simply disappear. They invariably come back for more. • One Party After Another: The Disruptive Life of Nigel Farage by Michael Crick is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIs it fair that Mrs Johnson should, courtesy of her sublime nickname, Carrie Antoinette, have become the face of complacent privilege? Whatever her faults, as recently enumerated by Lord Ashcroft, they have yet to include the dispensing of fatuous lifestyle tips for the less fortunate. Her old advisory tweets on single-use plastic were aimed, after all, at everyone less environmentally enlightened than Mrs Johnson, not just at poor people. Regardless of her taste in single-use interiors, parties and cake, Mrs Johnson has yet, publicly, to express the traditional Tory conviction that the struggling should welcome lifestyle advice from the prosperous. True, her husband has previously argued that “if having a baby out of wedlock meant sure-fire destitution on a Victorian scale, young girls might indeed think twice about having a baby”. But as the now married mother-of-two Mrs Johnson sometimes reminds us, it is sexist and retrograde to think she might be as ghastly as her partner. If she’s not Britain’s Marie Antoinette, her elimination leaves at least two UK energy companies in contention – along with a variety of influencers, politicians and City functionaries urging less fortunate people to, among other things, work harder, freeze bread, put on another layer, ignore fraud, forget the parties enjoyed by their betters and refrain from asking for a pay rise. Not, surely, since the unlamented George Osborne was fomenting hostilities between hard-working “strivers” and undeserving “shirkers”, have the unprivileged enjoyed so much free instruction on their habits and shortcomings and bread-storing practice. Deepening inequality, and the prospect of much more to come, promises, if anything, to reinvigorate a benevolent narrative that, while recognising the difficulties of the afflicted, remains firmly committed to the status quo. “Let them wear socks” was recently, for instance, E.ON’s way of reminding any customers unable to afford heating that they are freezing for the greater good. After a strikingly ungrateful reaction to its distribution of synthetic branded socks, labelled “heating down, CO2 down”, the company said it was “incredibly sorry for how we have made some people feel”. Members of the “Ovo family” of energy suppliers have likewise learned that, in the assessment of hardship, comfortable warmth is becoming the new flatscreen TV. Below a certain income level, is it really needed? If true poverty was regularly declared after the 2008 economic crisis to be incompatible with the presence of a large television, domestic heating was generally allowed to be a necessity. Unless it was just overlooked, being cheaper at the time? Last month, perhaps to avert consumer consideration of the more affordable alternative, an energy windfall tax, some Ovo customers were treated to its “simple and cost-effective ways to keep warm this winter”. If they could neither afford heating nor expect adequate assistance, poorer customers could help themselves with star jumps, doing chores and having “cuddles”. As always in advice to this incurably prodigal class, the need for temperance had to be stressed: the “warming feeling from wine or whisky is temporary, as you’ll soon lose heat from your core and end up feeling even colder”. Such advice, as Robert Tressell mentioned in The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists (1914), has the further benefit of suggesting that the poor, when they imitate the affluent, bring their problems on themselves. “The theories that drunkenness, laziness or inefficiency are the causes of poverty are so many devices invented and fostered by those who are selfishly interested in maintaining the present state of affairs…” Just as older or smaller TVs could once be tolerated in poor households, some heating is still acceptable. But how much? Among her recent hints for aspiring homeowners, which included shunning Netflix and gyms, and roaming Britain for any property unwanted by second-home buyers, the television celebrity Kirstie Allsopp also mentioned heating. Fuel poverty is a nightmare, she said, but “for those who aren’t in fuel poverty, if rising energy bills persuade them to turn their thermostat down to 17C that would be great. I keep my house at 17C.” This miserable recommendation, though it must certainly help people like the Allsopps with two properties to maintain, would not work for everyone. The World Health Organization advises a minimum room temperature of 18C; higher settings for vulnerable groups. And this disregards evidence that women are typically 2.5C too cold in temperatures comfortable for men. As much as Allsopp is to be admired for proposals that could add up to a deposit, if adopted, within less than 40 years, her message had, alas, an inescapable flavour of historical lectures on indigent improvidence. Once Netflix and gym membership are counted as unwarranted luxuries, we are pretty much back in the world of Orwell’s The Road to Wigan Pier, frowning on sugar consumption and movie-going. At the same time, Seebohm Rowntree was arguing for the inclusion in working-class budgets of “sundries”, for instance a radio, alcohol, holidays, presents, football. “Working people are just as human as those with more money. They cannot live just on a ‘fodder basis’. They crave for relaxation and recreation just as the rest of us do.” My tip, for what it’s worth, is never to take budgetary advice from a fashion influencer, energy company, member of the English peerage or a governor of the Bank of England, all the more so when this coincides with a cost of living crisis to which the only solution is structural. That said, it wouldn’t hurt to hear some practical hints from Rishi Sunak. Although vast personal wealth combined with wilful-looking poor-blindness might appear, on the face of it, a clear qualification for Marie Antoinette status, that seems, in the light of his fake discounts and fraud-tolerance, distinctly overgenerous. Sometimes, you can’t help feeling, the fabulously rich are their own worst enemies. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistAfter the Iraq war and the Great Recession, public trust in government plummeted while the flashpoints of race, religion and education moved to the fore. Barack Obama’s mantra of hope and change left many unsatisfied, if not seething. On election day 2016, Donald Trump lit a match. But the kindling was already there, decades in the making. Staring at the mess is Jeremy Peters of the New York Times, with Insurgency, his first book. A seasoned national political reporter and MSNBC talking head, Peters chronicles how the party of Lincoln and Reagan morphed into Trump’s own fiefdom. He writes with a keen eye and sharp pen. Beyond that, he listens. He captures the grievance of the Republican base, its devotion to the 45th president and its varied voices. He repeatedly delivers quotable quotes, painstakingly sourced. This is highly readable reporting. At the outset, Peters acknowledges Trump’s grasp of human nature, the media and resentment. Messaging and visuals matter to Trump, as does cementing a bond with his crowds. Fittingly, one chapter is titled “Give Them What They Want …” For many, Trump did so. As president, he kept campaign-trail promises. He reshaped the supreme court, moved the US embassy to Jerusalem and battled Isis. Most of all, he stuck a barbed middle finger at political correctness. His jagged edges thrilled his core as they elicited revulsion elsewhere – just as he wanted. His persona was Melania’s problem, not theirs. Trump rode into the White House on enmity to immigration, the sleeper issue of our times, over which Democrats continue to stumble. Chants of “build that wall” delivered far more votes than “defund the police”. Trump’s mien mattered too, as Peters notes. He was relatable to working Americans. He knew where wokeness was grating, that what passes as orthodoxy in the halls of academe is not applauded by kitchen table or barstool America. “Trump’s Latino Support Was More Widespread Than Thought, Report Finds,” a Times headline announced. It was Bernie Sanders, not Joe Biden, who led among those voters in the Democratic primaries of 2020. Right now, polls show Trump ahead of Biden in that bloc. Biden’s standing has also slipped among younger Black voters. From Peters’ vantage point, Trump’s description of himself as a “popularist” – an unintended malapropism – comes close to the mark. Trump can size up an audience, meet expectations and receive their adulation. For all concerned, it’s a win-win proposition. Peters gets people on the record. Per usual, Steve Bannon is there on the page, where he rates his former boss among the worst presidents with James Buchanan and Millard Filmore. Those two failed to halt the march to civil war. Bannon also likens Trump’s history-making escalator ride to Triumph of the Will, Leni Riefenstahl’s Nazi propaganda film. “That’s Hitler, Bannon thought”, as Trump descended to a bank of cameras and microphones. Peters memorializes those italicized words as another chapter title. Elsewhere, Bannon posits that for Trump it’s all about himself, and he would be pleased to see a Republican successor fail. “Trump doesn’t give a shit,” Bannon says. “He’s not looking to nurture. He’s fucking Donald Trump, the only guy who could do it. As for Trump, he talks to Peters and his observations are frequently dead-on. Most of all, he internalized that Republican success hinged on the white working-class base, a reality to which most other GOP politicians paid lip service. Offering tax cuts to the rich while plundering entitlements didn’t quite cut it. Sure, race and culture were part of Trump’s equation. But so was preserving social security and Medicare. Voters could not be expected to support candidates who took away things they had earned. The priorities of the Republican donor class did not align with those of the swing voters who seized on Trump. In the heartland, corporations definitely aren’t considered “people” – a lesson Mitt Romney failed to learn in 2012. A country club candidate who looked and sounded like a country club candidate might win the nomination but stood to lose in November. George HW Bush, remember, eked out a single term after eight years as vice-president to Ronald Reagan. Peters relates that Trump pushed back hard when Paul Ryan, the former House speaker and Romney’s running mate, suggested curbing government-funded retirement spending. “You tried that four years ago,” Trump told him. “How’d that work out?” For good measure, Trump snapped: “No thank you.” Insurgency also documents the capitulation of those Republicans who stood ready to take on the mob as it swarmed the Capitol on January 6 but then, hours later, voted against certifying the election. Peters tells of Ronny Jackson, a retired navy rear admiral who was White House physician to Trump and Barack Obama. When the glass started to shatter, Jackson removed his tie – so it would be that much more difficult to strangle him. But Jackson’s loyalty to Trump remained. He voted to discount the results, despite all he saw. Now, Jackson demands Biden’s mental fitness be tested. Trump stokes the lie that the 2020 election was stolen. No matter, in Republican ranks at least. Fidelity to Trump and his false claims are “musts” for the foreseeable future. Mike Pence and Mitch McConnell, at odds with Trump this week, are at some political risk. Pence refused to defy his legal mandate and reject electoral college results. He sticks by his decision. Of January 6, deemed “legitimate political discourse” by the Republican National Committee, McConnell bluntly says: “It was a violent insurrection for the purpose of trying to prevent a peaceful transfer of power.” Peters sees the dark clouds. His book is chilling. Insurgency: How Republicans Lost Their Party and Got Everything They Ever Wanted is published in the US by CrownIt only took six dozen trucks, and a few hundred protesters to bring Canada’s capital to a standstill and close a critical border crossing with the US, throttling the car industry that straddles the line between both countries and relies on a constant flow of trade. On Saturday, Canadian authorities finally began taking action to clear the Ambassador Bridge into the US, the busiest land crossing in North America, which had been blockaded by just over a dozen trucks and smaller vehicles, and a crowd a few hundred strong. The bridge has been closed for the best part of a week now, and meanwhile downtown Ottawa has been under a form of siege for more than a fortnight, blockaded by crowds gathered under the banner of opposition to Covid regulations. The protest has melded genuine grievances and fears about how the pandemic has upended lives with conspiracy theories and racist extremism, helped by some degree of funding from abroad. A handful of demonstrators have turned up with Trump banners and Confederate flags. The seductively open-ended rallying call for a “freedom convoy” has sparked an unlikely global movement. Around the world other police forces were moving this weekend to clear or block copycat actions. In New Zealand, the parliament Speaker, Trevor Mallard, used a sound system playing Barry Manilow songs to tackle a gathering in Wellington, and in France thousands of police fanned out to motorway tollbooths around Paris to stop a “convoi de la liberté” from getting into the city, and used teargas on protesters in the Champs-Élysée. “The right to demonstrate and to have an opinion is a constitutional right guaranteed in our republic and in our democracy the right to block others or stop them from coming and going is not,” said prime minister Jean Castex. “If they block the traffic or try to block the capital we will be very strict.” In North America, authorities are drawing up longer-term plans to tackle truck convoys, whose organisers have floated the idea of trying to barricade events from the Coachella music festival to the Super Bowl, and mooted a convoy from California to Washington DC. * * * The protest in downtown Ottawa that thrust Canada into an unwelcome international spotlight may prove harder to dismantle, and the shockwaves from the last two weeks may prove harder still for the country’s political class to shrug off. The protesters are a tiny minority in a country which has, on the whole, embraced the protection against Covid offered by science. Canada has one of the highest rates of full vaccination anywhere in the world, with more than 80% of people covered. The truckers are also a minority in their profession. The union Teamsters Canada, which represents 15,000 drivers, has also denounced “despicable displays of hate” at the protests, which it said did not represent “the vast majority of our members”. But the trucks form an obstacle that is much harder to move from the freezing streets than the crowds of individual protesters or smaller vehicles that police might have faced in the past. A state of emergency has been declared, residents have launched legal action against protesters and prime minister Justin Trudeau has moved out of his official residence. Police are meant to be trying to choke off the group by keeping food and fuel supplies out of the main protest zone, although they are taking limited action on the ground. A bank has frozen their funds and two sites, GoFundMe and GiveSendGo, shut down their fundraising. But several protesters told the Observer that the rights they were fighting for were worth any financial hit. Rebecca, who did not want to give her last name, lives near the protests and has joined them regularly. She has been on unpaid leave from her government job for months, after a request for a vaccine exemption on religious grounds was rejected. “I am a human rights activist. I don’t think that vaccines should be mandated for people to keep jobs. And that is the primary reason I’m down here,” she said. That sense of a heroic mission, also fuelled for some people by conspiracies such as QAnon, may make these protests far harder to end than demonstrations on behalf of specific political demands. “[They think] ‘We’re here to save you, we’re here to wake up the sleeping masses to the true reality of what’s going on.’ They’ve become heroes in their own story,” said Amarnath Amarasingam, an associate professor at Queen’s University in Ontario who specialises in social movements and extremism. “I don’t think that’s a challenge for security reasons from a terrorism perspective … But I think it does have an impact on how long this goes for because it’s not simply something you can negotiate with and say, ‘OK, the mandates will disappear’ or ‘this will go away, you can go home now.’” The nature of the protests meant they presented an unprecedented policing challenge for authorities, said Scot Wortley, a criminology professor at the University of Toronto. “Perhaps the closest thing we’ve had would be the uprising on 6 January in the US. So to say, ‘Oh, [Ottawa’s police chief] should have followed some kind of rulebook or some kind of strategic plan,’ I think that’s unrealistic,” he said. That insurrection in Washington DC was a reminder of how internet conspiracy theories, harnessed to a political cause, can erupt into mainstream political reality and permanently alter it. There, as in the Canadian protest movement, the crowd included advocates of the extremist QAnon conspiracy theory. In the Ottawa protest’s first days, QAnon’s self-proclaimed “Queen of Canada”, Romana Didulo, burned a Canadian flag outside parliament. She has previously called for the extermination of parents who vaccinate their children. The Canadian protests have given a disturbing platform to a range of other dark fringe views, amplified by genuine concerns. “Nominally protesting against vaccine mandates, the freedom convoy represented a medley of real, imagined and exaggerated issues bound together by a common sense of alienation and grievance,” Daniel Panneton, an online hate researcher, wrote in an editorial for the Globe and Mail. “[It] included a motley array of Western separatists, anti-vaxxers, conspiracy theorists, antisemites, Islamophobes and other extremists. This wasn’t a surprise to anyone who’d been paying attention: Several of the convoy organisers have a history of white nationalist and racist activism.” Convoy organisers named in a class-action lawsuit by Ottawa residents who say their lives have been unreasonably disrupted include Tamara Lich, who until recently had a role in a separatist party; Pat King, a conspiracy theorist who has shared racist tropes, and Benjamin Dichter, a podcast producer who has been sued for allegedly spreading Islamophobic smears. * * * Even if the few Trump signs and Confederate flags have captured media attention, it is the Canadian flag that has become the symbol of this movement. The red maple leaf is painted on the sides of trucks, tied around people’s necks as capes, embroidered into their hats and carried in children’s tiny hands. And the country has extremists of its own. “Be cautious of amplifying ideas that this is a foreign funded/organised movement. This occupation movement is Canadian, made up of Canadians, organised by Canadians,” the Canadian Anti-Hate Network tweeted last week. Yet while it would be naive to write these protests off as a simply an organic expression of legitimate political grievances, it would also be unwise to view them as entirely politically confected, or driven by foreign forces or cash. Scott, who owns a farm equipment business outside the city and didn’t want to give his last name, said he came to check out the protests with his son. He was sceptical about the decision to paralyse Ottawa, but has concerns about the government vaccine mandates. He disagrees with protesters now, mostly because he says the blockade is distracting attention from their key cause. “I think that there’s an awful lot of Canadians that are very quiet, like myself, on this that probably are more in support,” he said. “[That said] I don’t support them being downtown any more with their trucks,” he said. “I think that, you know, the underlying message has just been discredited and discounted and pushed off to the side.” Leaders around the world faced with protests like the ones in Ottawa are trying to balance the need to combat extremism they are spreading with recognition that their leaders are tapping into very real fears and sadness. Emmanuel Macron called for those taking part in the French convoy to be calm, while saying he “has heard and respects” the discontent caused by the health crisis. “We are all collectively tired of what we have been living through for the last two years. This fatigue shows itself in different ways; in confusion for some, depression for others. And sometimes that fatigue manifests itself in anger.” He added: “We have always maintained the right to protest, democratic pluralism and parliamentary debate.” In New Zealand, a convoy of roughly 1,000 protesters that converged on parliament’s lawn and its surrounding streets on Tuesday had dwindled by Friday to a few hundred people. They claimed they would not leave until the prime minister Jacinda Ardern committed to scrapping vaccine mandates, but as in Canada the vaccine seemed to be serving as a Trojan horse for a range of other grievances. At one point a protester drew a swastika on a statue, and others scrawled “hang em high” on the steps of parliament. Cars were scrawled with various slogans: “We stand with Ottawa” and “drain the swamp”, from the Trump era, among them. The threat of that rhetoric exploding into violence was acknowledged by parliament and the country’s counter-terrorism services in November last year. Associate Professor Grant Duncan, who specialises in politics at Massey University, said legitimate concerns and questions over the mandates were getting lost in the quagmire of conspiracy and abusive language. “It’s particularly perplexing, really, to see that kind of Trump-related rhetoric and QAnon-related rhetoric alongside flags displaying symbols of Maori independence – it’s a jarring juxtaposition,” Duncan said, even if there was good reason to have a debate about the vaccine mandates in a democratic society. In a rare display of unity, not a single politician went out to meet the protesters, which Duncan said showed that both parliament, and the New Zealand population generally, had “almost zero support for this protest … This is a loud minority.” Additional reporting by Eva Corlett in Wellington and Kim Willsher in Paris • This article was amended on 13 February 2022. Barry Manilow music was played over loud speakers by New Zealand’s parliament Speaker, not by police as stated in an earlier version.Cabaret opens with a Nazi getting kicked out of the Kit Kat Klub, a Berlin nightspot catering to the prurient whims of a well-heeled audience in 1931. It ends with the entire club populated by Nazis, as if it were under occupation. In between, the show goes on with minor changes to accommodate a different clientele, and the country, too, slips inexorably into darkness, engulfing characters who are powerless to stop it, even if they’re inclined to do so. It is an utterly bone-chilling movie musical, yet seductive, witty and delightful – an unbearable lightness of being. The contradictory tensions of Cabaret are managed with such deftness by director Bob Fosse that it remains, 50 years later, a rare film that feels like only one person could have pulled it off. How people continue to live their lives in the face of encroaching authoritarianism and violence is an endlessly renewable and relevant subject for movies, but Fosse choreographs the foreground and background of historic change with as much care as he brings to the song-and-dance at the Kit Kat Klub. “Leave your troubles outside,” beckons Joel Grey’s Master of Ceremonies to the audience in the opening number. Easier said than done. Cherry-picking from multiple sources – chiefly Kander and Ebb’s 1966 Broadway musical and the semi-autobiographical novel on which it was based, Christopher Isherwood’s The Berlin Stories – Fosse heightens the contrast between the libertine spirit of his main characters and the nationalist, antisemitic fervor that was sweeping through Germany at the time. In an all-time great performance, Liza Minnelli is both winning ingenue and devastating tragedienne as Sally Bowles, an American performer at the Kit Kat Klub. Fosse cleverly introduces Minnelli as a background dancer first, suggesting her willingness to conform, to literally fall in line with the crowd. But of course she doesn’t conform or shrink in the spotlight. She’s Liza Minnelli. Sally chooses to live her life moment to moment, with a spontaneous pleasure-seeking instinct that allows her to keep the blinders on. When Sally is off the stage, Minnelli’s performance recalls the vintage work of a young Shirley MacLaine, the star of Fosse’s debut feature, Sweet Charity. Jokes are made constantly about the number of men who have passed through Sally’s bedroom, but she has a bubbly naivety that suggests a born-yesterday innocence. She simply isn’t going to turn her thoughts toward the politics of the country that’s hosting her. Her world is the Kit Kat Klub, a disheveled room at a boarding house and wherever the latest party takes her. Splitting the difference between Isherwood’s gay surrogate and the heterosexual in the Broadway musical, Michael York plays Brian, a bisexual British academic who moves into the room across the hall from Sally, where he intends to teach English for money while working on his doctorate. He doesn’t have a minute to settle in before Sally ropes him into a “prairie oyster” hangover concoction (an egg with Worcestershire sauce) and works quickly and effectively to make him the closest friend she has in town. His sexuality is an obstacle that she’s able to clear – unlike his last three girlfriends – but when the two meet Max (Helmut Griem), a rich baron who likes to play the field, it leads to a bizarre love triangle that complicates their relationship. Inspired by the silent movie star Louise Brooks – both in her sharply cut bangs and her air of mystery – Minnelli commands the screen at all times, but shows tremendous versatility in a range of situations: as the featured performer of Mein Herr; as a Golden Age romcom flibbertigibbet; as a sexual adventurer; and, finally, as a woman who has developed the kind of hangover that can’t be washed away by a prairie oyster. Grey is similarly inspired as the Master of Ceremonies, acting as a kind of bellwether for the changes happening in the country, which has the effect of turning him from silly to sinister as the Kit Kat Klub starts serving a new audience. York can only seem temperamentally stodgy by comparison, but his performance accommodates Minnelli’s while giving the film a crucial moral footing in reality. Fosse’s version of this story restores a subplot from Isherwood’s book about the relationship between Fritz (Fritz Wendel), a German Jew who’s passing as Protestant, and Natalia (Marisa Berenson), a wealthy Jewish heiress who doesn’t know his secret. Fritz and Natalia’s fraught romance feels too tangentially related to Sally and Brian’s to fit snugly into Cabaret as a whole, but it signals Fosse’s seriousness in engaging in the grim truths of the period, even if that results in much more of a bummer musical than the one that played Broadway. And in perhaps the most extraordinary scene in the movie, Fosse pauses to witness a beer garden in rural Bavaria, where the entire crowd, shot from Leni Riefenstahl camera angles, comes together to join a Hitler Youth member in a soul-sickening rendition of Tomorrow Belongs to Me. (Move Cabaret toward the top of the long list of 70s studio movies that could have never been 21st-century studio movies.) There’s a way of understanding the characters in Cabaret, Sally especially, as unforgivably decadent, indulging in wine and song and sex while underestimating or willfully ignoring where the country was going. The baron Max is certainly guilty of that. But one thing Cabaret does well is remind the audience of the very human impulse to “leave the world outside” and escape into fantasy – whether that’s the fantasy of lingerie kick-lines or the fantasy that the Nazi threat can be suppressed by the German government. Sally has no power to stop any of it from happening – and Brian, when he tries, gets beaten on the streets – and so all she can do is keep going to work. History doesn’t pause for her. Or for us. • This article was amended on 14 February 2022 to correct the spelling of Leni Riefenstahl’s surname.As news of the latest grim White House briefing on Ukraine broke late on Friday evening in Kyiv, the bars and restaurants were as full as on any other Friday night, the atmosphere remained jovial, and anyone without access to a Twitter feed would have struggled to divine any sense of foreboding. While US officials and the Washington journalists briefed by them prophesied a “horrific, bloody” campaign to be launched against Ukraine imminently, nobody except journalists was paying much attention to what, to many in Kyiv, seems like just the latest in a line of apocalyptic briefings. As the staff at Washington thinktanks wrote of a ruthless campaign to be launched this weekend – one that would deprive Ukraine of power and heating, and take out the top command of the army – the streets of Kyiv, where light snow fell, felt like a parallel reality. Of course, underneath the surface calm, many Ukrainians are making contingency plans, some to fight off an invasion, others to flee for safer places. It is not possible to buy an electricity generator in the city, and many discuss what they would do if the worst does happen. Cellars, metro stations and even strip clubs have been mooted as possible bomb shelters in the event of a Russian air attack. On Saturday, thousands of Ukrainians rallied in central Kyiv for a “unity march”, waving Ukrainian flags and banners reading “We will resist” and “Invaders must die”. However, the crowd of several thousand was small by the standards of a city used to giant protests, and reflects a weariness at the constant, nagging threat of war. “Putin is making a huge mistake if he thinks he will be able to destroy Ukraine,” said Andriy Tyshko, on the march with his infant daughter. Iryna Kuprienko, who was out for a stroll near the protest, said she did not understand the fuss. “We know Putin is capable of doing terrible things but surely even he is not mad enough to try to bomb Kyiv.” As more embassies announced the evacuation of most diplomatic staff and told their citizens they should leave now or be prepared to get stuck, the increasing tension is getting harder to ignore. American citizens in Kyiv received calls on Friday evening from concerned consular staff, telling them to make plans to leave immediately. But for many people here, the idea of a full-fledged invasion remains something outlandish and implausible. Many Ukrainians, up to and including the president, say they are well aware of the risk Russia poses but do not quite believe the American insistence that the threat is imminent. “I’m beginning to get pretty annoyed with this,” said one former Ukrainian MP, who asked not to be named. “I am very pro-western, but the way this invasion news is coming out reminds me of [unverified rumours on] Russian Telegram channels, about unnamed sources and backroom information. “The media hysteria is extremely annoying, and you start to lose trust in your own government, which is just telling us to keep calm.”I still own a painting that I purchased at a flea market in Los Angeles in 1993. I got it cheap; $25 and it was in the back of my clapped-out convertible . It turned out to be a copy of Bronzino’s Portrait of a Young Man with a Book. In 16th-century Florence, if you wanted your portrait painted then he was your man, for one simple reason: he made you look great. His particular gift – and shrewd commercial decision – was to imbue his wealthy subjects with swagger, confidence and even a certain weight loss. Three centuries before you could sit before a photographer and more than four before you could take a selfie, rich Florentines would sit still for days and trust that Bronzino would do for them what he’d done for their wealthy neighbours, for Dante. It paid to flatter. In recent years, I’ve had, as a screenwriter, to wrestle with the extent to which the artist should or should not seek to serve the vanity of the subject and have now done so across an array of “sitters”, from popes Francis and Benedict to Stephen Hawking… and now Andy Warhol and Jean-Michel Basquiat. I take it as self-evident that I am serving art, not biography; that the facts alone, as far as they can ever be known, will simply not do. Where’s the room for interpretation, for “my” depiction? These issues were very much on my mind when I began to write my play about Warhol and Basquiat, two men with carefully managed personas. How could I capture them whole – not as they wished to be seen but in a way that tells us something we don’t already know, precisely because they didn’t want us to know. In the case of Warhol you might almost say that he was all persona. His greatest creation was his own image. His journey, from pale runt out of steel-town America to wig-wearing aesthete presiding over American art, was one entirely of painful self-creation. He thought art should do no more than give you a nice little hit, “like when you see a celebrity in the street”. It should purely be about surfaces because, as such, it reflected that modern life had become all surface, no substance. Basquiat also barely said boo in public. He was the first high-profile black painter America had ever seen and was young when he became famous, so young it almost hurt. In fact, his fame did hurt.. The attention that came so quickly overwhelmed him as the money rolled in and he tried to maintain his air of hobo chic, of smack-addicted street artist turned gallery genius in paint-spattered Armani suits. Although he did sleep rough on the busted streets of New York’s Lower East Side when he first crossed the river from Brooklyn, his father was actually a successful accountant and he had lived in a brownstone house for his entire childhood and been educated in an expensive private school. Here, again, persona meets reality and produces a tantalising shortfall. So, how do you get under the hood of such types who, we can assume, would rather sit for a Bronzino than a Lucian Freud? In the case of Warhol, a quick read of his diaries helped convince me that I could create, on stage, a mouthy Andy, a rivalrous Andy, a take-no-prisoners talker. For here, in his entries, was a character totally different from any I’d seen drawn: a gossip, a torrential name-dropper and popper of bubble reputations who was every bit as bitchy as his one-time crush, Truman Capote. Basquiat was a tougher nut to crack in that there is very little extant of his utterances and beliefs. And yet we have the thousand paintings he left before his death from an accidental heroin overdose, aged 27. From these, I figured, a depiction could be made. The paintings, I feel, tell us a great deal about the burden that he shouldered. His works teem with a playful but troubled questioning, inviting us to conclude that, unlike Warhol, he believed in the power of art to transform the artist and the viewer. So, if someone in my position is to offer anything worthwhile beyond biography, strict rules must be observed. The portrait must be drawn from deep research (sorry, Bronzino) but it can’t give up its interpretive responsibilities. Whether we’re talking about unreliable entries left behind in a diary or just obscure markings on a canvas, real lives can still be discerned in the mists. • Anthony McCarten is a novelist, screenwriter and playwright. His films include The Theory of Everything and The Two Popes. The Collaboration is at the Young VicThe husband of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, the British-Iranian charity worker detained in Iran, has said she is “very, very angry” after learning about the collapse of a deal to bring her home. Zaghari-Ratcliffe fears she is a “bargaining chip” in ongoing nuclear talks and is filled with “anger at her life being stolen” and the government’s “lack of urgency” in securing her release, Richard Ratcliffe said. The 43-year-old, from West Hampstead in London, was jailed for five years in 2016 after being convicted on national security charges for plotting to topple the Iranian government, which she has always denied. She was released temporarily in 2020 during the Covid pandemic, but was handed a further sentence in 2021 for “spreading propaganda” and is held under house arrest in Tehran, unable to return to the UK to join her husband and seven-year-old daughter, Gabriella. On Wednesday, MPs were told the UK had signed an agreement to secure her release in the summer, but that the deal had fallen through. Officials had previously refused to confirm that any agreement had been made, but when questioned about it by the couple’s MP, Tulip Siddiq, the prime minister did not deny it. Britain is understood to have agreed to repay a £400m debt it owes Iran relating to an abortive deal to export British armaments in the 1970s. The UK government has not revealed why the agreement about Zaghari-Ratcliffe broke down, but there are fears it is linked to negotiations with Iran over nuclear weapons. Iran is engaged in talks in Vienna with diplomats from the US, France, Germany, Russia, China and the UK, who hope to persuade it to limit its sensitive nuclear activities in return for the lifting of economic sanctions. In response to Siddiq’s question, Boris Johnson said the debt was “difficult to settle and square away for all sorts of reasons to do with sanctions”. Zaghari-Ratcliffe was able to watch the debate from Tehran, where she is under house arrest at her mother’s property. “In some ways she’s all isolated and far removed from the world, but she can see it now in a way that when she was in prison she couldn’t,” Ratcliffe said. While the confirmation that a deal was nearly struck in the summer had left him feeling hopeful, “for Nazanin, it really all rushed back that actually this has been dragged on for ages and she’s lost six years of her life”. He said his wife was “amazed” by the prime minister’s comments. She told him: “I could have been home last year. Why am I still here? They have ruined my life, day by day, for six years. Where is [Johnson’s] urgency? I just want to come home.” The next day she was “even crosser” after “stewing on the injustice”. “She’s calmer now,” he said yesterday, adding that they had spent the morning going through Gabriella’s baby photos together. Johnson has publicly pledged to meet Ratcliffe, an accountant who has campaigned tirelessly for his wife’s release, although a date for the meeting has yet to be fixed. Ratcliffe is expected to meet officials from the Foreign Office in the coming days. Siddiq, Labour MP for Hampstead and Kilburn, has urged transparency about the reasons for the collapse of the deal. “My constituent, Richard, starved himself almost to death during a hunger strike. He didn’t eat for three weeks. I think they have a duty to explain themselves,” she said. Ratcliffe said: “Why did it go wrong? What’s stopping it from being solved now? I worry we’ve become a bargaining chip in the nuclear negotiations and that the debt is now leverage on the UK side.” He added: “We’re essentially being held in a waiting room. It’s a game of cat and mouse being played.” A Foreign Office spokesman said: “We remain committed to securing the release of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, Anoosheh Ashoori and Morad Tahbaz. It is unhelpful to connect wider bilateral issues with those unfairly detained in Iran. “Separately, the UK has always said we are committed to paying this debt to Iran. We continue to explore options as a matter of urgency to resolve this case, and will not comment further as discussions are ongoing.”The Metropolitan Police is investigating death threats against Keir Starmer made in the wake of Boris Johnson’s accusation that he “failed to prosecute” Jimmy Savile. A cache of evidence documenting the threats was sent to Scotland Yard on Friday afternoon, including a number of apparently identifiable users on the messaging app Telegram who called for the Labour party leader to be hanged or “executed”. The Centre for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH), which seeks to disrupt online hate, sent the material to the Met after unearthing threats to life against a named individual. It is understood that Starmer’s office has a separate system where concerning material is passed to the police to assess. Starmer and shadow foreign secretary David Lammy were ambushed by far-right protesters last week, some of whom shouted “traitor” and “Jimmy Savile”. Starmer blamed Boris Johnson for inciting the attack, saying he had never been accused in public of being a “paedophile protector” until the prime minister falsely accused him of failing to prosecute Savile when director of public prosecutions. Prior to the emergence of the threats, which have been seen by the Observer, a number of Tory MPs had raised concerns that the false slur by the prime minister had endangered Starmer. Imran Ahmed, chief executive of the CCDH, called for tighter controls on Telegram and said the murders of Jo Cox in 2016 and David Amess last year should serve as a warning. “Two sitting MPs have been murdered in the last six years. Telegram has made a calculated business decision to allow users to egg each other on to violence against named politicians with zero consequences, just as they allow anti-vaxxers, incels and other fringe extremists to congregate on their platform. “Fundamentally, this is a national security threat and we need to act fast.” Starmer was returning to parliament on Monday with Lammy when they had to be bundled into a police car after anti-vax protesters surrounded them with shouts of “paedo protector” and “Jimmy Savile”. Following the incident, English Defence League founder Tommy Robinson, real name Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, shared footage of the ambush on his Telegram channel, prompting a supporter to call for Starmer and Lammy to be detained “until preparation can be made for their execution”. The conspiracy theory group Resistance GB, also showed footage of the incident, leading a supporter to post that Starmer should be “linched [sic] from the nearest lamppost”. Footage of the incident was distributed on another Telegram channel leading to further calls for Starmer and Lammy to be killed. “The sooner they’s all dead the better. Hang the fucking lot of them,” read one post. Another added “They can all swing on a rope together.” A separate user posted: “They all need to feel the heat of a rope around their neck.” Another Tommy Robinson supporter posted on the “free speech” social media platform Gettr site “bring back public executions” in reference to Starmer. Responding to the developments, a Labour source said: “Of course extremists of all stripes don’t like Keir – he spent years helping to put them and their ilk in prison and keep Britain’s streets safe from them.” Adam Hadley, executive director and founder of Tech Against Terrorism, an initiative launched by the UN counter-terrorism executive directorate, said the harassment of Starmer and Lammy demonstrated the danger of politicians legitimising conspiracy theories. “Conspiracy theorists and far-right extremists appear to be emboldened by this physical attack on the Labour leader. We have seen multiple posts since Monday that celebrate the incident, some with tens of thousands of views,” Hadley said. Among the far-right groups that praised last week’s accosting of Starmer were anti-Muslim extremists Britain First, the neo-Nazi Mark Collett who called the Labour leader a “paedophile protector”, and an organisation linked to football hooligans and the EDL. Tech Against Terrorism also found death threats with a Tommy Robinson supporter saying Labour MPs “need hanging”. Ahmed said: “Every time a violent extremist makes a threat of violence and gets away with it, the norms of those groups worsen, and others are driven to newer depths of behaviour.”The government is poised to terminate the contract of the Dutch multinational company it hired to run its flagship national tutoring programme (NTP), after official figures revealed the scheme was falling far short of its targets, sources close to the education department have told the Observer. The £1.5bn programme was set up to help pupils across England whose learning has been most disrupted by the pandemic. But the Observer understands that the Department for Education has been holding meetings in the past two weeks to discuss replacing Randstad, which has so far met only 10% of its target for children receiving one-to-one or small-group tutoring from NTP tuition partners. Many heads are strongly in favour of the idea of offering tutoring to families that would not normally be able to afford private tuition. But their feedback on the way the programme has been running under Randstad is damning. Schools have reported tutoring companies cancelling lessons just before they are due to start, tutors failing to arrive, and tutorials being run by people with no knowledge of the subject they are teaching. Schools also say that the main web platform is “bureaucratic and too difficult to use”. A senior education source involved in the discussion over the future of the programme said: “There has been a lot of discussion behind the scenes. A rival bid from tutoring organisations has been made and this is being seriously considered by officials and ministers.” The source said that they were expecting the department to make an announcement in a matter of weeks. Sam Freedman, senior adviser to the education charity Ark and a former senior policy adviser to Michael Gove when he was education secretary, said that the department’s contracts usually had a “tight performance commitment”. “I can’t imagine Randstad is hitting the performance targets, and from what I’ve heard they will have the ability to kick them out.” He added: “It would make sense to give a grant to the charities to run it. The [tutoring] charities are furious. Some haven’t been paid by Randstad.” It is widely expected that the National Audit Office will conduct an investigation into the NTP, and Freedman said: “If ministers have been shown what is going wrong and not acted on it, that will make things much worse for them.” Lee Elliot Major, professor of social mobility at the University of Exeter, said: “What is happening with the NTP would be a national scandal if we weren’t all so diverted by partygate and I hope there will be a public inquiry. It is a lot of public money but, more importantly, it is a battle for the futures of a whole generation of children.” The education select committee is already undertaking an inquiry into what has gone wrong in the delivery of the programme. School leaders have told the committee that the programme is “a bureaucratic nightmare”. This week, its chair, Robert Halfon, said that the government should “seriously consider” revoking Randstad’s contract. He said that he feared the funding “is not reaching the most vulnerable children in our communities”. Writing for the Conservative Home website, he quoted research showing that more than 96% of schools in the south had worked with the NTP, but that only 50% of schools in the north had. Nick Brook, deputy general secretary of the National Association for Head Teachers union, said: “Every child in every school in every part of the country should be able to access tutoring support if they need it regardless of their family income. It is exasperating to see something that could be so transformational falling flat.” He said: “It all needs to be made simple and easy for schools to access. The most obvious solution would be to give a single tutoring grant to schools and let them choose to go to a tuition partner or employ their own tutors.” A spokesperson for Randstad said: “We understand the importance of the national tutoring programme and take the responsibility of running it seriously.” The DfE was asked to comment but declined.It was a Saturday morning and Garry Ratcliffe, chief executive of a multi-academy trust of primary schools in Kent, was in school early to supervise the start of tutoring sessions provided by the government’s national tutoring programme (NTP). The programme aims to help pupils most in need of catching up after the disruption of Covid, and 12 children had been promised tuition. Ratcliffe’s school is in a deprived area with no culture of Saturday morning clubs, and parents had to be persuaded that it was worth sending in their children at the weekend. But just 10 minutes before the sessions were due to start, the tutoring company rang to say they couldn’t find any tutors. Like many headteachers, Ratcliffe does not need convincing that one-to-one or small group tutoring can be a great way to help children. Middle-class parents pay for private tutors in their droves: 41% of 11- to 16-year-olds in London receive tuition outside school, according to research by the Sutton Trust, a charity that works on social mobility . The government’s £1.5bn programme is intended to level the playing field, bringing tutoring to pupils all over the country whose families could never afford it. “We really believed in it as an idea,” Ratcliffe said. “We contacted a tutoring company that was a registered partner. They promised the earth and delivered very little.” Ratcliffe’s trust arranged for pupils “in real need” of help with lost learning to come in for three-hour sessions over six weeks. On three of those Saturdays, the company called moments before the sessions to say it couldn’t find tutors. He said the tutors who did turn up were “a real mixed bag” in terms of quality. “One tutor was an absolute gem, another was on her mobile the whole time, and a third turned up asking us to print things out and whether we had anything on the four times table.” He added: “We gave strong feedback, which obviously the company was disappointed by as it would mean they might be dropped. They weren’t.” Sources said the government is poised to axe Randstad, the Dutch multinational company appointed to deliver the programme, after revelations that pupil enrolment is more than 90% below target. The latest official figures reveal that, as of 12 December, pupils had begun 52,000 courses with the official tuition partners through the main pillar of the programme. That is just 10% of the firm’s 524,000 target for this academic year. School leaders report serious problems with the service, including lack of availability and poor quality of tutors. Many say they have found the main NTP website too difficult to use. Many are turning their backs on the main route and organising tuition through a schools-led route instead. Randstad was awarded the contract to run the programme last June, after submitting a £25m bid that significantly undercut a bid from charities including the Education Endowment Foundation (EEF), which ran the programme in its first year. Randstad’s bid came in well below the £62m maximum proposed by the government. Sam Freedman, senior adviser to the education charity Ark and special adviser to Michael Gove when he was the secretary of state for education, said the procurement process was developed in a way that allowed price to become too important. Although Randstad was considerably cheaper, Freedman said its bid was “only just over the threshold” on quality. “Why was that allowed? It’s not a scientific judgment: someone must have decided to let them in.” Experts say that finding enough high-quality tutors, especially in more deprived areas where there is no established market for private tuition, was always going to be a challenge for a programme of this scale. However, Freedman said: “A proper provider would have been running a high-quality recruitment and training programme to get numbers up. They just don’t have the money to do that as the bid they put in was so low.” Michaela Ellis (not her real name) is a single mother from Redruth in Cornwall whose daughter fell behind in the pandemic with her GCSEs looming. She said she had been very pleased when the government first announced the programme because, as an unpaid carer, she would never have been able to afford tuition for her daughter herself. “I felt that some individual attention, even in a small group, would boost her confidence and she would feel less overwhelmed. But we are now weeks away from exams and she’s had nothing,” she says. A spokesperson for the Department for Education (DfE) said: “We are determined to support children from all backgrounds to catch up on lost learning and reach their potential. Over 300,000 courses were delivered in the last term alone and the programme remains on track to deliver the ambitious target of teaching two million courses this academic year.” The spokesperson added that a range of measures would ensure all tutoring was of high quality. However, the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL) recently asked their members for feedback on the programme. The responses, which the Observer has seen, paint a very different picture. One secondary school head said: “I have one word for our experience of the programme: disastrous. No-shows, lack of subject specialist knowledge, punctuality issues. One of the tutors withdrew her services entirely on the day the students were expecting her.” The head of a secondary school in the south-west said they hadn’t been able to find any tutors through the main NTP programme. “We have had appointments booked [with NTP tutoring partners] to discuss, which have been cancelled at the last minute. We have heard from other schools that you don’t often get the same tutor each time which is difficult for the students. We have tried local tutors and have had no response.” The school has decided to use the direct schools funding pathway to pay its own staff to deliver extra tuition after school. The head said: “Our staff are exhausted but want to make sure our students get a good deal.” Geoff Barton, general secretary of the ASCL, said: “If you are in an area like the north-east or south-west, where tutoring isn’t part of the cultural tradition, and you’re not allowed to employ your own people, supply is always going to get in the way.” Barton says the programme is currently operating with “byzantine complexity”. His union is calling for all the money to be given directly to schools instead. Nick Brook, deputy general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said the 20 pages of advisory notes and a website that is “far from intuitive” on how to register interest or find a tutor are putting schools off using the NTP. “One of the biggest problems is that they have taken something that should have been simple for schools to use and made it very complex. School leaders have a lot on their plate but if it was straightforward many more would have accessed it by now,” he said. Lee Elliot Major, professor of social mobility at the University of Exeter, who was lobbying for a national tutoring scheme before the pandemic hit, said: “Tutoring is huge business in this country because of the middle-class demand. But the big problem is consistency. How high-quality are these tutors? It’s not just about numbers, it is about how good they are.” A spokesperson for Randstad said: “We understand the importance of the NTP and take the responsibility of running it seriously. We ensure that all tuition providers accepted on to the NTP framework have successfully passed the robust quality, safeguarding and evaluation standards set by the DfE.” Professor Becky Francis, chief executive of the Education Endowment Foundation, said there was clear evidence that one-to-one and small group tutoring could lead to four to five months of progress for pupils. But she warned that “it does need to be high quality to have an impact”. The EEF enrolled 125,000 pupils in its first three months of running the programme in 2020, which was half of their target for the whole year. Having met their targets for the first year, it was widely expected that the charity would be tasked with running the programme. Francis declined to comment on Randstad’s failure to meet its targets, but said: “I feel very proud of what we achieved in the first year.”The Danish French film-maker Jonas Poher Rasmussen’s animated documentary, in which a middle-aged academic living in Denmark relives his flight from Afghanistan as a boy, is shaping up as a major awards contender. Within the past fortnight, it has been nominated for best animated feature and best documentary at both the Baftas and Oscars, with an additional Academy Award nod for best international feature. It’s easy to see why the film has touched a nerve. Addressing difficult subject matter in a manner that is at once emotionally engaging and stylistically adventurous, Flee follows in the footsteps of Ari Folman’s 2008 animated awards-winner Waltz With Bashir, about his experiences and memories of the 1982 Lebanon war, proving once again that genuinely “true life” storytelling requires as much artistry and invention as any drama. Drawing on his background in radio documentaries, Rasmussen conducted a lengthy series of intimate interviews with the pseudonymously renamed “Amin Nawabi” whom he had known since middle school, but who had kept his past to himself. I’ll leave it to the film to explain why Amin’s story remained untold for so long; suffice to say that there is a palpable air of discovery as Rasmussen’s subject gradually reveals himself, finally giving voice to traumas that had long been hidden. Key to Amin’s openness is the animated format that allows him to speak about his life without sacrificing his anonymity. His memories are vivid, packed with the kind of details that transfer beautifully to the screen: flying kites and listening to music on headphones on the streets of Kabul; gazing with dawning longing at posters of Jean-Claude Van Damme; witnessing his father’s stoical courage when the mujahideen come calling. These scenes are rendered in sharp, unfussy 2D animation that at times reminded me of the boldly accessible images of the Belgian cartoonist Hergé or the rapturous melancholia of the UK-based Dutch animator Michaël Dudok de Wit (The Red Turtle). Such clarity gives way to something altogether more impressionistic and abstract as Amin recalls the horrors endured as he and his family fled Afghanistan for Moscow and beyond. While news stories detailing the unspeakable ordeals faced by desperate refugees have become appallingly commonplace, Amin’s account of human trafficking is dramatically amplified by the nightmarish images conjured up by Copenhagen-based Sun Creature Studio. Whether it’s phantasmagorical visions of drowning as an overcrowded boat hits a storm or the claustrophobia of being trapped in a sealed cargo container, Flee had my palms sweating with anxiety during its most harrowing sequences. Yet what emerges from this remarkable story is not a tale of victimhood but, rather, a coming-of-age narrative that covers a lifetime. Amin is physically displaced by the events of his early life, and his sense of identity has been similarly fractured. In the film’s opening movement we learn that Amin (who is in his mid-30s) is struggling to accept the prospect of an idyllic life in a rural home with his long-term partner, Kasper. Does the key to unlocking the future lie in confronting the ghosts of the past? That is certainly how it appears, as Flee traces an arc from secrecy to openness that seems to signal a great unburdening. No wonder Rasmussen gives his subject an “original screenplay” credit – this is a triumph-of-the-human-spirit story as dramatic as the most finely wrought melodrama, with flashes of vintage newsreels reminding us that it is all “real”. Just as Max Richter’s haunting score proved such a powerful part of Waltz With Bashir, so the Swedish composer Uno Helmersson provides a lyrical accompaniment to Amin’s story, his spine-tingling cues (featuring the violinist Mari Samuelsen) rubbing shoulders with pop tracks that play a transformative role. I’d never been a fan of Norwegian chart-toppers A-ha before, but having seen Flee I now cannot get their anthemic Take on Me (the video for which famously blended live-action with animation) out of my head. In UK cinemas, Flee (on which Riz Ahmed gets an executive producer credit) is being released in subtitled and dubbed versions. I have seen the former and would strongly recommend it, although anything that widens the film’s mainstream appeal is to be applauded.Does this happen to every generation? Where a cultural moment that, during our adolescence appeared deliciously shocking, is revealed to us in adulthood as, at best “troubling”, at worst a grim representation of how the world is cracked down the middle, a thick and low-humming oil dripping from its wound? I realise now what a naive girl I must have been, to have accepted without daily outrage such clumsy horrors as the media’s addiction to Amy Winehouse’s addictions and Britney Spears’s breakdown, and I choose “naive” rather than “cruel”, because this week has been tough enough. But today, entering middle-age tired and thoughtful, I remain grateful for the ongoing trend for films and TV shows produced as correctives to those decades of casual cruelty, partly for the answers they give, and partly for the questions they leave me with. The latest is Pam &amp; Tommy, a scripted mini-series about the scandal that unfolded in the mid-1990s after Pamela Anderson and her new husband Tommy Lee’s sex video was stolen from their Malibu home. It does something awkward which its sister-ish piece, Impeachment (Ryan Murphy’s show about Monica Lewinsky), didn’t – it lures an audience in by starting as a screwball romp with a heist and a penis that talks back, then, with scenes of the bloodthirsty deposition when Lee and a pregnant Anderson tried to stop Penthouse from using the tape (“Do you recall how old you were when you first publicly exposed your genitals?”) sinking into something harder, a reckoning. “It’s not funny,” Anderson told Jay Leno on The Tonight Show in 1996. “This is devastating to us.” We’re left feeling that it’s a kind of miracle she is still standing, having seen what experiences like this – ridicule, constant surveillance, objectification – can do to a young woman. The sense of entitlement the public felt to the intimate life of this couple has endured and exploded beyond celebrity. Soon after their safe was stolen by a disgruntled electrician, the internet arrived, and quickly became its own kind of safe, now full of everybody’s videos, whether nudes, babies or dinner. What Anderson would have been shocked to learn back then, as she was forced to meet humiliation and misogyny with the wide bright smile of an air hostess, was that two-and-a-half decades later many millions would willingly share similar videos every day. When the mini-series finishes, the reckonings keep wrecking, as we sit with the fact that both Tommy Lee and Pamela Anderson declined to be involved. It’s been reported that Anderson finds it “shocking” the series has been made without her consent. “Pamela has no regrets about her life, but the only thing she would probably erase is this burglary,” said “a source” last month. “She feels so violated to this day. It brings back a very painful time for her.” Could the retelling of the story, including a dramatisation of Anderson miscarrying, prove just as harmful to her as the story itself? This is the lemon that sours the drink. It’s fabulous that discussions about objectification, invasions of privacy and abuses of power are being ignited by glossy TV shows, and that viewers like me are being prodded to question our own complicity. But we’re a couple of years into the project now, and they’ve only got us so far. For all the focus on feminism online and its mainstreaming in the media, the world’s politics have not kept up. Rape and sexual assault appears basically legal – only 1.3% of rape cases are now being prosecuted, recorded rapes and sexual offences in England and Wales have “hit a record high” and we’re learning about a multitude of cases where women are suffering at the hands of police supposed to protect them. Across the world, women’s abortion rights are being snatched away. Decades after Anderson and Lee’s sex tape, the posting of nude images of women without their consent is rife, but unlike revenge porn, it is legal – a report by the Revenge Porn Helpline calls it “collector culture,” as the pictures are traded like football cards. That issue of consent – the idea that Pamela Anderson might feel violated not just by the ripples still felt by the exploitation of her “sex tape”, but by the world revisiting it today – is illustrative of how talking can be prioritised over action. Producers must have felt hers was too good a story not to tell – meaning the story ceased to be hers. It’s a funny kind of entertainment, a comedy caper about misogyny that features a talking penis, and leaves you awake at 4am, guilt and a little rage rattling through your throat. But the discomfort is a reminder. If what seemed funny then seems disgraceful now, then something is clear: the actions we take today will look very different to the next generation, looking afresh at the world and ready to find their own cracks. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanThe Ashes aftershocks have rumbled on over the past week, and on Tuesday peaked with the news that neither Jimmy Anderson nor Stuart Broad will feature when the so-called “red-ball reset” begins in the Caribbean next month. Both are known to be hurt to miss out and a touch miffed at being told in a couple of short, sharp phone calls rather than in person. Broad was literally raging against the machine in his final outing – picking a fight with a robot camera that kept moving on the boundary’s edge in Hobart – and his latest newspaper column continues the theme. In the boardroom at the England and Wales Cricket Board, with pictures of the record-breaking pair on the wall, Andrew Strauss tried to explain the rationale. He insisted Anderson and Broad would still be “in the mix” come the summer and this was a case of separating out England’s strategy home and away. It was also not, he claimed, a case of either being a negative dressing-room presence. “They are exceptional performers on the field and very professional off it, which is why they have played for so long,” said Strauss. “It gives an opportunity at the moment for people to stand up and play leadership roles they haven’t previously.” On the flip side, hasn’t an environment that has appeared soft for some time now suddenly become even softer? Anderson and Broad may be grouchy old pros at 39 and 35 respectively but they also set a fiercely high standard; more fool the teammate who hasn’t mined their combined 321 caps of nous or been driven to emulate their ongoing commitment to physical conditioning. Certainly Matthew Fisher, plucked from Yorkshire on promise and one of two uncapped seamers alongside Saqib Mahmood, is disappointed he will not work alongside them. Chris Woakes, surprisingly reprieved, is now the senior bowler on tour with 42 caps, with Mark Wood (25), Ollie Robinson (nine) and Craig Overton (six) combining for fewer. Strauss spoke of a “new cycle” starting – a phrase that grinds the gears of many who feel England have too often been guilty of not focusing on the Test in front of them – but as an interim director of cricket without designs on a return full time, it is debatable whether he had the mandate to make such a significant policy shift. Logically, the main aim of the caretaker management team on the five-week tour should be to steady the listing ship. Fresh blood was clearly required in the batting department but shoring up the captaincy of Joe Root results-wise should be the priority before the new director of cricket, selector and head coach outline their vision. To that end, and with Jofra Archer and Olly Stone still injured, one or both of Anderson and Broad would surely have helped Root here, even if the Sydney Test – when the pair became slightly leggy in the second innings and Wood’s workload went up – suggested their days in the same XI should be limited. The input from the Test captain, who was in the selection meeting but without a vote, is a bit vague too. After all, at the end of the Ashes walloping, Root was asked whether he wanted Anderson and Broad to plough on and replied: “Why wouldn’t you want class like that?” Strauss stressed the 16-man squad selected has not been imposed and so Root’s view has clearly changed; certainly his take on No 3 has, the impending move to a spot where he averages 38, after his annus mirabilis of six centuries at No 4, representing a second policy shift that feels counterintuitive. That move is one that can be more easily reversed, at least, and Root will no doubt look to shift the focus away from the headline omissions and back on to those selected for a tour that is historically tough and three years ago witnessed a vastly more experienced England side turned over. Alex Lees will be the latest opener hoping to jam the revolving door after his own reboot at Durham, while the silken talents of Ben Foakes behind the stumps will make a return to international stage. Matt Parkinson, a similar cause celebre among England supporters, is the second spin option alongside Jack Leach, even if Root’s management of this department remains maddening. In another era Root would be back in the ranks by now but then in another era the wider response to Anderson and Broad would be different too. Certainly the past week in English cricket has not matched the frenzy witnessed around Justin Langer’s exit as Australia head coach, which in itself feels slightly instructive. Coaches come and go. So, too, underperforming players, such as the six other Englishmen to walk the plank. But a pair of all-time greats, whose recent performances still place them in the top bracket of fit and available seamers? Supporters have made their feelings known – the majority seem shocked and fearful it’s all over – but it has not hit the levels of the Langer debate. Perhaps this is in part down to Strauss leaving the door ajar (even if departing players, bar Kevin Pietersen, seldom see it double-bolted publicly anyway). The high regard in which Strauss is held – something built on the 308 wickets Anderson and Broad shared under his captaincy – may have played a role too. But even factoring in these elements, the alarm bells that scarcely stop ringing at the ECB these days should have grown a bit louder by the fact that the country at large was not mouthing “WTF?”; that radio phone-ins were not beset with an avalanche of calls either berating or backing the decision. This does not feel like a population left apathetic by a succession of lamentable mornings, where grim scorecards lay in wait like bloodied horses heads under the covers. It’s rather a national team that has lost centrality in the zeitgeist and two utterly stellar careers that have played out almost entirely behind a paywall. During the Ashes summer in Australia it was hard not to be jealous; jealous that the exploits of their men’s and women’s teams are part of the national conversation through free-to-air coverage and jealous that their Test grounds are flooded with little champions playing cricket on the concourses, not solely the domain of grownups. Tom Harrison, the ECB chief executive, is reportedly working to renew the broadcasting contract before his expected departure. He won’t, because money talks, but if there is to be a true “red-ball reset” then the next deal should see at least one Test match per summer available on every television set in the country.“In years gone by I think I might have struggled to get the information I wanted over to people because they probably wouldn’t have accepted me,” Luke Tuffs says. “They would have thought: ‘Why is a gay person telling me what to do on a football pitch?’ I genuinely think that would have been a thing 20, even 10 years ago. Now, certainly not.” Tuffs is an openly gay man who is also a football manager. This is something still so uncommon in the British game that Tuffs, whose Leatherhead team are bottom of the Isthmian Premier League in England’s seventh tier, is the most prominent example. This is not a good situation and the challenges men face to be open about their sexuality in elite football remain stubbornly difficult to overcome. Fortunately for Tuffs, he is happy to take on the mantle of role model. He also has enough charisma and passion to power a set of floodlights. “It means a lot to me to be out there because I know it’s showing young people that you can be gay, be good at sport and still be a success,” he says. “Or in my case you can be gay, terrible at sport and still be a success. I’m very proud of the visibility I give even if I’m at the lower end of the game. Hopefully, more people higher up will soon follow in my footsteps – be that players, managers, secretaries, coaches or referees, because the more visibility there is the more we normalise something that is normal, in my opinion.” Tuffs has spoken about suffering abuse, being spat on and receiving death threats from the stands when he was a player a decade ago. But in his time as a coach and a manager he says he has had “nothing but positive experiences”. Tuffs’s experience deserves to be amplified as football attempts to change the long-standing stigma around homosexuality within the game. But Tuffs still faces challenges, he says, in being able to be who he is as a person and who he needs to be as a coach. A man who can’t stop cracking jokes and introduces himself as a “massive gayer in non-league football” says he uses and encourages banter in the dressing room to address the fact of his sexuality. “It’s very simple in my head,” he says. “If something comes from love and it’s from my friends and people I trust they can say what they want. I don’t care. I’ll probably say worse things myself. I wouldn’t want to put those boundaries – you can or can’t say that – because suddenly people will be walking on eggshells. You’re in the trenches together here so a bit of dark humour is actually a really good thing.” Tuffs acknowledges that what works for him might not work for others. He recalls an incident where one young player he was working with “said they couldn’t have coped with” the jokes Tuffs was the butt of. “So just because I’m OK with it doesn’t mean others are.” It could be that Tuffs, 35, finds himself in the middle of a changing of the guard: raised in a culture that was toxic but bringing through a generation he says are “a lot more open and … a lot less judgmental”. Some who work for change in the game say you can’t wait for it, you need to make it happen now. Tuffs is sceptical. “The people at the top are older males, predominantly white males, 50-plus years old. However much education there is, they will still harbour the views they do, even if they don’t see it. It’s how they lived over the past 30-40 years; you’re not going to change that with a couple of workshops.” To give the impression that Tuffs is fatalistic would be wrong. This is a man who is making change, and whose career to this point has seen nothing but upward mobility. From his work as first-team coach at Hartley Wintney, to his first managerial job at Knaphill in 2019, then on to Ashford Town during the pandemic and now at Leatherhead he has taken scalps, broken records and progressed from step five to step three in the National League System. He talks at length about the project to keep Leatherhead, “a great football club, amazing supporters and wonderful people”, in the division and his hands-on approach to everything from transfers to supporter liaison. At the heart of it all, however, is culture: that thorny, complicated thing which requires bringing together dozens of individuals and their different histories, personalities and perspectives in pursuit of a common goal. It’s culture that Tuffs says he prioritises and that will determine whether his team succeed or fail. When he talks about it, it’s difficult not to hear echoes of his approach to his own life too. “We’ve got so many different people all with different football experiences and they’ve all got different understanding of how to play,” Tuffs says. “They’re all bright people, there’s no right and no wrong, but you might have an experienced player who’s got [certain] habits, and a young player from the academy who’s only taught one way. They’re both right but they both think different things. It’s my job to get them on the same wavelength.”By the summer of 2020, veterinary practices were beginning to feel the effects of the pandemic pet boom. That was the time that Melanie, a small-animal vet from the southeast of England, realised she no longer wanted to be in the profession. The feeling left her at a loss. All she’d ever done was eat, breathe and sleep veterinary medicine. Like many vets she had been inspired since she was a child: religiously watching TV shows such as Animal Hospital and Vets in Practice, mucking out stables to embellish her university application and completing a five-year degree before finding work at a busy practice. It was a vocation, not a job: she simply loved animals. “Ever since I knew what a vet was, I wanted to be one,” she says. “I don’t remember a time when I didn’t want to do that – until now.” But for Melanie, the pressure of lockdown was just the start. During the initial mayhem, practices were forced to work within strict Covid restrictions. Many team members were off sick, isolating or furloughed. Melanie worked three shifts on, three shifts off with a skeleton staff, clocking two hours’ overtime every evening out of a sense of duty. The busiest day in the practice calendar was usually Boxing Day. But between March and July 2020, says Melanie, every day felt as if it was Boxing Day “if the toilet was flooded and the lab was on fire”. Staff bounced from the reception to operations, from remote appointments to emergencies, shepherding animals in for treatment from the street while brushing off abuse from stressed-out owners who were unhappy about wearing masks, didn’t want to wait outside or refused to accept that they couldn’t receive a home visit to have their cat’s claws clipped. Then the infamous surge in new pets struck. The practice was swamped with lockdown puppies and kittens needing check-ups, vaccinations and neutering. The intensity of the work continued. To Melanie, it all became a bit of a blur – but one moment that changed everything was when she heard that the partner of a friend, both of whom were vets, had taken her own life. Covid restrictions meant she was unable to offer support in person. It was crushing. The profession she loved seemed to be in disarray. As the pandemic wore on, Melanie’s exhausted colleagues began to bow out. By late 2021, her practice – which usually has about 15 vets – had lost half of them and only managed to replace a handful. One of those to depart for an alternative line of work had been a vet for eight years. “At the end of the first lockdown there was a sense of camaraderie,” says Melanie. “Now everyone’s just broken.” The pandemic has been good for pets. For vets, less so. Puppies and kittens have made things bearable for many of us, yet for those who keep our companion animals in good health, the meteoric increase in pet ownership has been overwhelming. A total of 3.2m households in the UK have acquired a pet since the start of Covid, according to a report by the Pet Food Manufacturers’ Association. The majority of dog and cat owners believed their pet had an “extremely” positive effect on their wellbeing during the pandemic, according to a large-scale survey by researchers at the University of the West of Scotland. Meanwhile, Vetlife, a charity that provides emotional, financial and mental-health support to the veterinary community, received 4,000 calls to its helpline in 2020 – its busiest year on record. The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS) conducted a survey of veterinary professionals in July and August 2021 and found that 80% saw an increase in their caseload due to a rise in animal ownership. Many felt this took a toll on them, with 65% experiencing conflict between their wellbeing and their professional roles. It’s part of a perfect storm in which staff shortages due to the pandemic and Brexit have collided with record demand. There’s even a cat vaccine shortage at the moment. It’s just another thing on a long list of problems for a weary vet. The reality of modern veterinary care is very different to how the public imagines it. That’s one reason why Gareth Steel, a Scottish vet, started jotting down his thoughts. He hopes that the resulting book, Never Work with Animals, which is published this month, will “help close the gap between perception and reality”. The book documents the grit and emotion of the job: working 100-hour weeks for minimum wage, tackling health problems as varied as the animals – and owners – themselves. For Steel, hit TV shows like All Creatures Great and Small, based on a series of books by James Herriot, have nurtured a romanticised notion of the life of a vet. “That was written in the 1960s, about the 1930s,” he says. “The vet will go to see a cow, then maybe drive back and see the neighbour’s dog… and that’ll be one episode. Compare that to now, where the average UK vet sees a new animal with a new problem every 10 minutes. And with the staff shortages that’s often your problem to solve as an individual with little help or guidance.” Amid the recent pet boom, the stakes for delivering good veterinary care have never been higher. Pets have transcended their animal status to become royal members of the household they reside in: fur babies, proxy children, influencers. People – quite reasonably – expect a level of care to match. But while the British public is used to free healthcare, there’s no NHS for pets. “People really don’t understand what animal healthcare costs,” says Steel. “Through no fault of their own, people have slightly naive perspectives on how veterinary care is delivered and what it costs, the skills involved and how available that might be to them,” he says. “Probably 90% of the stress of my job has to do with this. Having to say to a client, here’s [financial] option one, or two, or three, rather than just being able to concentrate on the medicine.” It doesn’t help that many of these new pets are uninsured. Despite the pet boom, insurance subscriptions have only increased by 1%, according to the Association of British Insurers, while a Mintel report suggests that around half of pets bought since March 2020 remain without cover. It means many people only realise the true cost of pet ownership when their animal becomes sick or injured. In an interview with Radio 5 Live last August, James Russell, president of the British Veterinary Association (BVA), said the sector was “exhausted”. He stopped short of requesting that the public stop getting pets (just), instead asking people to “think long and hard before they take on a new pet to make sure they can meet all its needs, including access to veterinary care”. Insurance or no, some practices have had to close their books to new clients, which was once unheard of, yet still new pets keep joining the queue. Bianca Bassanello, 35, a vet from South Wales, works in a 24/7 emergency clinic. She is regularly faced with challenging and emotional negotiations with owners who lack cover. The lucrative business of designer dogs has led to particular problems, she tells me, such as unlicensed dealers showing up with an animal in need of an emergency caesarean or puppies bought from Gumtree by people who can’t afford to care for them. “People are spending thousands of pounds on a French bulldog and then it ends up being put down because they don’t have any money left to treat it,” she says. “It’s like people paying for a Ferrari, but they can’t afford the tyres.” In some cases vets ask the owner to sign the animal over to them so they can pay for the treatment themselves. “We’re strongly advised not to do it,” says Bassanello, “but sometimes it gets to that point of emotional fatigue with the situation. You don’t know what to do with the animal, but you think, ‘I would rather own that dog and pay £1,500 to get it fixed and give it to a charity to rehome than let it die.’” She adds: “Sometimes people refuse to give up their pet – they’d rather the animal was put to sleep. How are you supposed to move on from that?” The high emotional stakes, the staff shortages, the cost of treatment, the stress of the pandemic… it’s all leading to an increase of abuse towards veterinary staff. Almost six in 10 vets experienced some form of intimidation on the job in 2020, according to the BVA, an increase of 10% on the previous year. Vet nurses and receptionists often bear the brunt of it. One vet told me she had seen more abuse in the past 18 months than in all her seven years of working, adding that she has had to deregister three clients from her practice because of their behaviour in the past six months alone. Bassanello tells me she never needed to call the police to work before the pandemic. “I’ve received direct threats myself, been called the C-word at 1am and I know of cases where the police have had to become involved due to harassment on social media,” she says. “There have been clients where we are advised to call the police should they show up to the clinic, but we’re still professionally obliged to treat their animal.” For Melanie, dealing with abuse during an already challenging time was “absolutely disheartening”, and she is far from alone in feeling disillusioned. One vet, who qualified in 2014, told me she stepped back from the front line after spending most of the pandemic working 50-hour weeks in a practice that was “chronically understaffed”. Others described the dismay at falling out of love with a job they’d always wanted to do. “I worked my backside off to become a vet,” said one. “Now I don’t know why.” Many vets are throwing in the towel shortly after qualifying. There has already been a significant drop in new joiners and nearly half of those to quit have been working for less than five years, according to RCVS, which held an urgent summit on recruitment and retention in late 2021. With morale low, the mental health of many vets is suffering. One vet told me that “around half” of her colleagues are on some sort of medication for anxiety or depression. “There are probably more colleagues than I’m aware of that are struggling emotionally, physically, mentally,” she said. “It’s just neverending. You see 20 animals a day and we get so anxious about getting something wrong – that one mistake will be the one that ends up with the owner attacking you on social media.” Danny Chambers, a vet and mental-health campaigner, runs the Veterinary Voices Facebook group, which has more than 15,000 members. “I’d sum it up in two words,” he says. “Exhaustion and burnout.” Rosie Allister is a vet surgeon who manages the Vetlife helpline and researches mental health and wellbeing in the veterinary community. Since the pandemic, the helpline, which operates as a 24/7 support service, has encountered a 25% increase in calls. One in 20 calls are from a vet experiencing suicidal thoughts and another one in 20 describes self-harm. “There’s a lot of stuff around working conditions and stress,” she says. “I don’t think people realised there would be sustained pressure for so long.” The pandemic has added to the strain, but poor mental health is a long-term issue within the veterinary community. Vets have a suicide rate four times higher than the national average and twice as high as other healthcare professionals, according to Oxford’s Centre for Suicide Research. The reasons for this are complicated and it is not, as is sometimes assumed, due to the stress or sorrow of having to routinely put animals to sleep. As Allister emphasises, suicide is always multifactoral, but some studies have suggested that the attitude vets have towards euthanasia could be a contributory factor, as could access to drugs or firearms. Many vets have a tendency to hold themselves to very high standards and can often work long hours alone. Ultimately, it’s a challenging, unpredictable job, with high stakes resting on one’s ability to do it properly, so occupational stress is high. At times, this sense of duty can override the welfare of the individual. “It’s difficult when you feel as if you’re constantly pushing yourself because there comes a point when that becomes the norm,” says Allister. “And that’s really hard for people. It’s challenging at the moment for those who need to decompress and have more of a balance again. But how do you achieve that when there’s still this huge demand and you can’t recruit enough staff to help you?” For vets like Melanie, it was difficult to see how to make the job work without making a dramatic change. Midway through 2020, she switched to working purely nights. It seems counterintuitive but it was the only thing that kept her in the job for the following year. “The beauty of night work is that people only call you if they really need you,” she says. “I could step away from dealing with the relentless calls and the constant barrage of abuse and just focus on the animals.” Towards the end of last year, she gave birth to her first child. She’s not sure if she’ll return to the profession. “I’m waking up every three hours throughout the night to feed my baby, but it feels like a break,” she says. “I don’t have to wake up and worry about what’s going to happen tomorrow.” Vetlife provides a 24/7 phone and email helpline. If you are affected by any of the issues in this article, contact Vetlife Helpline on 0303 040 2551 or email helpline.vetlife.org.uk. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org Some names and details have been changed in this articleIt’s easy to miss good news amid coverage of the pandemic, the rising cost of living and the, ahem, rest. However, the United Kingdom is getting something right. On Thursday, the government announced that it is investing up to £23m to boost artificial intelligence (AI) skills by creating up to 2,000 scholarships across England. This will fund masters conversion courses for people from non-Stem (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) degrees. “This will attract a less homogeneous group,” explains Tabitha Goldstaub, who chairs the government’s AI council and advises the Alan Turing Institute, “which means the UK AI ecosystem benefits from graduates with different backgrounds, perspectives and life experiences”. This investment in widening education and opportunity is just one of several steps in the 10-year AI national strategy, which aims to make Britain a world leader in AI. We’re not the only ones; as the AI dashboard at the Organisation for Economic Development (OECD) shows, many other countries have their eye on the same prize. The frontrunners in this race, the United States and China, have bigger populations and deeper pockets, while the European Union has an impressive record in setting global norms and rules for data protection. To have any hope of keeping up, at the very least the UK must find a way to punch above its weight. The signs are promising. AI is already an unstoppable force in our economy. According to Tech Nation, there are more than 1,300 AI companies in the United Kingdom. Research commissioned by the government and published last month shows UK businesses spent around £63bn on AI technology and AI-related labour in 2020 alone. This figure is expected to reach more than £200bn by 2040, when it is predicted more than 1.3m UK businesses will be using AI. Even so, to make the most of the opportunities that this offers – and to understand the risks – we will need to upgrade how we educate and train our workforce. This will be tricky because AI is surrounded by a lot of hype and mixed messages. Depending on who’s talking, AI will be a “more profound change than fire or electricity” (Google CEO, Sundar Pichai), it could “spell the end of the human race” (Professor Stephen Hawking) or help us “save the environment, cure disease and explore the universe” (Demis Hassabis, founder of London-based DeepMind). Some AI researchers strike a more cautious tone, arguing that AI is just “statistics on steroids” (Dr Meredith Broussard) and “neither artificial nor intelligent” (Dr Kate Crawford). All agree that AI is transforming how we work, live, wage war and even understand what it means to be human, as Professor Stuart Russell explored in his BBC Reith Lectures in December. As we aim for the goal of becoming a world leader in AI, the United Kingdom must choose between putting ethics at the core of our strategy or leaving it as an option – a bolt-on at best. This is not a choice between being unethical or ethical; rather, it reflects a fear that regulation risks stifling innovation, especially if other countries do not prioritise ethics in their approach to AI. However, ethics is about more than laws and regulations, compliance and checklists. It’s about designing the world we want to live in. As Sir Tim Berners-Lee, who created the world wide web, explained in 2018: “As we’re designing the system, we’re designing society… Nothing is self-evident. Everything has to be put out there as something that we think will be a good idea as a component of our society.” Again, he was ahead of his time. A new role is emerging in our economy: technology ethicist. Its contours are still being shaped. Is it a technologist who works in ethics? An ethicist who works in technology? Can anyone call themselves a technology ethicist or is it an anointed position? Rather than focus on what technology ethicists are, let’s consider what they do. They might have trained in the law, data science, design or philosophy or as artists and designers. They might be employed by universities (and not just in the philosophy and computer science departments) or work in thinktanks, NGOs, private companies or any part of government. They may infuse new meaning into existing roles, such as researcher, software developer and project manager. Or they might have new responsibilities, such as responsible AI lead, algorithmic reporter or AI ethicist. They are working daily to ensure that government websites are accessible to all UK inhabitants or fighting to force the government to reveal the algorithm it is using to identify disabled people as potential benefit fraudsters, subjecting them to stressful checks and months of frustrating bureaucracy. They are doing open-source intelligence investigations into crime, terrorism and human rights abuses, or improving healthcare delivery, or protecting children online. They are working in virtual reality and augmented reality and building – and warning about – the metaverse. Some of the leading technology ethicists in the world were either educated and trained in the UK or are living and working here now. This presents us with a unique opportunity to draw on their talents to ensure that ethics is embedded into our AI strategy, rather than treated as an elective or a bolt-on. This is about more than redesigning our education curriculum or new ways of working. It’s about creating the future. • Stephanie Hare is a researcher and broadcaster. Her new book is Technology Is Not Neutral: A Short Guide to Technology EthicsI have spent much of the past decade talking to people about love. I make it clear that any type of love is a welcome topic but when I ask what love is, my interviewees often shoot straight to romantic love. This is partly down to the inadequacy of our language: that small word has to do a lot of heavy lifting. But it is also because of the multibillion-pound industry that has convinced us the search for “the one” is the be-all and end-all. Mention love and that’s where we immediately go. But does this obsession with romantic love still reflect the lives we lead? In my new book, Why We Love: The New Science Behind our Closest Relationships, I have spoken to people from different backgrounds who have made me rethink our acceptance of romantic love as the dominant narrative. For some it is not a priority, for others it is a restrictive stereotype, while for others it can be a source of risk. As Valentine’s Day comes round again maybe it’s time for a different perspective. Human love is a special thing, unique in its longevity and the sheer number of beings we are capable of loving. We can love our family, our friends, our lovers. We can also love across the species boundary and the spiritual divide. And as AI romps ahead it may be that one day we can find love with an avatar or robot. In part, writing my book was driven by a desire, born of a decade of research, to get us to re-engage with and celebrate the different types of love in our lives. All forms of love carry the same joys and benefits as romantic love. In some cases, such as with our best friends, the love we have for them can be more emotionally intimate and less stress inducing than any we have with a lover. Demographic data shows that the downgrading of romantic love is, to some extent, already happening. Figures from the Office for National Statistics and Relate show that by 2039, one in seven people in the UK will be living alone and today only one in six people believe in “the one”. This change is particularly striking for women. Go back 100 years and your survival was predicated on finding a man who would support you and your inevitable brood of children. But with emancipation and the arrival of contraception women can choose not to partner themselves to anyone else and can remain happily child-free. Instead, they can build loving relationships with other people and beings who are capable of fulfilling all their needs. Relationships, science shows us, are underpinned by the same biological and psychological mechanisms and are as beneficial to health and wellbeing as romantic love. Any hierarchy of importance is a cultural construct. Even when we consider romantic love there is a spectrum of opportunity beyond monogamy which we rarely acknowledge. At one end are the aromantics who do not experience romantic love. It shows how far we have swallowed the romantic love narrative that they are characterised as being cold and unloving. But my aromantic interviewees do not lack love. They have full and loving lives, with family, friends, even queer platonic partners with whom they may have children. Their main issue is navigating a world where every person, every media outlet appears to be obsessed with romantic love. At the other end of the spectrum are the polyamorists. A group who experience romantic and sexual love with more than one partner. Again, the all-pervasive narrative of romantic love has led us to depict those who practise polyamory in a less than favourable light. They are characterised as being promiscuous, immoral, untrustworthy and dissatisfied. But to be successful, polyamorous relationships have to be based on trust, truth and open communication. They are moral because love for another is openly acknowledged rather than hidden in the secret of an affair. And while people can stay in monogamous relationships because of the legal ties that bind them, polyamorists recommit to their relationships every day. The power of the romantic narrative to drive dating behaviour and commerce is clear but it may also have darker consequences. In 2017 the testimony of 15 women regarding intimate partner violence (IPV) was published. It was clear that one of the issues with IPV was the stories these women had heard about what love was. Love overcomes all obstacles and must be maintained at all costs (even when you’re being abused). Love is about losing control, being swept off your feet, having no say in who you fall for (even if they are violent). Lovers protect each other, fight for each other to the end (even against the authorities who are trying to protect you). It is interesting to contemplate the power of our words. We speak without thinking but the stories we tell our children have consequences. Perhaps when ones survival, social standing and acceptance is predicated on coupling up, the obsession with romantic love is understandable. And it will always have a place in the spectrum of love. But we can experience love in so many different ways that we underestimate, even neglect. We are missing out on so much. Maybe it’s time to admit that for a significant number of people romantic love is no longer the ultimate goal, that Valentine’s Day is a commercial invention that has run its course and that we need to embrace all the opportunities for love in our lives to fully experience what it is to be human. It’s time for an inclusive celebration of love rather than an exclusive one. Time for a rebrand. Dr Anna Machin is an evolutionary anthropologist and author of Why We Love: The New Science Behind Our Closest RelationshipsPopping up in living rooms across the country, and certainly as questions in my inbox, is the new generation of grow lights. An amazing tool, these can be a conundrum for many. So here’s a quick guide to cut through the confusion. First things first. The concept of grow lamps isn’t exactly new. As a way to boost plant growth in areas with poor natural light they have been kicking around since at least the early 1980s. The problem is that, until very recently, they were enormous, incredibly complex to fit, and kicked out so much heat that, ironically, they could often burn the very foliage they were trying to nurture. That’s before we considered their eye-watering cost, not only to buy but to run. We were talking upwards of £200 to buy a single, incredibly energy-inefficient bulb. All this started to change, however, about 10 years ago when a new generation of LED lights started hitting the market. Using a fraction of the energy and emitting very little heat, these products have been steadily decreasing in both size and price over the years. You can now buy bulbs that will fit any standard desk lamp for little more than the price of regular ones. Even flexible LED strips can be taped into place to line the underside of bookshelves, cabinets and larger terrariums. As pretty much all houseplants need to be grown within 2m of a window, these lamps dramatically open up new opportunities for indoor growers – and even for regular gardeners who grow many tender or half-hardy species from seed each year, such as tomatoes. Without a greenhouse, grow lamps are really the only way to get significant quantities of seedlings away at this time of year. This sudden boom has meant there are now so many options available in different shapes, forms and colours, it can be a little bewildering. As a basic rule, the most important thing to remember is that plants will grow in really any light that humans can see. However, they do have preferred spectra, which mainly look blue or red to our eyes. That’s why many grow lamps have crazy disco hues to them, with many even having adjustable functions to change their colour. This is because changing the wavelengths of light that plants experience can, amazingly, change their behaviour. For example, upping certain wavelengths of UV can make cannabis kick out more resins, or infrared can cause commercial tomato crops to fruit more. However, are these really relevant to home growers who just want plants to look good? No. Can you even see a plant’s true colours under coloured lights? Nope. Do they fit in with most people’s idea of what they want their living room to look like? Probably not. So, I would always side-step these in favour of the simplest options that emit white light. Frankly, even regular daylight bulbs will work fine. So please don’t feel confused, just pick the options that fit your budget and witness how your indoor growing opportunities will suddenly be widened. Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekSitting in a blue armchair, vaping with one hand and making phone calls with the other, Yevhen Murayev, Ukrainian politician and backer of the Nash television station, spent last week desperately trying to save his career. In recent weeks, his swanky television studios, housed in an industrial building not far from central Kyiv, have been picketed by groups of angry nationalists, and on Friday Ukraine’s security council imposed sanctions on the channel, effectively taking it off the air with immediate effect. He is not able to appeal against the decision. The reason, Murayev believes, is Britain. An unusual statement released by the Foreign Office three weeks ago referenced unspecified intelligence purporting to show Russia was plotting a coup in Ukraine to install a puppet government in Kyiv. “The former Ukrainian MP Yevhen Murayev is being considered as a potential candidate,” read the statement, released in time to make the front of the Sunday newspapers. “It’s clear with the release of this statement that Britain decided it was going to be part of an information operation,” said Mark Galeotti, a Russia-focused political analyst. British and US officials say that by releasing statements such as this one, they are letting Russia know they are aware of Moscow’s plans and making it harder for the Russians to implement them. The Murayev announcement, however, was greeted with confusion and chuckles in Kyiv, given his low popularity ratings in most parts of the country. “It just didn’t sound right at all. This is not a government that could be imposed in Kyiv,” said a diplomatic source, adding that it would only make sense if Russia intended to divide the country and set up a regional government in the east. Murayev said he was on holiday with his family on a tropical island when he began receiving calls from British journalists who wanted his comment about allegations he was the figurehead of a Russian coup. “At first I thought it was some kind of prank,” he said. The Foreign Office statement named Murayev, as well as four other politicians who fled Ukraine after the 2014 Maidan revolution, including former prime minister Mykola Azarov, who has lived in Moscow ever since. Murayev said he had helped Azarov to escape from Ukraine in the heat of the revolution, driving him across the border to Russia, but since then has had no meaningful contact with him or the other men named. “Since then we have just spoken occasionally by phone, usually to wish each other happy birthday,” Murayev said. He claimed he has not visited Russia since 2015 and has been under Russian sanctions since 2018 after falling out with Viktor Medvedchuk, another pro-Kremlin politician, who is a personal friend of Vladimir Putin. “The British have publicly labelled me a collaborator, and now the Ukrainians are targeting me and there’s no public evidence,” he said. Like with so much of the recent publicised intelligence, it is certainly plausible someone in Moscow may have tapped up Murayev, one of the few politicians in Ukraine who is friendly to the Russian position. But it is hard to know whether the statement was based on rock-solid information or informal contingency plans. For Murayev, the biggest irritation was that he was named as someone who was “being considered”, but was not directly accused of anything. “How can I defend myself against the allegation when nobody has provided any evidence against me? I can’t even sue the British, because they phrased it very carefully. They haven’t directly accused me of being involved, just that some people may have been thinking of using me,” he said. The crescendo of intelligence briefings declaring that a Russian invasion of Ukraine is imminent has mostly emanated from Washington in recent weeks, but Britain has emerged as the leading supporting voice, backing up US claims about the present danger. The Foreign Office has stood firmly behind US messages that the threat of a full-scale invasion is real and may come at any time, even as other European capitals and the Ukrainian government have remained more sceptical. This has been combined with a number of high-profile visits to Ukraine and Russia this month, starting with Boris Johnson’s visit to Kyiv to meet with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy and followed last week with two ministerial visits to Moscow. The first of them – foreign secretary Liz Truss’s trip on Thursday – did not go well. One politically connected source in Kyiv compared the spectacle of Truss going up against Russia’s wily and experienced foreign minister Sergei Lavrov to “Champions League meets Sunday league”. A bad-tempered meeting ended with an acrimonious press conference and the Russian side commenting on a gaffe Truss had made during talks. Reportedly, as Truss noted the ominous Russian military buildup close to the Ukrainian border, Lavrov asked her whether Britain recognised Moscow’s sovereignty over the Rostov and Voronezh regions, where much of the buildup is taking place. Truss allegedly told Lavrov that Britain would “never” do so, before the British ambassador intervened to gently mention to Truss that these regions were in fact inside Russia. Before long, news of the geographical slip-up was being gleefully reported across Russian and international media. Truss seemed to confirm the reports when she said in an interview with a Russian newspaper that she had thought Lavrov was talking about regions of Ukraine. Truss returned to London with little sign she had made any progress either on divining Russia’s intentions or on delivering a useful message to Moscow. “I honestly have no idea why she went to Russia, except for the photo op,” said Galeotti. On Friday, the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, met his Russian counterpart, Sergei Shoigu, a key member of Putin’s inner circle who rarely meets western ministers. Wallace described the talks as “frank and constructive”, and the visit lacked the adversarial jockeying of the Truss trip. In addition to the visits to Kyiv and Moscow, Britain has been more forthright providing weapons to the Ukrainian army than many European countries, and there has been gratitude in Kyiv for Britain’s forceful stance. But the intelligence briefings have not been as well received. “The majority of people in Ukraine took the British statement with enormous scepticism,” said Volodymyr Fesenko, a Kyiv-based political analyst. He suggested a popular theory was that the information may have been leaked to the British by personal enemies of Murayev. “I think the British may have been played,” Fesenko said.Oksana Riwnyj remembers life under Soviet rule. “When I was at university, I wasn’t allowed to speak up and say what I think. We couldn’t go to church or celebrate Christmas. It was very tough, especially for the young people,” the 58-year-old primary school teacher said. Now, the news of Russia assembling troops on the Ukrainian border triggers memories that bring her to tears. “I never thought something like this could happen. It’s too horrible to even think about,” she said. Riwnyj is one of about 70,000 Ukrainians living in the UK who are watching anxiously to see what will unfold over the coming days. The mother-of-two lived for the first two decades of her life in western Ukraine, then part of the Soviet Union, which was toppled in 1991. She moved to the UK after meeting her husband, Stefan, a gas engineer, 25 years ago, and has a happy life in London, where – as a teacher at St Mary’s Ukrainian Saturday school – she is at the heart of the expatriate community. But while safe on UK soil, as the crisis in her home country intensifies, she is struggling to carry on with life as normal. “I’m trying to go about daily life but it’s a very stressful and worrying situation,” Riwnyj said. “I can’t sleep because all my family are over there.” For Diana Palamarchuk, 17, who grew up in Ternopil Oblast in western Ukraine but moved to the UK six years ago, watching the crisis play out on screen is difficult to take in. “It doesn’t really feel real because I haven’t been there and seen it with my own eyes. When you’re watching it on TV, it feels like you’re watching a film,” the A-level student said. While teachers at her school ask her how she is, most of the other pupils have no idea what’s going on in Ukraine. “Some of my friends know about it but not many,” she said. “The only thing people know about Ukraine is Chernobyl, and lots of people think Ukraine is poor, with dumb people. But it isn’t. It’s a beautiful country and Ukrainians are good people.” She said seeing what was happening was “really tough” because she still has family there. But she has been heartened by statements from British and US politicians warning Vladimir Putin of the potential consequences of any aggression. “Hopefully, it will make Russia think twice about it,” she said. Iryna Pereginyak, 41, a learning support assistant, is also trying to remain positive. But her brother, 34, remains in Ukraine – and faces being called to fight if there is a war. “I am a very hopeful person but we are living in fear and anticipation of the worst,” she said. “Sometimes I have to just switch off and escape and watch a film, but there is no feeling of complete peace. It’s constant.” Vlodko Pawluk, an administrator from Barnet, London, and chair of the London branch of the Association of Ukrainians in Great Britain, is coordinating efforts to raise money that could be used to pay for supplies for those affected if the worst does happen, including soldiers serving on the frontline and people displaced by conflict. He said he was grateful for support from the UK and the US, but that many Ukrainians felt a little “bitter”. “Everybody knows this has been going on for a while, since the annexation of Crimea. But it feels like for eight years, the west has done nothing,” he said. “These sorts of conflicts belong to the last century, not in Europe in 2022. This could be a full-scale, bloody war.” Natalia Ravlyuk, 41, a retail manager originally from Ivano-Frankivsk in western Ukraine, described the situation as “very scary”. “I don’t know what to say to my relatives. I’m chaotically thinking, ‘What can we do here?’ We are demonstrating every week near the Russian embassy and at Downing St. “I personally feel guilty being here because they are unsafe there and I’m safe here,” she said. Watching events unfold from 1,400 miles away, she feels “helpless”. “I just want to do something and everything will be back to normal,” she said. “But what can we do?”I was working as a GP when a new respiratory illness began crossing the globe. So much rewriting of history has happened since that it’s easy to forget how anarchic things felt in March 2020. Devastating images from China and Italy were followed by a deafening silence from the British government. Junior doctors were left to implore the government to lock down on social media and TV. In our clinic, left to our own devices, we mocked up an infection control room, saw patients in cars, improvised PPE, and rotated shifts in clinic and on the phone to reduce infection. Roopa Farooki’s brilliant, raging stream of consciousness relates 40 days in her life as a junior doctor. An award-winning author, she retrained as a doctor and was in her first year working at an English seaside hospital when SARS-CoV-2 arrived here. Forty days is the period Venetian ships were kept at anchor to reduce transmission when they docked from disease-infected ports in the 14th century, but during the chaotic opening stages of the Covid-19 pandemic Farooki is in constant motion, walking along dual carriageways and fields from her family home with her husband and children, to the hospital and its virus. She is also reeling from the recent death of her rivalrous older sister, Kiron, from breast cancer. At the end of each exhausting day she reaches for her laptop and writes this memoir: “stolen moments in the unobserved night, like a guilty grandad sucking down a secret cigarette”. The result is vivid and immediate, fragmentary and unalloyed. In Farooki’s hospital many think fears of the virus are overblown, but within a week staff are going off sick with it, the hospital gets overloaded and people start dying; many having caught the disease there. Claps and banging of pans and self-serving soundbites from politicians contrast with the suffering and inadequacy surrounding her – an already threadbare healthcare system, chaotic pandemic guidance, hopeless PPE, minimal testing and two treatments, oxygen and proning (“tummy time”, as an ITU consultant dubs it). As patients cough, vomit and bleed on the medics, a young colleague of Farooki’s dies of Covid in their intensive care unit. Why go to work when you may be robbing your children of a mother, Farooki’s relatives ask. When she has a rare day off, people jump out of her way on the seafront and shelves in the supermarket are empty. And on top of all this she carries the heavy burden of grief and guilt at her sister Kiron’s death. “Friend is too big and small a word for what you were... You were generous with physical affection and violence. Long childish cuddles on the sofa. Casual childish slaps and scratches and kicks and punches.” She knows people do not suddenly become heroes because they have died, nor because they have become doctors. Writing in the second person, Farooki’s voice often melds with that of her sister. As circumstances designed to promote self-pity or self-congratulation pile up, Kiron/Farooki won’t allow it. Kiron is her constant companion, her secret sharer, as everyday life begins to implode. “I don’t know how you can go to work, she says. Picking at you like a wasp. It’s selfish. It’s unsafe. […] And for the record, I don’t think you’re a hero. I don’t think you’re brave. I think you’re just a mildly talented eccentric who’s stumbled into a stupid time to start medicine. “You’re right, you say. Thank you.” In an age of amnesia and dishonesty, I loved the unedited, unflattering truth of the thoughts and feelings that Farooki’s exhausted brain trawls at the end of each gruelling day. The patients who sicken and asphyxiate, the buzz of social media, hospital rules that volte face without explanation, memories of decisions from earlier in her life along with the voices of parents and Kiron, patients, her children and husband; all meld into a pointillist narrative. “You fill the bottles with the ascitic fluid for testing. Cytology, biochemistry, protein. You check the tracing of a heart. You manage soaring blood sugars. […] “You walk home. “You admire the children’s work. “They start fighting about something stupid, the death of a virtual llama, the malicious uncharging of a tablet, the design on a painted pot, an insult at the table, and you shout at them, and then you start crying. And then the ones who started it start crying too.” As Conservatives make their appalling claim that Boris Johnson has had a good pandemic, despite the underfunding, delays, indifference and charlatanism, it’s cathartic to travel back with Farooki’s memoir into the mess of the 40 days, the quaranta giorni, from which it all sprang. 34 Patients by Tom Templeton is published in paperback by Michael Joseph on 31 March • Everything Is True by Roopa Farooki is published by Bloomsbury (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIt seems to be an unwritten rule of the Prime Ministers Club that a former one will not directly call for the resignation of the present one. Theresa May has mercilessly skewered Boris Johnson in the Commons over partygate, but she has refrained from telling him to walk. Sir John Major delivered a powerful speech on Thursday in which he listed all the reasons why Mr Johnson is unfit to remain in office. He “broke lockdown laws”, makes “brazen excuses”, sends his ministers out to “defend the indefensible” and asks the public “to believe the unbelievable”. “Our reputation is being shredded,” declared Sir John and made the vital argument: “Deliberate lies to parliament have been fatal to political careers and must always be so.” This was punchy, pungent and potent. And it was all true. Sir John sounded like he was building up to a clarion call to Conservative MPs to remove Mr Johnson, but then his trumpet went mute. As for David Cameron, we have not heard a peep from him about partygate. In his case, this is probably wise. After the Greensill affair, he is not best placed to get up on his hind trotters to give a lecture on the importance of integrity in public life. Eager to wound, but unwilling to strike, Sir John and Mrs May reflect the state of the party they once led. It is simultaneously infuriated and paralysed by a scandal that is also a crisis. It is easy to find Tory MPs who are seething about their leader and increasingly hard to find ones who think that Mr Johnson will lead them into the next general election. But it is also hard to find Tories who speak with any conviction about when he will be evicted from Number 10 and easy to find MPs full of excuses for not taking action just yet. This leaves the Tory party and with it the government, marooned in no man’s land. Purely as a matter of self-interest, Tories have clear incentives to dispatch Mr Johnson without delay. His poll ratings are plumbing depths from which leaders almost never recover. The polls also suggest that public fury is dragging his party down with him. “It’s definitely contaminating the wider Tory brand and that’s what’s got so many of us worried,” remarks one Conservative MP. Waiting to see if the polls are verified by a heavy defeat at the May local elections “puts our councillors in the executioner’s tumbril”, as another MP puts it. Key party bankrollers are snapping shut their cheque books. One Tory reports being at a recent dinner with four major and longstanding donors, all of whom were “in despair”. The prime minister is solely focused on trying to save his own skin. He always governed from one week to the next. Now he governs from one day to the next. Government policy is not being designed with a regard to the national interest, or even being shaped around what might be popular with voters. Those involved with “Operation Save Big Dog” admit that the only people who matter to Mr Johnson at the moment are Conservative MPs. Decision-making is entirely driven by his need to appease this Tory faction and placate that Tory groupuscule. Putting it about that there will be a big reshuffle in the summer is a crude ruse to seduce the more gullible careerist parliamentarians. Explaining the inertia of his colleagues, one Tory MP says: “Some are thinking he’s promised me that I’ll be Minister for Paperclips, so why don’t I give him one last chance to make me Minister for Paperclips?” Other Tory backbenchers relish having the prime minister in a prostrate position and desperate to please them. Yet this is not sustainable because different gangs of backbench hostage-takers are demanding conflicting things from Number 10. The more slabs of “red meat” he flings in the direction of ravenous rightwingers, the more he aggravates moderate Tories. One Conservative MP reports: “The phrase you hear a lot of in the tearoom is ‘we can’t go on like this’.” So I asked him whether he had submitted a letter calling for a confidence vote. He confessed that he hadn’t, before arguing that it was too early to move. He was choosing to go on like this. A relatively small number have put in letters and announced it to the world. Others have secretly lodged a missive with Sir Graham Brady, the chairman of the 1922 Committee. Then there is the substantial group who want Mr Johnson gone, but are hesitant about acting. There are even cases of Tory MPs who have publicly called for the prime minister’s resignation, but not yet written a letter. They privately say that they are holding back until they are more confident that they can cleanly eject him from Number 10. While it only takes 54 Tory MPs to compel a confidence vote, there is a larger and more important figure. That is 181, the minimum number of votes against him needed to ensure his defenestration. “One of the worst outcomes is that we get a confidence vote and he narrowly survives it,” says one senior Tory. “If he wins by just one vote, he will stay. Anyone else would walk, but he will stay.” The majority of Tory MPs are neither dedicated to his removal nor committed to his survival as of today. “Never forget, most of my colleagues are sheep,” remarks one veteran backbencher. The mob sways this way and that, depending on the movement of the polls, news events, the contents of their inboxes and postbags, the media and what activists and fellow MPs are saying to them. Some who have not declared a position say they will spend the 10-day parliamentary recess, which began on Thursday, sampling opinion among constituents and local party members, which is one way of ducking their responsibility to make a decision. Number 10 has just confirmed that Mr Johnson is one of around 50 denizens of Downing Street to receive an investigatory questionnaire from the police. Many Tory MPs justify their vacillation by saying that they are waiting on the detectives and the publication of the unexpurgated version of Sue Gray’s report. Another shocking revelation before then might finally be the trigger for the sheep to stampede against the Tory leader. Cynic that he is, he will be thinking that he has a chance of riding out this scandal because something will turn up to his advantage or his MPs will eventually get bored with partygate. While Tory MPs dither, the behaviour of the prime minister and his understrappers becomes more shameless. Some of his supporters are contending that if he does not get a fine from the police, he will have been exonerated and can carry on in office, as if the many false denials to parliament are of no consequence. Around the time that Dame Cressida Dick was announcing her departure from Scotland Yard, someone close to the prime minister made the outrageous claim that the Met ought to give Mr Johnson a free pass over lockdown-busting. A “senior ally” of the prime minister contended that the police have “a degree of discretion” and implied that they should let him off because you can’t have the “Metropolitan police deciding who the prime minister is”. It is no part of the Met’s remit to consider the political consequences, one way or another. The job of the police is to apply the law without fear or favour and maintain the principle, so often forgotten at Mr Johnson’s Number 10, that no one is above it. “If he gets a ticket from the Met, the game is up,” says one Conservative MP whose view is representative of many others. Yet some around Mr Johnson are pushing the line that he is entitled to carry on as prime minister even if he is fined for breaching the restrictions that he imposed on the rest of the country. The Conservative party will pay a penalty for its prevarication – indeed, it already is paying. The longer this goes on, the more this looks like a lawless government that thinks rules are for everyone else and the deeper the reputational damage sustained by the Tories. “A month ago, this was hurting only Boris,” says one former cabinet minister. “Now, it is hurting the whole government. The more they put up ministers to make a defence of him, the more it damages all of us.” So I asked this senior Tory whether he had put in a confidence letter and discovered he was another who hadn’t done so yet. The government will remain trapped in this nightmare no man’s land, and the country with it, until Tory MPs cease equivocating and a critical mass of them decide to bring things to a head. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverDoes music taste reflect personality? A study from the University of Cambridge involving 350,000 participants, from 50 countries, across six continents, posits that people with similar traits across the globe are drawn to similar music genres. So, “extroverts” love Ed Sheeran, Beyoncé and Justin Timberlake. The “open” thrill to Daft Punk, Radiohead and Jimi Hendrix. The “agreeable” are into Marvin Gaye, U2 and Taylor Swift. The “neurotic” enjoy, presumably as much they can, the work of David Bowie, Nirvana, and the Killers. And so on. While the study doesn’t claim to be definitive, how strange to be allotted only one personality trait/genre each. It sounds like Colour Me Beautiful for music. “What sound best goes with my personality? Did you bring along swatches?” Certainly, back when I worked for the New Musical Express, journalists, musicians and readers alike resisted being wrangled into such rigid categories. Most half-serious music fans would consider their tastes eclectic. Which seems more feasible than a distinct personality type exclusively cleaving to one genre, and this being faithfully replicated across the globe. The idea of, say, an English person, an Argentinian and a South African, separately thinking: “I feel alienated. I will signal that by performatively listening to Nirvana’s Nevermind. For ever!” To me, this is not how people are. This is not how music works. Music taste, like the humans who possess it, seems built from a dizzying array of variables. What is your age, sex, background? Growing up, what was the dominant culture, and did you subscribe to it? Were/are you rebellious? Political? Apolitical? Withdrawn? Hedonistic? A loner? Do you feel more “yourself” in the real world, or online? When you select a song, are you happy, miserable, in love, heartbroken, angry? Or none of the above – just trying to chill while you make dinner, thanks. That’s pertinent, actually: where you are when you listen to music, what you’re doing. Working out. Driving. Strolling. Reading. Work. Leisure. In a pub or at a club. Lying in a darkened room, with AirPods in. This is a key difficulty with personality-typing music: at any one time, listening can be affected by a plethora of variants, including location, situation, activity, outside forces, memory, mood, need, whim. While taste can overlap with cultural tribalism (the spurious notion of Good/Bad taste; the need to belong), this is mainly a youthful tic and it will pass. What’s left is the individual, the ceaselessly mercurial personality, which can feel many different things within the space of a day. Which isn’t always drawn to the same style of songs. Which doesn’t always want to be the same person. The chatterbox might want to disappear into the mists with Leonard Cohen. The depressive to boogie with Ariana Grande. The introvert to headbang to Megadeth. Music can reflect your nature, but it can also take you out of yourself. It is an escape chute, a liberator, as much as it is a mirror. Some people don’t even like music. They don’t yearn for a soundtrack to their life. They just want neutral background noise that used to be termed “coffee table music”. For the rest of us, it continues to be an era of engorged culture and musical plenty. Over the years, popular music has become akin to a vast junk food menu: tasty but confusing. What do you want to listen to? Pop. Rock. Disco. Hip-hop. Punk. Grime. Goth. House. Reggae. Soul. Indie. Folk. Gospel. Dub. Heavy Metal. Psychedelia. Jazz, Prog… The list sprawls on even before you get into myriad fusions of genres. With streaming, Spotify, the rise of the superstar DJ, et al, we have completely and irrevocably changed the way we consume and interact with music. Volume. Distribution. Payment (or otherwise). There’s a thought: perhaps there should be a global “cheapskate” personality-category for those who don’t pay for music? Even when people do pay, there’s a sense of cultural free-for-all. Generally, “Young People” approach music song by song, anthem by anthem, club banger by club banger. What research-based personality type (Open? Agreeable?) could be applied to such an elastic approach? Do we just ignore how, like a generational bushfire, it’s caught on throughout age, race and class? How, like it or not, we are all in shuffle mode now? If, like me, you’re still partial to listening to whole albums, digital or vinyl, you may feel increasingly like the last dodo, stubbornly playing Hounds of Love all the way through, creeping ever closer to easy-listening extinction. Just to rub it in, it might not even be “your” music taste any more. Past a certain age, people’s tastes freeze, go on long pause, a form of cultural atrophy sets in. What you think “defines” you may just be your music taste of five, 10, 20 years ago, and, according to the Cambridge findings, you now have an outdated personality to go with it. Diverting though these studies are, there’s no foolproof way of personality-typing music. That jukebox embedded in your skull may end up rusted and ugly, unfit for public consumption, but it will always be unique. Tailored music exists only in the fevered minds of marketing and advertising executives who want to zone you, sell you stuff. It’s not a case of too much music, rather that there’s too much human condition: too many people – restless, vivid, alive – thinking, feeling, and wanting differently from one moment to the next.One of the most serious impacts of cancer is the sudden loss of weight, appetite, and muscle that can hit some patients in the later stages of the disease. This wasting syndrome is known as cachexia and it can be triggered in other serious conditions, including heart disease and HIV. In addition, an inherited version of extreme wasting syndromes can affect children. Known as Cockayne syndrome, it causes them to suffer severe malnutrition and wasting that parallels the effect of cachexia. “In the case of patients with cancer, individuals can go from seeming quite normal to being wheelchair-bound due to muscle wasting and weight loss in only a matter of a few months,” said oncologist Professor Charlie Swanton, of the Crick Institute in London. “It’s quite frightening.” Despite considerable scientific effort, cachexia’s causes have remained a mystery. However, recent work by UK researchers has raised hopes that scientists are closing in on some of the causes of this affliction. A team of scientists led by Professor Ketan Patel, director of the Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine in Oxford, has recently linked the disease to DNA damage that disrupts chemical messengers that are sent to the brain, causing it to release appetite-suppressing hormones. The result is severe weight loss. The researchers found that this process is often initiated when the naturally occurring chemical formaldehyde builds up in a person’s blood stream. When this is filtered by the kidneys, their cells suffer DNA damage in the process. This, in turn, causes their kidneys to secrete a hormone which messages the brain to suppress appetite. “When you have chemotherapy, you are given a chemical substance that attacks DNA in much the same way as formaldehyde does,” said Patel. “In other words, it may be damaging DNA and triggering these signals that tell the brain to suppress appetite.” The research also suggests a possible avenue for treating the problem, he added. The messenger sent out by the kidney to the brain is a chemical called GDF15, a discovery that holds important clinical implications. “It suggests we may be able to treat weight loss in patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy and in children with Cockayne syndrome by administrating an antibody which neutralises GDF15. We might then be able to block these messages and halt the onset of their cachexia.” However, Swanton counselled caution. “This is a fascinating and important study. GDF15 is one known mechanism that contributes to the development of cachexia but it is not going to be the only one. We need more work like this to understand other routes and causes as a matter of urgency as we know this syndrome contributes to our inability to treat patients as they become weaker.” Progress in genomics and in understanding the causes of cachexia has led the disease to becoming a focus for the Grand Cancer Challenges programme recently established by Cancer Research UK and the US National Cancer Institute. This pinpoints the condition as a prime target for tumour research on both sides of the Atlantic. “Cachexia is more than losing your appetite and weight loss, and doctors struggle to reverse this condition when it takes hold,” added Michelle Mitchell, chief executive of Cancer Research UK. “It is a complex problem that has an enormous impact on people with cancer, damaging their wellbeing and lowering their energy at a time when they need it most. “Research that can tell us more about the mechanisms behind cachexia is essential if we want to find a way to manage it.” • The photograph accompanying this article was replaced on 15 February 2022. The previous image showed a rare left-handed helix; DNA, however, is typically right-handed.Paul Graham Senami, Shambhala, New Zealand, 2012 Paul Graham is an English fine-art and documentary photographer living in New York. He was awarded the Deutsche Börse photography prize in 2009 and in 2011 the Paris Photo prize for the most significant photobook of the past 15 years with A Shimmer of Possibility The woman in the photograph is Senami, my partner of 18 years. It was taken in a very basic room during a trip around New Zealand’s South Island in 2012. We were staying in a travel hostel called Shambhala, a lovely place on the northern coast. I always wake up early; Senami… doesn’t. We are very different, Senami and I, but have found a way to make it work, and we have a lovely son together now. As Harold Brodkey put it: “People are somewhat gorgeous collections of chemical fires, aren’t they?” I chose this photograph because I like the simplicity of it. You don’t need adornment and embellishments to express love, despite what Hallmark says. When you take images of others, it is vital to take that Buddhist approach of projecting love towards everyone, no matter who, no matter where. KF * * * Richard Billingham Walter holding newborn Bruno, 2014 Born in Birmingham, Richard Billingham is best known for his award-winning photobook Ray’s a Laugh (1996) and the 2018 film Ray &amp; Liz, both documenting the chaotic lives of his parents in the Black Country. He lives in Wales with his wife and three children and holds professorships in photography at Gloucestershire and Middlesex universities This photograph was taken seven years ago. My wife had our third child, and when the baby came back with the other two kids from the hospital, I wanted to make a photograph that captured the positive energy you get when you bring a newborn into the house. I knew from having the other two that the energy is there for the first few days, and then it dissipates. Everyone’s happy and blissful, but it doesn’t last. It’s like a honeymoon period. You can never get back to it. In the photograph, Walter would be eight, Ramona six or thereabouts, and the baby is probably just a day old. It still has blood on it. It wouldn’t have had a bath. Whereas the older two have had showers and it looks like they’re ready for bed. Walter’s got a bare chest and he’s got the baby on it skin-to-skin. I was trying to make a photograph that captured the three of them together for the first time. Since then, screens have come in – phones and iPads. That picture was taken just before there were any screens in the house apart from a TV. Now [the three kids] are more atomised. I’ve got five brothers, but, except for one of them, I haven’t seen them for many years. So I don’t recognise the sibling dynamic here. I guess a lot of the photographs I’ve done in the past, with my family in them, haven’t been as positive. Does love come up a lot in my work? Empathy, maybe. And even when I photograph in quite grim surroundings, I’m looking for composition, beauty and harmony within that. When I took all those photographs of my parents many years ago, the camera brought us together more. If I hadn’t had the camera, I wouldn’t have gone around to see them as much and taken all those pictures. A camera enables you to get closer. There can be an expression of love in the taking of the photograph. In this photo, it’s in the arrangement, the way I’ve positioned the camera, the way I’ve got the three kids together within the frame, the way I’ve positioned myself in relation to them. I’ve got down on to their level, I’m not standing up with a phone looking down on them. It’s like you’re in their world with them, and I like that. KF * * * Viviane Sassen True Love, from the series Venus &amp; Mercury, 2020 Viviane Sassen is a Dutch photographer based in Amsterdam whose work straddles fashion and fine art, using human bodies to often surreal effect. She won the Prix de Rome in 2007 and in 2013 exhibited at the Venice Biennale I love how this work symbolises the ever-lasting longing to fully merge with another; how two become one. It’s a romantic myth that somehow kept lingering in my subconscious ever since I was a young girl. My heart yearned for such a collision of two bodies and souls; to truly melt together with one’s lover. To never be alone. Now I’m older and wiser and know there’s no such thing, at least nothing definite. Maybe in alchemy, art and death there might be answers and solutions, but not in our daily lives. This image shows a man and woman in stone, sharing body parts – it reminds me of Pompeii, lovers who died in each other’s arms. Classical sculptures that slowly crumble in time, erosion of their bodies, symbols of decay. But where their bodies meet, there’s an eruption of colour, as if to say: we’re alive, fluid, we’re dancing. I like to think of this as two people making love, an orgasm frozen in time and space, and hope for them they’ll enjoy it for ever. * * * Neil Libbert The Dance, Manchester, 1958 Born in Salford, Neil Libbert is a photojournalist who has worked for the Observer, the Guardian, the New York Times and many other publications since the 1950s, with specialisms in street photography and the performing arts. In 1999 he won Nikon news photographer of the year and a World Press Photo award for his coverage of the bombings in the Admiral Duncan pub, Soho I was 20 years old when I took this, living in digs in Manchester, a few years after finishing at art school, taking photographs for the Manchester Guardian and local papers. I can’t remember being commissioned to do it, or where the club was – it’s such a long time ago. I was single, but I certainly wasn’t there for the dancing. I’d have just been there with my camera, to try to capture moments between people. This picture doesn’t reveal much about the people involved, and I like that. Nobody can recognise themselves years later and be upset about it. But even though you can’t see their faces, there’s a tenderness in the image that everyone can understand. I read recently that Picasso said that inside every photographer is an artist trying to get out, which made me laugh. There’s some truth in that. I think this photograph has a little feeling of a painting, with me trying to capture a spontaneous moment. It’s a bit of a fantasy, really, and it helps that back then I always shot in black and white. Can a photo be an expression of love? Yes, I think it can, especially in photos that aren’t staged or set up, as they feel trivial – those aren’t my scene. Even after all these years, I don’t stop seeing little moments of connection or taking photographs of them. I can’t stop it, actually. I love it. Taking a photo is still such a form of pleasure. JR * * * Pieter Hugo Jakob Hugo, Nature’s Valley, South Africa, 2020 An internationally renowned photographer specialising in portraiture, Pieter Hugo made his name with his 2008 photobook The Hyena and Other Men, and has since been shortlisted for the Deutsche Börse Photography prize and the Prix Pictet. Born in Johannesburg, he lives in Cape Town with his wife and two children There’s something inherent in love that it comes at such a great cost. Love keeps you awake at night. It comes with loneliness and discouragement. With kids, it’s a different kind of love from what I’ve experienced before. I guess it’s a more unconditional love, and with that comes a whole bunch of things that you have to accept. The nature of this thing that you love is changing, becoming sentient, evolving. And even when you desperately love someone, you also have to be able to give them space, give them distance, let them grow by themselves. You can’t smother them. This is my son after he’d had an accident during lockdown in South Africa. He was six. We had a strict, long lockdown, then we were on the red list for a very long time, so I couldn’t travel for work. Financially, it was unbearable, but I got to spend so much time with my kids that I wouldn’t normally have had. I started taking photos of my family and spoke to them about it. It became a collaborative thing. We are lucky to have a house in the countryside, so we spent a lot of time in nature and in the ocean, letting the kids roam free. You can see another scar on the photo too : that’s from a chafe from my son’s wetsuit. There’s also something allegorical about the photo, to me: we’re all scarred. And love hurts! It’s a cliche, but it’s true. JR * * * Niall McDiarmid Soho, London, November 2018 A Scottish photographer based in London, Niall McDiarmid has spent much of his career roving around Britain documenting its people and landscapes. His books include Crossing Paths, Town to Town and, most recently, Breakfast This shot, from a series I’m working on called Nightfalls, was taken in the early evening, about half past four, just off Old Compton Street in Soho. I don’t know anything about the couple but I’m guessing, from what he’s wearing, that the two of them work in restaurants. I get feelings of melancholy and a certain sense of desperation from them. The restaurant trade is hard, and they may be far from home. He’s feeling a bit down and she’s moving in to him and saying it’ll be OK, I’m there for you, we can get through this. The city is big, the night ahead will be tough, but we can do this together. There is love in this picture. There’s also the fairly surreal element of the dodo looking on, or maybe giving a bit of encouragement. Though perhaps it’s not the best creature to have rooting for you. Don’t end up like the dodo! Get together and reproduce, or we’ll all be gone! I wouldn’t necessarily say I’m a street photographer, but street photography has a rich tradition of trying to capture aspects of love. The idea of showing affection has always been part of the genre. Who could resist a picture of people kissing on the street? It provides an element of hope, and if done in the right way, it’s engaging, people are drawn to it. You do have to be a bit sensitive, because people are being intimate and hopefully you’re not capturing something illicit or wrong, but I think love is an important thing to capture, in any kind of photography. KF * * * Arpita Shah Canal Road, from the series Nalini, 2017 An artist based in Eastbourne, Arpita Shah has lived in India, Ireland, Saudi Arabia and Scotland and her work explores the intersections of culture, identity and heritage. Her practice involves photography, film and found objects, and she has exhibited internationally This is Canal Road, from a long-term project of mine called Nalini, named after my grandmother, whose name means “lotus flower” in Sanskrit. It looks around my maternal lineage, at our stories of migration, love and loss. This passport belonged to my great-grandmother, Narmada, who ran a dairy farm in Nairobi in the 1920s and 1930s before returning to India during the second world war, which took 27 days by sea. In 2017, I travelled to Kenya with my mum for the first time, as a way to connect with my family’s past. Growing up, I’d heard so many stories about it from my grandmother, who was young when they left: it was like a family myth. I knew that Narmada was a very resilient, petite woman, 5ft tall with 14 children, hands-on with farming and running the business. But when my mother and I got to Nairobi, Canal Road, where my family’s home used to be, didn’t exist any more: the road names changed after Kenya gained independence. I tried to find old maps, then, by luck, my mum chatted to a shop owner who knew someone who knew someone… and we were fortunate enough to be taken to the exact spot where it used to be. That’s where I picked the pink flower. When my grandmother used to talk about her childhood, she talked about the vivid, pink flowers that grew there. Flowers are a sacred offering in Hinduism, which is the cultural background of my family, so by collecting objects and making still lifes, I’m making shrine-like images imbued with stories that bring us together in love. JR * * * Donovan Smallwood Untitled #8, from the series Languor, 2020 Born in 1994, Donavon Smallwood grew up in Harlem, not far from Central Park. A self-taught photographer, last year he published his first monograph, Languor, and won the Aperture portfolio prize and the Daylight photo award This picture was taken in Central Park in summer 2020. I was mostly at home alone that year because of the pandemic. Being with yourself instead of with a partner, everything sticks out as an image of love, of what you don’t have. I was walking through a part of the park that you’re not supposed to go through and I saw a bunch of spider webs, including this one. I was like, of course I see a heart – it just keeps coming up! I spent 30 minutes trying to get photographs of it – I had to wait for the light to shine through at a specific angle so that you could see the whole web. The wonkiness of the heart was really interesting. People always ask, did you Photoshop that? No, that’s literally how it was. The fragility of the heart said something to me about the fragility of love – of loving without getting love in return. And a spider web is used as a luring device to capture prey. There’s so much meaning there. Ideas of love come up a lot in my work, but it might not always be obvious. Recently I’ve been taking portraits of people I’ve just met, and I found those experiences to be really intimate and even loving, even if they only last 10 minutes. When people are wary about being photographed and then become at ease with it, it reminds me of the transition from winter to summer and the idea of rosebuds growing from underneath the snow. Everything looks like it’s dead, but underground everything is working hard. KF * * * Sophie Green Toni &amp; Jamie, 2020 Born in 1991 and based in London, Sophie Green is a documentary photographer who celebrates British culture and its idiosyncrasies, with a particular focus on under-represented communities and subcultures When lockdown relaxed in summer 2020, huge crowds of people from all classes, races and religions headed to the beach. I started going to seaside towns around the UK to take portraits, and I met Toni and Jamie outside the arcades at New Brighton beach in Merseyside. I’ve always found arcades exciting social spaces, with mad interiors and machines ramped up to full volume… there’s huge energy. When I met Toni and Jamie there was something quite intense about their faces, their eyes. I immediately wanted to make their picture. It was clear they were a couple. I asked their permission to photograph them, and they were really up for it. It felt necessary, in order to convey their status as a couple, that Toni and Jamie should be in some kind of embrace or loving posture. They had been in a similar position when I found them, so this was inspired by what I saw. I love Jamie’s protective position over Toni, wrapping his arms around her. It’s a very sweet gesture. I’m not sure how long they’ve been dating, but there’s something quite romantic and innocent about their body language. I always think of young love being so innocent. We imagine we’ll be with that person for ever, but in most cases the relationship will fail. There are so many challenges to overcome in any kind of relationship, but particularly when you’re young and there’s so much evolving and learning to do. A lot of my work follows different subcultures and communities who are drawn together by a way of life or shared identity, and I’m always looking for positive stories. Our world is incredibly negative, so it’s wonderful and necessary to find instances where people merge and find common ground. KF * * * Martin Parr INDIA. Delhi. A Valentines day love cake, 2009 A chronicler of modern, everyday life in Britain and abroad for the past 50 years, Bristol-based Martin Parr is internationally renowned for his anarchic and brightly coloured photojournalism exploring subjects such as class and tourism. His major projects include The Last Resort and Common Sense I’ve been to India two or three times and often been there in February. During the run-up to Valentine’s Day, I discovered they make a lot of cakes. I wasn’t expecting to find this surfeit of them, but I couldn’t resist photographing them. They were bright, colourful and kitsch: everything I like about a good image, and a good cake. So over the years, I’ve made a point of photographing them with my closeup lens and lens flash. This one was in Delhi – a lot of them were in Delhi. I’d make it my business to go round some of the bakers and get some shots on the 13th: I’d have to get permission, then pull the cake from behind the counter, so it was a bit of a faff, but most shopkeepers were good. We’d have a little chat in English, but the bakers didn’t tell me why they made them. Supply and demand, I suppose… as simple as that. I don’t know why we don’t see more cakes like this made in the UK, because I’m sure they’d sell. I send a Valentine’s card every year – I’m very happily married – but I’ve never bought a cake, because I haven’t found one. I could make one myself, yes, but sadly I’m not the cake-making type. JRPlugged by Nas, sampled by Rita Ora, Nigerian-born, Hamburg-based Nneka makes music that ranges across genres, a versatility that chimes with her own internationalist backstory: she’s also a visual artist with an anthropology-archaeology degree. Her fourth album, released on her own label, takes in African-inflected reggae resonant with electronics (Yahweh, Maya), dissonant soul (About Guilt) and the stark, trip hop-like Afrobeat of the title track. Made in lockdown, independent of her previous labels, Nneka has been keen to join the dots between the contemporary Nigerian pop takeover and her own predilection for spacious, bass-y production. The silver thread throughout these songs is Nneka’s deceptively featherlight voice, one that tends towards sweetness and serenity but can pivot towards a sharp righteousness. The politically charged Afrobeat-rap of Yansh is both playful and furious. Then there’s the grace of her songs that ponder deceit and healing. There are bangers here that deserve a wider audience. The dubby love song Tea? finds Nneka reconnecting with a former lover, checking on whether he has done as much work on himself as she has – gently, but pointedly.It may be Valentine’s Day tomorrow, but regular readers will know I don’t buy into that. Here, instead, are three lovely bars to treat yourself to. Marou 48% milk, £6.95/60g, is from Cocoa Runners. The cocoa is from Vietnam and the milk is from grass-fed cows and, I swear, you can tell. God this was so good. My restraint was sorely tested once I’d flicked the foil open. (‘Where’s that yummy milk gone, Mamma?’ my children asked as I slid it under my diary.) With its creamy, almost meaty mouthfeel, you can kid yourself it’s OK, because it’s a dark milk. Thoroughly enjoyable. If you fancy something a little darker, but want some inclusions, and who doesn’t, then Karuna’s 62% Hazelnut and Dark cashew Nougat, £7.95/60g with cocoa from Mexico, is absolutely wonderful (also from Cocoa Runners). It doesn’t taste madly nougat-y, so don’t let that put you off if nougat is not your thing. But if it is, then don’t expect chewy nougat bits, think more nutty bits. It’s organic, fair paid, bean to bar, it’s got it all going on. For something darker, but a bit more exciting than a regular non-inclusion bar try Cocoa Retreat’s Whisky Nibs, £6.25 /45g. It’s 70% single origin Ecuadorian chocolate with cocoa nibs that have been soaked in 10-year-old single malt Glenmorangie whisky, which you can taste. As it happens I’ve been to this distillery, so I learned how to pronounce it, and it’s in a wonderful part of the world so brought back great memories.Extortionate energy bills that land on the nation’s doormats this spring may not be solely due to soaring gas prices. Customer service blunders have left some households facing erroneous demands for hundreds of pounds and threats of bailiffs if they contest them. Last year, 40% of energy complaints made to Citizens Advice concerned inaccurate billing, it says. According to the charity, companies are “failing in their most basic obligation to customers”. Inadequate IT systems, faulty meters and mismatched accounts are to blame for thousands of inaccurate charges at a time when gas and electricity bills are set to rise by 51%, following the price cap review in April. One Cash reader, Ali Shearer, was stunned to open a final demand of £1,000 from Scottish Power. He’d received no previous bills from the company because he had never been a Scottish Power customer. “It started with a man arriving at the door to read the meter,” he says. “He told me he had the wrong meter number for the house and that he’d deal with it. Unbeknownst to me, he was from Scottish Power, not SSE, which has supplied my energy since 2010.” Shearer’s numerous attempts to convince Scottish Power that he was not a customer were ineffective. Over the next nine months, he received letters and a visit from two debt collection companies. Last month two bills for £1,700 and £1,729 arrived in the same week, addressed to “Owner/Occupier”. Only after the Observer contacted Scottish Power did the firm discover that Shearer was being billed for the electricity consumption of a nearby water pumping station. “We should not have pursued him for this debt. We have apologised and agreed a gesture of goodwill,” it says. Scottish Power customers Douglas and Karen Wilson were perplexed when the monthly direct debit for their one-bedroom flat was raised by 20% to £171 in late 2020. They checked their online electricity account, which said they were £800 in credit. When they applied for a refund they were told they actually owed £1,200. “A monthly direct debit of £82 was agreed until the anomaly was resolved,” says Douglas. “The resolution was to be an official meter reading, but the pandemic precluded a site visit, so the problem was kicked down the road.” Four months later, Scottish Power increased the direct debit to £233 without warning. It closed the Wilsons’ complaint without notifying them, and passed their account to a debt collection agency. Last month, the agency demanded an immediate payment of £930. “The letter from the debt collectors threatened action unless we paid by the day before the letter reached us,” says Douglas. “I attempted to contact Scottish Power but couldn’t get through on the helpline. They take up to five days to respond to emails and we’re worried about sheriff officers turning up at the door and demanding access with menace.” An investigation by the Observer exposed years of error on the part of Scottish Power. The company admitted that the Wilsons’ electricity meter had packed up in 2017 and failed to record consumption for 18 months. Oblivious to the cause, Scottish Power assumed the couple’s energy use had plummeted to near zero and refunded the £1,600 they’d paid for the period. The meter was replaced in 2019 and a blunder meant that the day readings were transposed with cheaper night ones so the Wilsons continued to be undercharged. The shock bills were a belated attempt to make up the shortfall. Scottish Power says: “We’re sorry for the meter issues Mr Wilson has faced over the past few years and the customer service he has received trying to get this resolved. “The amount he was paying was not reflective of his actual usage which resulted in a debt accruing on his account. However, we should not have deadlocked his account whilst we were investigating these issues. In recognition of the time it has taken us to resolve the issues we have withdrawn £532 from Mr Wilson’s outstanding balance.” Scottish Power was fined £18m in 2016 after the energy regulator Ofgem identified serious failings with its customer service and its billing system. According to complaints received by the Observer and reviews on Trustpilot, errors persist. Ovo customers have also endured years of inaccurate bills after being subsumed by the energy giant SSE. In 2020 the company agreed to pay £8.9m into a redress fund after Ofgem ruled that it had prioritised business expansion over customer service. It promised to ensure the mistakes were not repeated. However, last month it informed blind 81-year-old customer John McKenna that his electricity account was £993 in arrears, having increased his monthly direct debit from £14 to £236 without warning. The customer’s bills had been based on estimated readings for seven years, despite visits by agents to read the meter, and his requests for an accurate bill had gone unheeded. Ovo discovered last October that his meter had stopped recording his electricity consumption back in 2014 and so he’d only been billed for standing charges since then. As energy customers are not allowed to charge customers for unbilled energy dating back more than 12 months, the £993 was Ovo’s guesstimate of the previous year’s costs. Ovo admitted a series of errors when the Observer intervened and agreed to waive the £933 arrears as a goodwill gesture. Complaints website Resolver says energy complaints rose 21% last month and a third were from vulnerable customers. “When people are concerned about making ends meet, they tend to scrutinise their bills closely,” says Resolver’s Martyn James. “Massive bills, over short periods, that can’t possibly be right is a strong trend – as are complaints about how they are being investigated.” Ofgem says: “Protecting customers is our top priority and we regularly engage with all domestic suppliers to ensure they are treating customers fairly and providing reasonable customer service.”It was an extraordinary way to end nearly two years of restrictions and lockdowns. With no explanatory briefings from either the chief medical officer or chief scientific adviser, no input from Sage and no consultation with Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, the prime minister told a surprised House of Commons he would unilaterally lift all Covid restrictions a month ahead of time on 24 February. How public health could be sustained thereafter was plainly an afterthought, of little consequence to be unveiled after the recess in a document pointedly called Living with Covid. Nobody expects other than the scantest of strategies, with even the Office for National Statistics’s (ONS) highly regarded surveillance survey, which allows the UK to pick up the emergence of high-risk variants, likely to be scaled back or even scrapped after April. Any continuing requirement to self-isolate? Wear masks? Any social distancing? Working from home? Covid passports? All over. Even, it seems under Treasury pressure, free PCR testing is to be stopped for all but the most at risk. With a confidence born of Omicron proving to be much less dangerous than feared in December (helped perhaps by Britons behaving in a guarded way), the gamble not to lock down has been validated; Britain is to be the “first in the world” to be free of restrictions. But this was not a decision driven by public health considerations; it was rather buying the prime minister crucial political support. Allow me to let you in on a dream I have. I’m living in a country in which, after months of sacrifice, hardship and dislocation, the leaders are pulling the country together to create a new normal. Flanked by experts and supported by the encouraging data that hospital admissions are falling, with death rates falling even further for the vaccinated, we are told that, after consultation with the three nations and the leaders of the opposition parties, the entire country is going to enjoy an immediate, phased, watchful relaxation of restrictions as fast as possible. Of course, surveillance through surveys would continue as we guard against new dangerous variants and, to make it worthwhile, testing would not be scrapped but become more sparing so that those with symptoms could know whether they had Covid. The expectation would remain that people with Covid would legitimately stay at home rather than infect others, while nightclubs and sporting venues could and should ask for proof of vaccination. Masks would continue to be worn on public transport. In this imagined country, we had come through the pandemic together and, while the new normal could never be the normal of pre-pandemic, it was still normal enough. Recognising that Covid is global, we would be actively mobilising our now surplus public health capacity to help others. This dream is where the vast majority would love us to be. Personally, I delight in the escalating return to normality – dinners, lunches with colleagues, getting out and about much more freely – but I am watchful. On buses, trains and tubes, I take care to wear a mask and make sure, if I can, that I sit with others wearing them. I willingly wear a mask in shops, cinema, theatre or going around galleries. I keep my social distance. I enjoy the possibilities of Zoom, a working life organised around online slots, but saving time on travelling. If asked to take a lateral flow test before a large gathering, I happily comply. I live a life as normally as possible – but remain vigilant about the danger of contracting Covid. It’s how I expect to continue. Instead, Living with Covid will be an enforced imposition of a particular conception of liberty by the dominant faction of a discredited party – a fundamental misreading of public opinion and the dynamics of pandemic management. I am like the vast majority. The modellers who warned about the potential explosive impact of Omicron were not exponents of big state socialism. Rather, they were surprised and their models caught out by the degree to which the majority of us constrained our own liberty, were watchful about contact and social interaction, partly as a result of the models’ alarming projected scenarios, and lived by the rules. It was our new behaviour, as much as state rules, which drove the better-than-expected outcome. We were, in philosopher Isaiah Berlin’s famous formulation, practitioners of positive liberty – taking control of our individual destinies through acting together. By contrast, Tory libertarians are really Big Brother imposers of Berlin’s negative liberty, defining liberty not in terms of individuals trying to control their life in concert with others but wholly in terms of removing what they describe as coercive state restrictions and obstacles. Concerns about coercion might make arguable sense in some second-order walks of economic and social life – objecting, say, to councils’ over-zealous imposition of swingeing parking fines – but in public health issues negative liberty is bonkers. Big Brother removal of safeguards to my good health in the name of individual liberty so that I am free to be made seriously ill by others is as dangerous as any socialist Big Brother. As I have argued in an earlier column, the good society fuses the claims of the “we” with the needs of the “I”. Be sure Living with Covid, informed by the bossy negative libertarians of the Tory Covid Recovery Group, will neglect the “we” almost entirely. Nor is any of this made easier by chancellor Rishi Sunak’s obsession with Treasury orthodoxy. The purpose of the state is the creation of public goods for which we readily pay – of which the Office for National Statistics surveys of the incidence of Covid and testing are prime examples. This short-sighted, mad-dash exit from the pandemic mirrors its beginning – a painful refusal to accept that human beings benefit from the group acting together, especially in matters of public health. Libertarianism is the new political virus. Immunisation from its baleful effects cannot come too soon. • Will Hutton is an Observer columnistSongs that claim Covid-19 is fake and describe the vaccines as “poison” are being actively promoted to Spotify users in playlists generated by its content recommendation engine. Tracks found on the world’s largest music streaming service explicitly encourage people not to get vaccinated and say those who do are “slaves”, “sheep”, and victims of Satan. Others call for an uprising, urging listeners to “fight for your life”. “They fooled the whole world with PCR testing. The thought police are patrolling. Can’t you see what’s unfolding?” say the lyrics of another, adding: “The whole thing ends once the people have risen.” Spotify this weekend removed several of the songs flagged to it by the Observer, which it said breached rules banning content that promotes “dangerous, false, or deceptive content about Covid-19” that may pose a threat to public health. Before being removed, the songs could be easily found using keywords through Spotify’s search tool. But they were also actively promoted to users who express interest in similar songs via automatically generated playlists, potentially bringing them to a far wider audience. One user who played a song containing anti-vaccine lyrics was given a personalised playlist directing them to even more extreme songsOf the 50 songs in that playlist, 19 included explicit references to anti-vaccine and Covid misinformation, including claims the vaccine is being used to microchip people. Some had references to other conspiracy theories, including claims that satanic paedophiles run the world, and that the Sandy Hook school shooting in the US, which left 26 dead, was a hoax. Among the artists whose content was recommended to users was Edward Freeman, a rapper known as Remeece, who made headlines in the UK after touring schools blasting his anti-vaccine anthem Don’t Tek Di Vaccine to pupils outside school gates. The lyrics of the song – among those that remained live on Spotify last week – repeatedly say “don’t tek the damn thing” and “you mad”, and describe the vaccine as “poison”. Remeece has visited primary and secondary schools in London, Cornwall and Bournemouth, according to videos posted on his Instagram feed. In December, he was filmed performing the song at a protest with Piers Corbyn, a key figure in the UK’s anti-vaccine movement. Spotify has long been aware it is hosting the rapper’s content – which was first reported to Spotify by a concerned parent in November, according to emails seen by the Observer. His material remained live without any content warning last week. The findings have stoked debate about the streaming giant’s handling of misinformation, with critics calling for the platform – and other streaming services hosting similar material – to be held to the same standard as traditional social media platforms such as Facebook and Instagram. Spotify, which has more than 180 million users, has recently faced criticism over its relationship with podcaster Joe Rogan, who it signed in an exclusive deal for a reported $100m. Several artists including Neil Young and Joni Mitchell demanded their content be removed from Spotify in protest at Rogan’s alleged role in spreading misinformation about Covid-19, and 270 US doctors, scientists, healthcare professionals and professors wrote to the platform calling Rogan “a menace to public health” for airing anti-vaccine ideology. Guests on his podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience, have included Robert Malone, a controversial infectious-disease researcher who was involved in the development of mRNA vaccine technology but has been criticised for spreading vaccine misinformation. In response to that criticism, Spotify deleted several episodes and published new rules telling those uploading content to avoid claiming Covid-19 is a hoax and spreading anti-vaccine misinformation. It also said it would add content advisories to podcast episodes discussing Covid-19. However, the anti-vaccine songs, which contain lyrics in some cases far more extreme than those podcasts, did not carry a content warning. In some cases the algorithm directed listeners to content with low numbers of plays, potentially amplifying the reach of misinformation that would otherwise have had a small audience. Many of the songs had titles containing keywords such as “vaccine” and “mask”, suggesting it would be easy for Spotify to locate them if it wanted to. Imran Ahmed, chief executive of the Center for Countering Digital Hate, a group that monitors misinformation and harmful content online, said the material identified contained “unscientific, provably false misinformation” that encourages listeners to refuse vaccines that could save lives. He said: “Spotify isn’t just hosting and profiting from dangerous misinformation, its algorithm is proactively connecting disparate pieces of dangerous misinformation and packaging it up to listeners. After the Joe Rogan controversy, much was made of Spotify’s supposed tough stance against Covid misinformation. It appears the opposite is true.” Spotify has previously removed other types of harmful content from its platform that was deemed to breach its policies. In December, following an investigation by Sky News, it removed almost 150 hours of content it said violated its hateful content policy, including antisemitic, racist and white supremacist material found in podcasts. In 2020, a BBC investigation led Spotify and other platforms including Apple Music, YouTube Music and Deezer to remove racist, antisemitic and homophobic content. An excerpt of a Hitler speech, calls for “Aryans” to make a brand new start, and references to white power were found in songs hosted by the streaming services. Don’t Tek Di Vaccine was among the songs Spotify took down this weekend. It is yet to say if it plans to add health warnings to songs which discuss Covid-19, as it has with podcasts. A spokesperson said: “Spotify prohibits content on the platform which promotes dangerous false, or dangerous deceptive content about Covid-19 that may cause offline harm and/or pose a direct threat to public health. When content that violates this standard is identified, the appropriate enforcement action is taken.”Fraudsters who engage in romance scams are becoming increasingly brazen about how they operate and are willing to spend five months building up a relationship with their victims, according to a security expert. In some cases, criminals will even have video calls with victims, luring them into a false sense of security that they are involved with someone who is genuinely interested in them. The number of romance scams, where people hand over money to someone they believe they are in a relationship with, doubled during the pandemic with the average victim losing £6,100, according to figures from TSB. Women are twice as likely to be victims as men. Jake Moore, a cyber-security adviser at internet security firm ESET, says fraudsters can spend four to five months in establishing a fake relationship before carrying out the crime. During this time, they will often be working on several victims. “They’re very good at remembering all the stories that lead along that journey [ending in] an elaborate scam as to why they want the money,” he says. These scams can be as simple as a person claiming their car has broken down on the way to visit and that they need money to repair it, he explains. In another instance reported by TSB, a “soldier” claimed he needed funds to get home from a foreign posting. Victims, who TSB says are an average age of 47, have been increasingly targeted through social media and dating apps. There have been warnings to consumers to beware of scams before Valentine’s Day . Many scammers used restrictions on movement during the pandemic as an excuse not to meet up with victims. Refusing to meet in real-life, or face to face for a video call, are both things that should ring alarm bells. However, Moore says that criminals are now taking more risks and making face-to-face video calls where they are fully visible. “There are male and female fraudsters who put in video calls every night, really creating this perfect story as to how this relationship unfolds.” He advises daters to change the times of the calls and to be spontaneous about when they happen, as this could upset a fraudster’s timetable. “If they are controlling and saying ‘it’s got to be this time’ then that could be a red flag,” he says. Katherine Hart from the Chartered Trading Standards Institute, which represents trading standards officers, says the pandemic increased people’s reliance on indirect communications through phones. “There’s the thinking that they’re protected by a computer screen to a certain extent, and will easily, and quite readily, pass on a lot of personal information via text or emails,” she says. “Unfortunately, quite often we only find out about these things when somebody has actually intervened, whether that be a bank or a family member, or the victim has caused themselves such mental anguish there is a referral from social services.” In some instances, criminals will scan the death announcements and target lonely widowers in the following months with the promise of companionship, she says. Action Fraud reported instances of romance fraud were up 40% in the year to April last year with almost £74m being lost.Epping Forest has swaths of designated land that is home to adders, grass snakes and common lizards, as well as white admiral and purple hairstreak butterflies, and mammals such as shrews and voles that, in turn, provide food for birds of prey and owls. However, life for the forest’s bovine residents has not been so easy. Forest staff have long battled to prevent the cattle from roaming across nearby roads and dual carriageways. Now, at last, cattle in Epping Forest know their place – thanks to satellite technology. The English Longhorn cows and calves that live on the ancient woodland were recently fitted with receivers – which look like cowbells – that can pick up GPS signals, which are then used to create virtual grazing areas for the animals. If an animal approaches the edge of its delineated area, its cowbell detects the boundary and starts to emit a sound that rises in pitch or eventually delivers a mild electric pulse as the animal tries to cross the boundary. The technology means the forest’s cattle can spend their time in carefully selected spots without the need for barbed wire or electric fences to keep them from wandering across the roads surrounding the former royal forest at the northern tip of London. The system, pioneered by the Norwegian company Nofence, has been adopted to control the herd of 66 animals that currently graze in Epping Forest and which help maintain the health of its 2,400 hectares (5,900 acres) of grass and woodland. Over the next few years, it is hoped the system will allow forest staff to increase the herd to around 150 animals. “Large grazing animals like cows help to create very variable habitats,” said John Phillips, the forest’s grazing and landscapes officer. “They crop back the grass and allow smaller plants to grow. And keeping the grass short also helps animals, including reptiles and birds to feed.” Hundreds of cows and calves once grazed on the land under ancient rights that were granted to commoners, people who lived in a forest parish and who owned at least half an acre of land. In the late 19th century, these rights came under strain as land was enclosed and housing developments spread. Protests began and the forest was eventually bought by the City of London Corporation and stripped of its designation as a royal forest. It was decreed that from then on, Epping Forest would be “unenclosed and unbuilt on as an open space for the recreation and enjoyment of the people”. (The right to collect wood in Epping Forest also survives though this is limited to “one faggot of dead or driftwood” a day per resident and is rarely exploited.) Commoners were allowed to continue grazing cattle – though their numbers fell throughout the 20th century until the BSE crisis in 1996 led to their complete removal from the forest. Recently, cattle have been brought back, triggering the need for a new solution. Fencing is not permitted in Epping Forest so at first underground cables were laid round the perimeter of grazing areas and cattle were fitted with tracking devices that gave them a mild electric shock when they tried to cross over a cable. “However, you had to dig up the cable each time you wanted to move the cattle to a new grazing area,” said Phillips. “In addition, you had to dig up the cables if they broke down or needed servicing. We needed something more flexible.” The Nofence system avoids these problems, said Phillips. Its receivers relay the exact position, determined by GPS, of each animal in the forest. That data is then transmitted to apps on the mobile phones of forest staff. Using these devices, they can then mark out the grazing area for each animal on a digital map that is stored on their phones. The animal’s cowbell detects if it is approaching the boundary of its grazing area and emits sounds before administering a mild electric pulse. “The cow learns to associate the sound’s rise in pitch with the prospect of being given an electric pulse – which is no stronger than the one it would get from an electric fence,” said Synne Foss Budal, general manager of Nofence UK. “As a result, it changes direction away from the boundary. “We can monitor very precisely what a cow is doing this way. We can see that it knows the difference between the first pitch and the last pitch of the sound emitted, and that it knows exactly when a pulse is going to come. So they time it. They turn around at the last second so they can get the most of fresh grass at the boundary edge,” she said. Crucially, these virtual grazing areas can be changed merely by altering their boundaries on a mobile phone app, said Phillips. “We can create a new virtual pasture by marking it on a phone while also creating a corridor that links their old pasture with their new one. The animals will wander down the corridor to their new grazing lands. There is no digging up of cables or knocking down fences. It is just right for Epping Forest.”Improvements made to Hestercombe, a grand old house in Somerset, at the end of the 19th century were many and varied – glasshouses, a church, a model dairy and a splendid cricket pitch, but one addition was a little more intimate and surprisingly modern. EWB “Teddy” Portman, the wealthy owner of the house, gave to his wife, Constance, what the modern custodians of Hestercombe claim may be the first “Jacuzzi” bath for a domestic home, possibly as a Valentine’s present. The eight-tap spray bath is to be shown off as part of an exhibition at the estate that highlights some of the house’s more unusual artefacts. Portman ordered the installation of the bath in the 1890s and it cost him about £45, the equivalent of more than £5,000 now. The bathroom overlooks the formal gardens, which were redesigned by Edwin Lutyens and Gertrude Jekyll and, for added cosiness, has an open fire. A spokesperson for the house said the bath was unusual and well preserved. “It is an eight-tap spray bath we believe was one of the first Jacuzzi baths installed into a British home by George Jennings Ltd, who was also the inventor of the first public flush toilets. We are confident it is the best preserved bath of its kind in the UK, possibly even farther afield. “Teddy Portman bought the bath for his wife and it was installed in the 1890s – a Valentine’s gift perhaps. We think we’re so advanced and different today, but these objects show that us humans haven’t changed all that much really.” The improvements made to the house and estate made a stir in the area, with the Somerset County Gazette reporting that “no fewer than 150 men” were working on the project. Hestercombe archivist Kim Legate said the bath was designed by the London firm founded by the sanitary engineer and plumber, George Jennings (1810-82). Settings include “wave”, “plunge” and “spray”. After the deaths of the Portmans, the house was used as a fire service headquarters and got a mention in the Western Daily Press in 1972, at which point the bath still worked. “No one, not even Mr. Johnson [chief fire officer], uses the bath nowadays,” the paper reported. “But it is still in perfect working order. This was proved quite recently by a visiting television reporter who got a soaking when he tried it out.” The bath will be displayed in the heritage exhibition, Things That Pass a Thousand Times: Unearthing Hestercombe’s Collections, which will also feature one of Jekyll’s trowels, from 12 March – to 15 May.Asking my friends for parenting advice is tough, because we all know next to nothing, but good because we do at least agree what we’re doing is very hard and we should be proud of ourselves. My dad, by contrast, is the exact opposite. He doesn’t really dispense parenting advice, even though he had 11 children and fostered half a dozen more. He’s basically the end-level boss of dads, the one you have to fight once you’ve dispatched Tom Hanks, Richard Madeley and Liam Neeson’s character from Taken. There’s nothing I’ve done as much, or for as long, as he’s done parenting, but when I ask him specific questions, he always seems slightly bemused I’m having any trouble at all, as if I’ve rung him up for a refresher course on tying my shoelaces. ‘Just do what you think is best,’ he said on the phone a few days ago, when I related my trepidation around introducing the imminent baby to our son. He uttered this with the sort of breezy dismissal that suggested he’d feel more panicked sliding some keys off one fob and on to a different fob. Maybe deep investment in the small anxieties of fatherhood is just one of the first casualties of having so many children. What can trepidation really mean to someone who’s sat through more than 100 school plays? What could perturb a man who has been witness to the gory loss of 220 baby teeth – and had to shell out cold, hard cash for each? My fears about welcoming another child into our family fell on deaf ears, not because my dad is unfeeling, but because he has introduced a new baby to an older sibling no less than 55 times, and can’t remember it ever being much of a problem. My friends and I spend parenting chats nodding our frowning heads sympathetically, riveted by the noble difficulties of our challenging lives, and the fresh offering of new hurdles that come with every milestone. Not so my dad, who had seven kids under 10 by the time he was my age, and spent a period between 1999 and 2000 living with six teenage daughters at once – an experience which resulted in his capacity for anxiety being permanently cauterised. ‘Should I get him a wee present from the baby?’ I ask, hoping this leading question will force some specific advice from him in a pathetic act of ventriloquism. ‘Maybe,’ he says, ‘but then you’d better be ready for them to want a present from the baby every time they see them, so prepare for that!’ The financial sting of all those baby teeth clearly made its mark, I think to myself. My dad is, of course, merely a proponent of the theory that parents know better than they think they do, and experience has taught him that worrying about every little thing is useless. By the end of the call, I know it’s the best advice I could receive, precisely because it fails to flatter my problems the way I tend to prefer. Luckily, I relate his responses to some friends the following day, along with my frustration at being told everything will be fine. ‘That’s so hard,’ they say, and we frown, happily, once again. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsA few years ago, I was interviewing the French novelist Laurent Binet and asked him what the most powerful motivational force in his creative process was. “A fear of humiliation,” he told me. Writing is a profoundly exposing act, a public baring of the soul, and this is why so many authors hide behind irony or flippancy, unwilling to commit fully to the deepest demands of their art. I thought about Binet, who described an almost paralysing anxiety that people would laugh at his writing, when reading Alex Hyde’s debut novel. This is a book that walks along the dangerous edge between seriousness and portentousness, between high art and parody. That it largely works is down to the very earnestness with which Hyde pursues her artistic ends, the sense of a writer entirely committed to her project. Drawing loosely on the story of Hyde’s own father’s birth and upbringing, Violets tells the story of two young women during the second world war, both of them called Violet. The first Violet we meet wakes in a Birmingham hospital with memories of an “enamel pail of blood”. She has had a hysterectomy after an ectopic pregnancy. Dreams of a happy family life with her husband, Fred, seem suddenly remote. What’s more, he is about to be deployed to Burma. The other Violet is younger, in a small Welsh village, pregnant by a Polish soldier who’d been lodging with her family. On a whim, she signs up to the Auxiliary Territorial Service, who are “shipping out to Italy pretty quick. Naples”. Hiding her pregnancy, she flees to Italy. This Violet’s chapters are punctuated with passages of poetry addressed to the unborn child – “Pram Boy”. Some of these poems are more successful than others, with the occasional sense that they are there more as a signifier of formal daring than because they work either on their own as poetry or as part of the broader narrative. This is a profoundly unusual novel, an intricately composed and thoroughly corporeal portrait of the intertwined lives of two women during the war. Hyde is clearly a writer of talent and ambition: Violets suggests a glittering career ahead. •Violets by Alex Hyde is published by Granta (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThis Is Going to Hurt BBC One | iPlayer Chloe (BBC One) | iPlayer Inventing Anna Netflix Starstruck (BBC One) | iPlayer If you’re expecting a baby, then perhaps it’s best to give the new seven-part BBC One drama This Is Going to Hurt a swerve and watch something more chilled with less gore: say, the Red Wedding massacre on Game of Thrones? Adapted by doctor turned writer Adam Kay from his bestselling 2017 memoir of the same name, and directed by Lucy Forbes (In My Skin), TIGTH is like a medically sanctioned slasher movie. The opening scene involves obstetrics and gynaecology (“brats and twats”) acting registrar Adam (Ben Whishaw), fresh from sleeping in his car, encountering a woman whose unborn baby’s arm hangs out of her like a bloodied spindle. As the series unfolds (all episodes are on iPlayer), blood, guts and placentas are chucked around by the bucketful; trainees faint into caesarean incisions; foetal heartbeats vanish; vulvas are mutilated. As you’d expect, the carnage comes with socio-political undertones, showing the underfunded, overstretched NHS as broken. Medics lurch through drab corridors like zombie extras in The Walking Dead. Patients are sometimes stupid or racist. Nor are the staff presented, glowingly, reductively, as saints and angels. For his part, Adam is human, fallible and not that nice with it. He makes a terrible mistake and scrabbles to cover it up. Treated like a serf by his consultant (Alex Jennings), he’s correspondingly mean and sarcastic (“So near, and yet so shit”) to his nervous underling, played by Ambika Mod. Meanwhile, Adam’s personal life with fiance (Rory Fleck Byrne) is in tatters. A colleague wryly observes: “You should mention the gay thing at work. People might warm to you more.” The result is graphically reminiscent of Jed Mercurio’s Bodies, but this time from the perspective of an unintentional bad guy who also does good… it’s complicated. The tone chops so violently between light and shade that sometimes it forgets to take the viewer with it, but Whishaw effectively embodies the bloodshot-eyed desperation of a macho-hours work culture where every slip can mean life or death. If the medical profession is rife with impostor syndrome, then Chloe, the six-part BBC One thriller created, written and directed by Alice Seabright (Sex Education), is about embracing the fraud within in a social media-addled world where the heavily curated onscreen life is king. Erin Doherty (Princess Anne in The Crown) stars as Becky, first spied obsessively scrolling though the Instagram-feed of Chloe (Poppy Gilbert). Chloe’s perfect existence (big house, perfect marriage, yoga, blah, blah) appears to mock Becky’s reality: an office temp living with a dementia-stricken mother. When Chloe dies, Becky restyles herself as art-world somebody Sasha, and infiltrates Chloe’s social group, including her best friend (Pippa Bennett-Warner) and husband (Billy Howle). What is Becky up to, and what was her relationship with Chloe? Doherty gives a beautifully ambiguous performance in which it’s difficult to work out whether Becky is malignant or just messy. Her eyes shine coldly, victoriously, as she successfully navigates her new clique: an arty, voluminous dress here, a carefully calibrated accent there, laid-back entitlement everywhere. The real Becky keeps escaping through the cracks (hate, envy, need), but there’s honesty there too. She knows she’s a construct – a talentless Ms Ripley – but it’s still better than who and what she really is. I loved all this, I sucked it up like a superfood smoothie. But sadly, a few episodes in (again, the whole series is on iPlayer), Chloe turns sludgy and formulaic, with a denouement that’s as unlikely as it is overexplained. While still watchable, it wasn’t a patch on the earlier episodes, in which Chloe is a study of social climbing mores in the modern era, with mischievous flashes of Patricia Highsmith. Doherty is superb, barely needing to speak: her intense, hyper-vigilant face says it all. Another delicious impostor of the social media age arrives in the latest Shonda Rhimes offering, Netflix’s nine-part Inventing Anna, part-directed by David Frankel (The Devil Wears Prada) and based on a 2018 New York magazine article, How Anna Delvey Tricked New York’s Party People, by Jessica Pressler. Julia Garner stars as Delvey, real name Anna Sorokin, who posed as a fake German heiress, managing to dupe Big Apple high society, and (almost) the banking world into financing her multimillion-dollar schemes, including a Park Avenue social club. In real life, Sorokin was jailed for her crimes (after her release, she was detained again for overstaying her visa). I was expecting an examination of upmarket grifting on a major scale, but unfortunately Inventing Anna is a padded-out mess. Despite being swamped by her wigs, Garner is suitably fierce and commanding as Delvey – demanding private jets; denouncing people as “basic” – but after a while, her narcissistic shtick (“My father will wire over the money”) becomes droningly repetitive. Moreover, Delvey’s relationship with the journalist Vivian (Anna Chlumsky), presumably representing Pressler, is overplayed, as are the relentless sequences following journalistic process – we practically end up writing the piece with Vivian (I know we journalists are dead sexy and all, but Watergate this ain’t). Inventing Anna would have worked far better if it had focused on the flawed but mesmeric hot mess of Delvey, rather than on getting the story about Delvey. I was shocked to find myself bored and wondering if other viewers would last until the end. The first series of the UK-based millennial romcom-sitcom Starstruck was an unexpected hit last year. Created and co-written by the New Zealander comedian Rose Matafeo, it followed her character, Jessie, as she blundered into a relationship with famous actor Tom (Nikesh Patel). The six-part second series begins with Jessie not returning to New Zealand after all, and she and Tom continuing their adventures in odd coupledom. The script remains baggy, with Matafeo’s charisma doing some heavy lifting. Still, it’s a warm, easy watch. Minnie Driver reprises her role as Tom’s self-serving agent (“I recognise you from Instagram. You realise anyone can see that?”), and I’m sure we’d all love – love – to know who Russell Tovey based his obnoxious, laddish film director on. While Starstruck makes obvious nods to Notting Hill, the vibe remains zones 4-6, and it’s all the better for it. What else I’m watching Imagine… Marian Keyes: My (Not So) Perfect Life (BBC One) Alan Yentob’s art series profiles the bestselling Irish writer Marian Keyes. She talks candidly about alcohol addiction, depression and the blatant chauvinism directed at “chick lit”. Direct, engaging, whip-smart, Keyes never disappoints. Love Is Blind (Netflix) It’s back – the second series of the hit dating show where couples meet in the dark and are then astounded to discover they might not have much in common after all. Preposterous it may be, but it’s also addictive. 60 Days With the Gypsies (Channel 4) In the raw, sometimes alarming opener of this documentary series, explorer Ed Stafford experiences the ups and downs of life with Romany Gypsies and Irish Travellers, with outsider distrust and evictions constantly forcing them to move on.Maria Friedman, 61, is a singer, actor and director who has a natural musicality (her parents were classical musicians) and knows how to get inside a song and make it her own – and ours – with emotional precision. An eight-time Olivier nominee (she has won the prize three times), she is known for her interpretations of Stephen Sondheim’s songbook, and is about to celebrate him and the composers Marvin Hamlisch and Michel Legrand in Legacy, a show at the Menier Chocolate Factory in London. Friedman is married to the actor Adrian Der Gregorian and has two sons. Tell me about the first time you met Stephen Sondheim… I was in my early 20s and in a gala as a replacement for a singer who had flu. I had two days to learn Broadway Baby [from Sondheim’s Follies]. The lyrics fitted me like a glove: it was about a girl with aspirations who wanted to land a great job and not work in cafes or live in a bedsit with no money. Everyone considered Broadway Baby Elaine Stritch’s song [she was also on the bill that night]. The music started and a spotlight went on to the middle of the stage. I took a deep breath and was about to start my song when, from the top of the gods, someone shouted: “Get off, we want Elaine!” I had tears in my eyes but dug really deep into those lyrics. It’s what I have done ever since. Sondheim’s work is extraordinary: when you trust it and live in it, it keeps you safe. The place went berserk. Sondheim was in the audience; at the party afterwards he asked: “Who was that girl?” What was he like as a character? He came to see me later in Ghetto at the National, and it was after that I got cast as Dot in Sunday in the Park With George. Sondheim was the most curious person I’ve ever met. His intelligence was dazzling, but what I loved most was his capacity to laugh and to care and to listen. So was the nuanced bittersweet quality of his music in evidence in the man himself? Life is bittersweet and his music reflects that. He wrote about people’s complexities and relished them. There was never any judgment about people being fractured. He was a kind, loyal man, but God, he could be very … direct. I gather he was godfather to one of your boys? He was godfather to my son Toby and mentor to my younger son, Alfie. How do you interpret a song –? It’s gradual. You have a smell, a feeling about your connection. You feel it coming closer and closer until it becomes part of your marrow and suddenly it belongs to you. Sondheim’s genius was that he left space for every actor to bring their own life into play – he was open to new interpretations and would roar with laughter when you came up with something he had not thought of. Tell me about your show at the Chocolate Factory, which will celebrate not only Sondheim but the American composer Marvin Hamlisch and French composer Michel Legrand … I worked with them both, and travelled the world with them. I sang at Marvin Hamlisch’s memorial along with Aretha Franklin, Barbra Streisand and Liza Minnelli. Michel Legrand came to see me in one of my shows and actually played the piano, which was unbelievable. I sang at his memorial too. So this is in memory of absent friends? It’s about legacy, celebrating three people I miss. Sondheim had this idea that everything had to stay fresh. And so during the pandemic I got a lot of recently graduated young people to send me tapes and auditioned them, and they’re taking part. This was not out of sympathy but because they are amazing. Your father, Leonard Friedman, a violinist with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, left the family when you were five. How did that influence your life? Look at the men I’ve mentioned: three Jewish older men … we don’t need a psychiatrist to tell us about that [laughs]. I realised something about my dad recently. I hardly knew him but he got me up to the Isle of Mull for one of his festivals. He promised me the world – cellos and violins and everything – but I ended opening my show with small pipes and a banjo, for f’s sake. He was doing a concert down the road. Then, bit by bit, all the musicians came in and began making music, and that was the show that ended up at the Donmar because Caro Newling, who is Sam Mendes’s producing partner, was on a walking trip with her mother and came to see my little cabaret. I got my first Olivier award for that show. And that was because of my dad. Your sister is the leading West End producer Sonia Friedman. What do your other siblings do? My brother is a solo violinist and was leader of the Royal Ballet… he’s amazing. Sarah is a computer scientist and way, way cleverer than all of us. And wonderful Benjy was the director/producer of Bake Off and is now a documentary-maker. When you look back on your life, which has played the bigger part – luck or hard work? Not knowing the rules meant we walked into situations that somebody with more education and a conventional upbringing might not have walked into. The lack of formality in our family meant we were either going to drown or just scrabble to stay afloat. I’ve spent months of my life under water with a little snorkel, just managing. But in terms of luck, I feel blessed that music has been part of my life. I’ve worked hard at it but I love what I do so it doesn’t feel like work. Getting cancer in 2005 was obviously bad luck. How has that changed your perception of your life? A lot of people say cancer has made them bolder but it made me more afraid. I gave up the industry – nobody believed I would – and did concerts and jobs that were not going to take me away from putting my children to bed. I was 45. There are big consequences if you step out of the industry, but I didn’t have a choice. It was the right decision, yet part of me got lost. It’s good now because I’m coming back. How old are your sons, and does being a mother get easier as time goes by? Toby is 27 and has a degree in inclusive performance. He works with an autistic child at Chickenshed [theatre company]. My other son, Alfie, is 19 and a brilliant actor and has just got a great part in Peter Kosminsky’s new TV series The Undeclared War with Mark Rylance and Simon Pegg. As for being a mother … it does not get easier as time goes by! What Sondheim song would you choose to get you through the hardest times? Move On from Sunday in the Park With George – “Stop worrying where you are going … The choice may have been mistaken, the choosing was not. You have to move on.” It’s about taking one little step forward. Life changes and things pass. You can’t stand still. What’s the happiest song you sing? The Way You Look Tonight [by Jerome Kern]. It’s about capturing the moment when you know you’ll love somebody for ever and will grow old with them if you’re lucky. I used to sing that to my little grandma and know she was transported to when she was young dancing with her handsome husband. She was 96 and she was beautiful. I love that song. Legacy is at the Menier Chocolate Factory, London, 3-20 March • This article was amended on 13 February 2022 to remove an image of Friedman that incorrectly said she was pictured with Stephen Sondheim.‘The idea of having a memorial to this catastrophe next to the mother of parliaments,” says Dr Martin Stern, “is brilliant.” He speaks of the Holocaust memorial proposed for Victoria Tower Gardens, next to the Palace of Westminster. He does not, though, feel the same way about a learning centre that is proposed to go with the memorial. He feels that this would be a “calamitous mistake”, both “ridiculously large” for the small park in which it would be located and “ridiculously small” for its intended purpose. Stern’s views should carry some weight. He is a survivor of the Theresienstadt concentration camp, where he was sent at the age of five. In 2018, he was awarded an MBE for his services to Holocaust education. He was an early backer of the memorial idea and was “induced to record a video” in its support before he saw the full extent of the plans. He tells me that “it distresses me greatly to upset people that I respect and like” who support the project. But he feels it is too important an issue to remain silent. The UK Holocaust Memorial and Learning Centre has been contentious ever since David Cameron announced it in 2016. Objectors have questioned whether it is the most effective way of ensuring that the Holocaust is fully remembered in the future. They have also opposed its unquestionable impact on Victoria Tower Gardens and the threat its excavation poses to magnificent mature plane trees. The security aspect of putting it in the middle of Westminster is, as Stern puts it, “a nightmare. It’s an obvious target for nutcases.” The learning centre magnifies these issues. It has to be buried underground because there is nowhere else for it to go. It requires bag checks and security screenings. It bloats the project into something unwieldy and cumbersome and drives the cost up to a figure that is now more than £100m. Stern points out, as have others, that there is a much better place for such a centre, in the Imperial War Museum, which already has powerful and informative Holocaust galleries about a mile from the memorial site. There is more room there for a learning centre, he says, and it “could integrate with other organisations… it would have more space for expansion”. He would like to see a less grandiose but still eloquent memorial built next to parliament. Last year, the then planning minister Chris Pincher gave the project the go-ahead, after a public inquiry recommended approval, but the question is still not settled. Later this month, the high court will hear an appeal against the government’s decision, brought by the London Historic Parks and Gardens Trust. Stern does not make any claim to speak for all survivors, although he knows many others who feel as he does, but don’t want to speak out. Surely such an endeavour should respect voices such as his wherever possible. The best way to do that would be to place the learning centre in a location where it would flourish. It wouldn’t weaken the project’s ideals and objectives, but would strengthen them. • Rowan Moore is the Observer’s architecture correspondentClick here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.A student whose photograph went viral after her arrest at a vigil following the murder of Sarah Everard said she “almost cried” when she heard Dame Cressida Dick had resigned as Metropolitan police commissioner. Patsy Stevenson was pinned to the ground at the vigil on 13 March at Clapham Common, south London, for Everard, who had been kidnapped while walking home before being raped and murdered by the serving Met officer Wayne Couzens. The force was criticised over its policing of the vigil, during which women were bundled to the ground and arrested for breaching Covid-19 laws. In a Sunday Times interview, published ahead of first anniversary of her arrest, Stevenson, 28, a physics student, said she “stopped in the street and almost cried” when she heard the commissioner had resigned. She said: “I thought, thank God. Not only has she presided over a force where systemic misogyny and racism has been allowed to thrive, she’s failed to ensure the perpetrators are prosecuted. But the fact that she’s out doesn’t fix what’s going on. This can’t be a token gesture. There has to be top-down, radical change.” Stevenson, who has since launched legal action against the police, said she was forced to the ground, handcuffed and arrested under Covid-19 laws, the same laws Couzens had falsely used to arrest and handcuff Everard as she walked home. She said officers used “brute force” to intimidate her and other women that night, adding she had previously trusted the force and thought police brutality was “rare”. “It felt like they were telling us not to mess with them. I’d always trusted the police, so it was unexpected and shocking,” Stevenson said. “I could never have imagined something like that could happen to me … I was confused and terrified. “All the time I was being handcuffed and taken away I was thinking, this is how Couzens got Sarah into his car. I knew they were going to put me in their van but I didn’t know what they were going to do to me or what they could get away with.” After the photograph of her arrest went viral, she said she experienced abuse on social media – “really, really in-depth death threats and extremely twisted misogyny from men who said they knew where I lived and they were coming to kidnap me. I don’t think I slept for more than an hour all that week.” Stevenson said her Tinder profile was liked by 50 serving Met officers. She said she knew they were serving police officers “because they were in uniform! And their bio says: ‘I’ve got handcuffs and a baton and they’re not the fluffy kind. Wink.’ I mean what are they doing?” she told the newspaper. She said she was continually worried about her own security, had been followed home by random strangers and had had to move house. “After the vigil, a very nice decent police officer came round and gave me a barricade for my door and window locks, and I carry a vibrating alarm wherever I go,” she said. She still has a fear of police officers, saying: “I cross the road to avoid them,” and said she had nightmares of being forced to the ground, unable to breathe. “The feeling of being physically overwhelmed as they surrounded me will stay with me for ever,” she said. Stevenson is contesting a £200 fine for breaking Covid laws. Couzens is serving a whole-life order for his crimes, while prosecutors are separately considering charging three of his former colleagues over allegations they shared racist and misogynistic messages with him.They are the lifeblood of many communities, but tens of thousands of pubs and breweries across Britain have closed down since the 1970s, with thousands more falling victim to Covid-19 lockdowns and restrictions. Now, leading British film-makers have taken inspiration from the near loss of their own community pubs to produce a feature film that they describe as “a love-letter to family, community, real ale and Britain’s forgotten rural traditions”. Writer-directors Meg Leonard and Nick Moorcroft – who made Fisherman’s Friends, one of the most successful British independent films of the past decade – are about to start shooting the uplifting story, which also explores serious issues, from the dying trade of pubs to mental health. Titled Mother’s Pride, it is a comedy drama about a failing pub, a divided community and a grieving family whose lives are changed by brewing real ale and entering the Great British beer awards. Moorcroft said: “Pubs are really important for communities, bringing people together, which is especially pertinent with Covid as they tackle loneliness and social isolation. But on our location scouting, we were visiting pubs that have been empty for two years – and will never become pubs again. Each is filled with history and memories. It’s really sad.” Leonard said the losses were “particularly resonant when we’re all lacking human connection” because of Covid: “That’s why our film feels important to make now.” Filming begins in May in a Somerset village pub. James Spring, the film’s producer, said: “Somebody very valiantly tried to run it for a number of years and then, when Covid and lockdown came, that was the moment to call it a day.” Noting that some of the lost pubs had survived for hundreds of years until recently, he added: “With the lockdown, for a business that was tough anyway, that’s been the final nail in the coffin for a lot of them.” The film-makers have experience in their respective communities of pub closures and local people coming together to save those pubs. Leonard recalled her childhood memories of the Shoemakers Arms in the Brecon Beacons national park, an 1800s cottage once occupied by a shoemaker before becoming a tavern, and where she remembers horses tethered outside “to get round drink-driving”. “I grew up in a farming community in the mountains in mid-Wales, very rural and remote. This one pub was very important as a watering hole. There wasn’t anywhere else for people to meet, unless it was chapel. The mental health of the community is serviced by people being able to get together. This was a lifeline. When it was faced with closure, the community clubbed together and bought the pub,” she said. Moorcroft grew up in rural Essex where one of the local pubs was the Compasses, Littley Green, whose future was secured after it was bought back from a pub chain by members of a brewing family who had once owned it. Industry figures vary, but more than 11,000 pubs closed between 2012 and 2021, according to AlixPartners CGA Market Recovery Monitor. Tom Stainer, chief executive of the Campaign for Real Ale (Camra), said pubs were crying out for government support and that their loss to communities was “immeasurable”. “A local can increase your number of friends, your wellbeing, your happiness and your mental health. Once a pub closes down, you lose all of that. There are big housing estates that have no communal space at all,” he said. Moorcroft said: “This is an industry under serious threat. The government needs to help them. The film is a call to arms.” The film-makers have an impressive track record. Fisherman’s Friends, based on the true story of singing Cornish fishermen who signed a record deal, had success worldwide and inspired a sequel, Fisherman’s Friends: One and All, to be released in cinemas this year. Their other hits include Finding Your Feet, a romantic comedy that has inspired a French remake. The same film-makers are also about to produce a biopic about Levi Roots, who found fame and fortune after securing an investment for his Reggae Reggae sauce on Dragons’ Den.A few years ago, I had a fan. She had read my writing and listened to my podcast, and often replied warmly to my tweets. Occasionally, she would send me private messages, and eventually I started following her back. It was nice. At some point, the volume of communication increased – I began receiving emails, and the notifications and messages spread to Instagram. Then they grew more frequent, uncomfortably so. She wanted things from me: to work for me, to meet up with me, to know how my weekend had gone, to tell me how hers had gone, to tell me about the job she disliked, for me to help her with a project she was launching. My heart began to sink whenever I saw her name appear on my phone and I started responding less and less in the hope of discouraging her overtures. Then she came to an event I’d organised – the first time we’d actually met – and to my mortification, presented me with a bundle of gifts (which I obviously sent a thank you message for – I’m not a monster). After a period where rarely a day would go by without some form of contact – invitations for coffee, lunch, to her house (all politely declined) – I texted a friend asking for advice. The attention had become suffocating, but I also felt a little guilty. She was pleasant enough, if somewhat intense. In the end, I chose the coward’s way out. I blocked her on social media and felt an immediate sense of relief as I did so. It probably wasn’t the kindest way of dealing with the situation, but I also reasoned that feeling anxious on account of a stranger’s expectations of friendship from me wasn’t what I’d signed up for as a writer. After that, I never heard from her again. I’d fallen victim to the consequences of a parasocial relationship. The term describes people forming intense – and crucially, one-sided – attachments to celebrities or public figures. I’ve seen that word, “parasocial”, used on social media to describe everything from speculation around Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck’s surprise reunion, to Taylor Swift fans’ feverish discussion of her relationship with ex-boyfriend Jake Gyllenhaal. Unsurprisingly, during the pandemic these sorts of relationships have assumed heightened importance. For many of us, periodically trapped at home and unable to socialise, our favourite creators and media personalities have stepped into the breach left by our real-life friends. We feel as if we know these people and, indeed, we sort of do – we know how old they were when they had their first kiss, and how long it took them to get over their last break-up, what their bathrooms look like perhaps, and where they’re going on holiday next month. We feel like we’re sort of friends, or would be friends given the opportunity. Now, I’m not actually famous, so the intensity of parasocial fandom my writing has invited is generally tolerable, and usually even pleasant – but I often consider what it must be like to have a bigger platform, and to have thousands, or perhaps even millions of people who think of you as a friend. “I think sometimes people with larger platforms or audiences have a level of protection,” says the actor Evanna Lynch, who rose to fame playing Luna Lovegood in the Harry Potter movies, and who says the messages she receives from fans are often prefaced with the assumption that she’ll never actually see them. “When you have a smaller, more intimate audience, I think people do expect a reply, and they feel like you’re very close.” This is the paradox of low-level fame – the kind bestowed on popular podcast hosts or minor media personalities; people who have a public profile, but are still “normal” enough for their followers to assume a degree of kinship. And, of course, social media, where dispatches from celebrities sit side by side with updates from our closest friends, actively encourages this sense of proximity and the blurring of lines. Our exposure to celebrities is no longer limited to the press junkets accompanying a movie release or album drop – instead the steady drip-feed of social media bestows on us constant updates on the minutiae of their lives. Having starred in one of the most successful movie franchises of all time, Lynch has a colossal following (3.8m followers on Instagram alone) – and though she emphasises the many positive encounters she’s had with fans who’ve reached out to her, the ease of access fostered by social media has also at times invited more uncomfortable interactions. “Sometimes it can go a bit too far with people expecting too much of you. I would find myself busy and not able to reply, and then they’d get angry – with some people even saying, ‘If you don’t reply to me, I’m going to do something to myself.’ “One guy – I’ll never forget – wrote me novel-length letters on Facebook every day, talking to me as if I was his best friend and telling me about his life. Sometimes he’d be really friendly and sweet, and other days he’d be furious because I actually never replied.” Lynch was a teenager at the time. “I sort of had the sense even then that there’s something not right here,” she adds, though she speaks about this particular fan with considerable empathy. Over time, she has changed the way she engages with fans. “I’m much more guarded now – I usually don’t reply to those messages, because there’s a fragility there that can be quite dangerous to entertain when you’re somebody who they revere so much.” If ever there was a media format that lends itself to parasocial fandom, it is the podcast. The way we consume them – one-to-one, a familiar voice chattering away in our ears, often in the privacy of our own homes – makes podcasts a particularly intimate experience, and for many listeners that “friendship experience” is a huge part of their appeal. This is something that Zara McDonald and Michelle Andrews, both 27 and co-hosts of one of Australia’s most popular podcasts, Shameless, know all too well. The duo were close friends before starting the podcast, and their weekly analysis of celebrity and pop culture now pulls in an impressive 1.6m downloads a month, mainly from 20-something women – but it’s their friendship as much as their musings on the latest Kardashian scandal that drives the podcast’s popularity. “People are invested in the dynamic between us and our bond,” Andrews notes. “Even now, four years into doing the show, we still on occasion receive DMs that imply we’re not actually friends, or that we’re trying to deceive people and don’t actually like each other – that we secretly fight behind the scenes and aren’t as close as we appear on the show.” As well as projections about the nature of Andrews and McDonald’s friendship, some listeners have also projected the expectation of friendship on to the duo. “We’ve been invited out to social events with listeners, who sometimes get a little confused when we don’t respond, or are quite surprised when we don’t want to go to dinner with them,” Andrews tells me – and the consequences of not indulging what fans perceive to be a reciprocal relationship can be disconcerting. The pair describe a “flipping of the switch”, where their most ardent fans have occasionally become hostile when the pair fail to engage with them, sending aggressive DMs and leaving critical comments about the show on social media. I, too, have experienced fans whose mood turns sour when they consider themselves spurned – one minute sending congratulations on the publication of my book, the next suggesting that I am “full of shit”. After Andrews and McDonald published a book in 2019, in which Andrews detailed the sexual assault she’d experienced at 18, she received hundreds of messages from women who’d suffered similar trauma – something she was totally unprepared for. Though she repeatedly took to social media to plead with her followers not to send personal accounts of their assaults, for the sake of her own mental health, she felt considerable pressure to provide the kind of emotional support one would usually expect from an actual friend – or a therapist. “I really struggled mentally with the tsunami of sexual assault stories.” she remembers. “I had some people get incredibly upset with me, that they’d sent me a story and I didn’t respond or give some form of mentorship. There was 1% of women who got very aggrieved or angry when those stories weren’t responded to.” It’s clear that the pair have learned the hard way to establish rock-solid boundaries as their profiles have risen. When I ask if any of their listeners have ever crossed the line from fan to friend, the answer is an unequivocal “no”. “We will always be polite and friendly with fans who approach us, but there won’t be a one-on-one situation where we’re DMing a fan back and forth over weeks.” And yet for every creator for whom parasocial relationships are an unintended byproduct of their work, there are many more – influencers, YouTubers, vloggers – who actively cultivate that faux-intimacy with their followers, softening them up so that they might more easily ply their wares, be that waist trainers or make-up brushes. The currency of personal information is something fashion influencer Camille Charrière is well aware of. As one of the industry’s most established influencers – Charrière has 1.2m followers on Instagram – she is refreshingly honest about the professional incentives to overshare online. “Sharing your children, your boyfriend, the inside of your home, perhaps about your mental health or other illness struggles, family stuff – all of that performs better on social media. Anything that is very intimate and relatable, and that other people can identify with. The things that used to work – keeping it impersonal and just showing your outfits, like we used to do – don’t really work any more. That’s something that anyone with a large social media following will be able to see: which posts generate higher engagement.” By design, social media algorithms reward the type of disclosure that invites parasociality. In the digital age, many creators’ livelihoods depend on that ever elusive and highly sought after metric of “engagement”, prompting them to offer up an access-all-areas pass to their lives – and the politics of personal disclosure are especially fraught for women. “I think there is something about women in [media] roles, where they are expected to share more of themselves,” McDonald suggests. Though she acknowledges that she and Andrews have freely chosen to share personal stories with their audiences, there’s no denying that there’s an expectation of women in the public eye to maintain a level of accessibility as part of their actual work, engaging in correspondence with their fans and sharing intimate details about their lives. “No decision exists in a vacuum. We’re making that decision for a reason,” McDonald adds, and her co-host concurs. “At some point along the line, I internalised this belief that if I have a platform, I must expose the most traumatic sides of my life to help other people,” says Andrews. “And for some reason I don’t see that being the case for the men around me.” That level of intimacy can be a difficult path to retreat from once you’ve embarked on it. “The more you give, the more people expect from you,” Charrière notes. If you occasionally engage with some of your followers, others feel affronted when you don’t respond to them. If you have demonstrated a willingness to share some personal information publicly, people begin to feel entitled to all of it. Gossip forums such as the notorious Tattle Life are rife with amateur detectives sleuthing often deeply personal information about influencers that’s hard to justify as being in the public interest, as per the website’s stated raison d’être. And yet there is a fear among many creators that publicly commenting on the discomfort of these expectations would risk appearing ungrateful for the audiences that, ultimately, sustain their livelihoods. And perhaps they’re wise to accept these dynamics as merely the cost of doing business, the Faustian pact of creative work wherein audiences’ investment in your personal life often bolsters your professional endeavours. Still, I can’t help but feel a little depressed by that attitude, and the normalisation of trading one’s boundaries for professional success – not to mention the implications for the type of creative work likely to be produced under those circumstances. Personally, I’m still torn over the right amount to share on social media, mindful of how easily parasocial fandom can tip into overfamiliarity, and of my own tendency towards petulance when it does. These days I flit between sharing the ins and outs of my ongoing flat renovation with all 37,000 of my Instagram followers, and with a more limited “Close Friends” only audience (about 50 people who are, I suspect, bored senseless by my prevarication over nearly identical swatches of white paint). While working on this article, I decided to remove the “Hi friends!” greeting I’d reflexively opened with in a newsletter I was drafting, suddenly conscious of slipping into the cadence often employed by people with sizeable followings when communicating with their audiences (or “communities”, as they are often called). For now I’ve settled on the slightly awkward sounding “Hello there” – though I still sign off my newsletter with an “x”. It’s a stab at taking a leaf out of McDonald’s playbook, and her assertion that, ultimately, it’s down to creators to manage the situation themselves. She and Andrews neither check nor respond to their DMs as much as they used to, and in the past year have decided to share less information about their private lives on air. “The responsibility is on us to create our own boundaries,” she concludes. “You can’t expect other people to do that for you.” We Need to Talk About Money by Otegha Uwagba is published by Fourth Estate at £14.99. Buy it for £13.04 at guardianbookshop.comI read recently that in the first age of computing doctors treated office workers for a condition named “turtle neck”, caused by long hours squinting at a screen. I just used to get RSI, but we’ll let that pass. Now, in the early days of the metaverse, there’s an altogether more unpleasant sounding hazard – “gorilla arms”. Rather than being seated, users of augmented reality and virtual reality devices are usually standing without support. Explains Jay Kim of Oregon State University: “By sticking your arms forward far away from your body, that creates shoulder strain that’s called gorilla arm syndrome.” So now you know. There have also been incidents of users punching walls, lampshades and ceiling fans. Alas, the medical profession has yet to come up with names for these conditions, but I eagerly await them. In the meantime, if you injure yourself lumbering about in the metaverse, blame that Mark Zuckerberg and add it to the increasing charge sheet against that wretched man and his supposedly brave new world. In the list of odd events such as the world worm-charming championships, the world wife-carrying championships and chess boxing, we should never forget the UK Pun Championships, won last week by Richard Pulsford. A good pun should be truly groanworthy and Mr Pulsford acquits himself honourably on that front: “I used to work in a lighthouse – I still get flashbacks”; “Doorbells. You can’t knock ’em”; “Rocket countdowns? Don’t get me started.” Yes, I admit it - I’m a sucker for puns. And a special mention must go to another competitor, Chris Norton-Walker: “If you’re going to walk 10,000 miles, wear the correct footwear and consult a doctor. The Disclaimers.” My all-time favourite appeared in a local Essex newspaper, decrying a crisis in the county’s libraries: “Book lack in Ongar”. John Osborne must be turning in his grave. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistOn a hillside an hour from Madrid, not far from the sepulchral splendour of the Escorial monastery, with its royal tombs, imperial maps and sacred relics, lies another, rather less austere, treasure house. The Gladys Palmera collection, kept in a sprawling, tropical-hued complex crammed with 1950s Mexican film posters and prowled by the odd decorative monkey and jaguar, is the largest private archive of Latin American music in the world. In its numerous niches and cabinets and on its many, many shelves sit 60,000 records, 50,000 CDs and countless cassettes and digital audio tapes, offering everything from bolero to garage rock, and from salsa to reggaetón. After a decade near the Spanish capital, however, the collection could cross the Atlantic as the woman who has spent the past 30 years amassing it ponders donating its riches to a worthy – and preferably noisy – new home. Among the archive’s scores of highlights are a rare green vinyl LP by the Cuban musician Arsenio Rodríguez, a pink-and-silver sequinned dress worn by the Afro-Cuban superstar Celia Cruz, and a recording of James Dean, released in 1957, behaving like a good coffee-house beatnik and playing the congas. The complex also houses an online radio network that plays classic, contemporary and rare tracks, an exhaustive online catalogue and a brand new record label. Although the collection now encompasses photos, posters, flyers, songbooks, magazines, books and personal memorabilia, it remains founded on one woman’s love for the songs she heard as a child. Alejandra Fierro Eleta, a Spanish-Panamanian radio broadcaster, grew up in Madrid listening to records by Toña la Negra, Elvira Ríos, Cuco Valoy, Cuco Sánchez, Lucho Gatica and Amalia Mendoza that her father brought back from his business trips to Latin America. “I was listening to all this music from the cradle,” says Fierro. “I started helping myself to his records when I was little.” By the time she was 12, she had also developed a passion for ham radio and for talking to people across the airwaves. “There came a day when I didn’t know what to do with my life and I said to myself, ‘Well, what do you like?’, and I thought Cuban music and amateur radio. So I thought I’d like a radio programme.” But her father had one stipulation: “When I told my dad I was going to be on the radio, he said, ‘Not with my name, you’re not’.” Casting around for a suitable alter ego, Fierro decided to use the name Gladys – a family joke with one of her brothers – and felt that Palmera (palm tree) would serve as a suitably tropical surname. “It came to me in a second and ever since then I’ve been Gladys Palmera.” After starting her radio career on a small station near Madrid, Fierro worked for a national chain before setting up Radio Gladys Palmera in 1999 to broadcast Latin music to Barcelona and then to Madrid and Valencia. A decade later, she had swapped FM for the internet and was learning more about collecting and conserving rare vinyl. Fierro and her small team have scoured the internet and record fairs to put together an archive made up of purchases from more than 40 countries, including several pre-existing collections. Her colleague José Arteaga once tried to work out how long it would take to listen to the entire archive. “I calculated it would take 62 years to listen to everything,” he says. “But that was a while ago. Perhaps it would be 80 years now.” But, despite the size of the archive, Fierro says it’s “not about quantity – it’s about really, really high quality”. At the end of last year, the collection launched its record label with the release, on 10-inch vinyl, of two late-1960s songs by the Guantanamo Boys. It will be followed over the coming months by a contemporary release, a compilation of 60s and 70s music from New York and the Caribbean, and some remixes. Fierro has an eye on the longer term, too. In 2009, she set up La Escuelita del Ritmo (The Little School of Rhythm) in Portobelo, a Panamanian town that reminds her of Gabriel García Márquez’s fictional Macondo. The free academy helps local children develop their musical, artistic and performance skills as they learn how to play instruments and build and decorate cajones, or drum boxes. Plans for residencies by DJs and production experts are also in the pipeline. Three decades and countless acquisitions later, Fierro has her own future to consider. She has set up the Gladys Palmera Foundation to ensure the survival of the collection and its attendant enterprises, and the search has begun for a permanent home for the archive – possibly in the US. “I’m trying to find a space for all this because I’m 63 and my health isn’t good,” she says. “This is a temple to music and I want to donate it all.” There will, inevitably, be conditions. Fierro wants the collection kept out of the cold, anonymous confines of a traditional museum. Wherever it ends up, it will need to be “a buzzing place with a multi-use space for concerts and exhibitions”. She gives short shrift to the idea that the collection is simply the culmination of decades of a very personal passion. “It’s not an obsession – even if it may look like one,” she says. “What I’m aiming for here is excellence; to build the best collection there is and to do it properly. This isn’t about me and my life – I don’t care about that – it’s about showcasing all this work here. It needs to be shared.”Five planes from Egyptian resorts returned to Boryspil airport yesterday, picked up new passengers and flew back. A plane also flew in from the Cuban resort of Varadero, where my friend, the publisher Anetta Antonenko, recently had 10 days rest. Ukrainians are already used to warming up and sunbathing in Egypt in winter. I do not know how they feel now, flying to warmer climes. Do they take with them documents for their property and everything that the Ukrainian government advised its citizens to put in one “emergency suitcase”, along with a supply of food for two days, a change of underwear and personal documents? Actually, I checked the departures/arrivals website because the British embassy sent an email to my English wife with a warning that she and the children must leave while there are commercial flights. If they stay, they should not count on the help of the embassy. I am not British, I am a citizen of Ukraine. Nobody sends me emails demanding I leave as soon as possible. My wife decided to stay. As did our sons Theo and Anton, who do not want to go anywhere. The elder, Theo, works at an animation film studio and recently signed a contract until the end of May. Anton is 19 and waiting for spring to fix a 1974 Soviet Moskvich car he bought a year ago for $800. In the past two days, there have been many statements from the United States, Canada, Japan and other countries announcing that almost all diplomats are leaving Ukraine, as there is information that active hostilities, including city bombing, may begin in the next 48 hours. But as long as the planes are flying, I am calm. Not only that, my wife and I are going to dinner with the ambassador of Brazil tonight. Brazil has not yet made any announcements. My friend said that we should actually keep an eye on the Chinese embassy. As soon as it announces the evacuation of its employees, then the threat of war must be taken seriously. Russia will definitely warn China before bombing Kyiv. They are now strategic partners. The Chinese embassy is silent for now. Our close friends, an elderly Japanese-French couple, are at a loss. They have been living in Kyiv for a long time, they bought two large apartments in the centre. One is for rent, the other is for living, as is the case with many of the foreigners who moved to Ukraine. They too don’t want to go anywhere. The war barometer in Kyiv is exchange rates and statements by the president, Volodymyr Zelensky. If the dollar and the euro rise sharply against the hryvnia, then the war has become even closer. Today, the dollar and the euro have risen in price more than usual. But, in truth, in recent weeks they have already been at this level and even more expensive. Petrol has already risen noticeably in price too, but it is still cheaper than in the UK. Zelensky again reassured Ukrainians and said that everything was under control. He has repeatedly accused western politicians of exaggerating the danger of a Russian attack, though after his speeches, I feel as if he’s downplayed the threat. I am one of many Ukrainians who has to change euros and dollars regularly to pay for living and utility bills. My main income comes from selling books abroad. A week ago, I went to the exchange office, where the rate is usually very good. A young guy was standing at the window of the exchange office and changing several packs of $100 bills for hryvnias. An employee approached me and said: “This client has a very large amount, the cashier will be busy for a long time. How much do you want to change?” “One hundred dollars,” I replied. “Tanya, give me small change, for a hundred dollars!” Putting the hryvnias in my pocket, I went outside and for the first time thought about the fact that $100 no longer means so much in Ukraine. Prices in the country have long since become European, while ordinary salaries and pensions have largely remained post-Soviet. Most of my neighbours in the village receive a pension of just over $100 a month. But they usually have large stocks of vegetables and canned food in the cellar. However, civil servants in Kyiv receive salaries of thousands of dollars a month. They live in a different reality. Now both of these realities are under threat. Under the threat of war. Yesterday, I noticed that the exchange office where I changed money the other day had already closed. Disappeared. It is no more. But there are several other exchanges nearby. As long as banks and exchange offices are open, you can be relatively calm. Today, my friend invited my wife and me to one of the best restaurants in Kyiv for his birthday. Next Saturday, 19 February. Does this mean that there will be no war until 19 February? I really hope so. I’ve lost a lot because of the pandemic – trips abroad, book festivals and exhibitions and also, for we need pleasure, dinners in good restaurants. I wouldn’t want to lose everything again, this time because of the war. It’s so strange to think that the whole world now depends on what can happen in the head of a single, ageing man.With a handshake and brief embrace, congresswoman Abigail Spanberger welcomed Joe Biden to her Virginia district last Thursday. The event was an opportunity to highlight the administration’s plans to lower the cost of prescription drugs, but it also provided an opportunity for the US president to promote the members of his party ahead of the midterm elections in November. “In every chapter in her career, in every chapter, she’s always been about one thing: service,” the president said of Spanberger, a Democrat whose competitive re-election race is on the front line of the battle for control of the House. It is a crucial effort: Democrats already face a punishing political climate as they defend their paper-thin majorities in the House and Senate. The president’s party typically loses seats during the midterm elections and a president’s popularity is a key variable in determining the extent of those losses. Widespread economic discontent and frustration over the pandemic have battered Biden’s approval ratings, now hovering just above 40%, according to public polls. Underscoring the deep challenges confronting his presidency, Biden arrived in Culpepper, Virginia, hours after the release of another grim economic report, showing inflation rising by 7.5% over the last year, its highest level in 40 years. The present reality poses a dilemma for some Democrats: embrace an unpopular president or shun the leader of their party. Republicans have called the choice the “burden of Biden”, targeting members who appear with him, like Spanberger, over their support for the president while accusing those who don’t of avoiding him. Practically a perennial midterm predicament for the party in power, the question of whether to put daylight between vulnerable candidates and Biden comes as he prepares to ramp up travel outside Washington. This week he will travel to Ohio, where Democrats are trying to flip a Senate seat. Some Democrats are hopeful the personal appeal of Biden – known as the consummate retail politician – will help them sell their agenda and improve his party’s prospects later this year. “If you are trying to distance yourself from Biden, you’re doing it wrong,” said Lanae Erickson, senior vice-president at the moderate thinktank Third Way. Many of the most fiercely contested House races are anchored in the suburbs, which powered the party’s victories during the Trump years but where Democrats have struggled recently. Erickson said Biden remains the party’s best spokesman. A visit from him, she continued, telegraphs to swing voters that “this is the party of Joe Biden, it’s not the party of Bernie Sanders, and that’s what we’re offering when it comes to November”. In recent weeks, some Democrats have not attended events where Biden is speaking, giving grist to Republicans eager to amplify the narrative that they are avoiding him. On a trip to Georgia, where Biden delivered a major speech on voting rights, gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams, a prominent voting rights advocate, was not in attendance, citing a scheduling conflict. In Pittsburgh last month, Pennsylvania attorney general Josh Shapiro, the probable Democratic nominee in the race for governor, did not attend the president’s speech on infrastructure – also due to an apparent scheduling conflict. Both insisted at the time politics had no bearing on their decision. Abrams and Biden flatly rejected any notion of friction. But there are other signs that Democrats in difficult races are trying to put daylight between themselves and the president. Asked whether he would accept Biden’s help, Beto O’Rourke, who is vying to become the next governor of Texas, told reporters he was “not interested” in receiving campaign assistance from anyone outside his state. Other Democrats have hedged, offering neither an emphatic yes or a definitive no. An analysis by Axios, using data compiled by Quorum, found that many at-risk Democrats avoided any mention of the president on their official campaign accounts since 1 September, when Biden’s approval began a precipitous decline after the chaotic withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan. Still, several Democrats in key races have welcomed the president. Georgia senator Raphael Warnock, who faces a difficult re-election fight, appeared alongside Biden during his voting rights speech. Congressman Conor Lamb, a candidate for Senate in Pennsylvania, was in the audience in Pittsburgh when Biden mistakenly referred to him as “senator”. In December, Kansas congresswoman Sharice Davids flew with Biden on Air Force One to her district, where they touted the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure law. And he also appeared at an event with Michigan congresswoman Elissa Slotkin to push for passage of the law. Presidential visits often drive fundraising and attract media attention. An appearance by Biden could help amplify Democrats’ economic agenda while serving to dispel concerns about his age, said Mike Noble, a pollster in Arizona, where senator Mark Kelly is defending his seat in one of the marquee races of the cycle. A recent survey of Arizona voters, conducted by OH Predictive Insights, Noble’s polling and research firm, found that the economy had overtaken immigration as a top priority for voters in the border state. At the same time, approval of his handling of the economy and the pandemic had fallen sharply. “You can either be reactive or proactive,” he said. “And we’re seeing that being reactive has not been great for his numbers here.” At a press conference last month, Biden said he planned to be more “deeply involved” in the midterm elections. And though he expressed an eagerness to travel on behalf of his party, it is highly unlikely Biden would appear anywhere he is not wanted. “We’re going to be raising a lot of money. We’re going to be out there making sure that we’re helping all of those candidates,” he said. “And scores of them have already asked me to come in and campaign with them, to go out and make the case in plain, simple language as to what it is we’ve done, what we want to do, and why we think it’s important.” But it is not easy. Once popular with a wide cross-section of voters, Biden’s appeal among conservatives has all but vanished as he attempts to lead a divided America out of a pandemic and economic crisis. His appearances almost always draw protesters, often waving vulgar signs as Donald Trump continues to spread lies about the results of the 2020 election. Alarming Democrats is his slipping support among critical parts of the party’s coalition, including Black, Latino, young and female voters deflated by his failure to enact a bold agenda and disappointment that life remains far from “normal” more than a year into his presidency. The collapse of legislative efforts to protect voting rights and enact police reform should worry Democrats more than an appearance by the president, said Cliff Albright, a co-founder of the Atlanta-based advocacy group Black Voters Matter. In a recent survey by the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, nearly a quarter of Georgia voters named voting and elections as their top priority, the highest percentage of any issue, including the economy. Concern was especially pronounced among Black voters, whose disapproval of the president soared from just 8% in May to 36% in January. Even a marginal drop in Black voter turnout in November could spell trouble for Democrats in November, particularly in Georgia, where Biden won by less than half a percentage point. “We didn’t vote for him because we thought he was a great speaker or a great motivator,” Albright said. “We thought he would be able to govern and help pass legislation.” Four years ago, voter fury against Trump lifted Spanberger to victory over Republican David Brat, an arch-conservative. Spanberger has been a top Republican target ever since, but she held on in 2020, defeating her Republican challenger by less than two percentage points. This year she will run in a district that has been dramatically redrawn, and now tilts more heavily in her favor. Whereas Biden narrowly won her district in 2020, it’s projected he would have won the new district by seven points. But the increased margin is little comfort after Democrats’ stunning defeat in Virginia’s gubernatorial election last year, when Republican Glenn Youngkin stormed to victory in the state, which Biden won by 10 percentage points in 2020. The shocking losses in Virginia, thought to have turned reliably blue, came amid Democratic infighting over the size and scope of the president’s domestic agenda, which remains stalled in the Senate. In an interview after the election, Spanberger suggested that Biden had overreached with his expansive domestic agenda, telling the New York Times “nobody elected him to be FDR; they elected him to be normal and stop the chaos.” After the interview was published, Spanberger said she got a call from the White House. When Biden came to the phone, he teased: “Hello, Abigail. It’s president Roosevelt.” Speaking with reporters before Thursday’s event in Culpepper, Spanberger said she welcomed the opportunity for Biden to hear directly from her constituents, like Joshua Davis, a 12-year-old with diabetes who introduced him. “I have the opportunity to literally give my constituents the opportunity to tell their stories to the president of the United States,” she said “That’s, for me, the height of what representation can and should be.” At this stage in the cycle, Larry Sabato, director of the Center for Politics at the University of Virginia, said the choice to appear with the president in a part of the state he won to discuss a part of his agenda that is wildly popular was an “obvious one” for Spanberger. He cautioned that much could change before November. “But if this were October, with these kinds of ratings,” Sabato said, “I think she’d have a scheduling conflict.”At time of writing, I am bored with being told that Boris Johnson’s government is on the brink of collapse. It’s been talked about constantly for weeks. The “senior” Tory backbenchers, the thrusting new “red wall” backbenchers, the “former ministers”, the “ex-chief whips” – I’ve lost count – all of them pissed off, not taking any more of this shit, saying he’s got to resign, he’s lost confidence, it’s over, I never liked him, his wife’s a bitch, etc. They’ve all been doing their letters, or thinking about doing their letters, to the 1922 Committee. No one knows quite how many letters there are – maybe they haven’t all been posted. Is it 30? It could be 40! It needs to be 54. David Davis even did the “In the name of God, go” bit in the Commons. Surely that’s the cue? He must be feeling embarrassed now, like he’s failed to get a Mexican wave going. Cromwell used that speech to usher in martial law, Leo Amery’s quoting it got rid of Chamberlain within a couple of days, but Johnson just ignored it and “got on with the job” of slandering the leader of the opposition and singing disco hits to his new director of communications. I’ve been nervous to mention the prime minister in these columns recently, so fervent have been the assurances of dozens of his former allies that he’s about to go. I didn’t want to embarrass the print media by exposing its lead times. He won’t be prime minister by Sunday, so mentioning him will make the whole article irrelevant, I’ve been telling myself. But it’s getting ridiculous. So I’m taking the risk and if he’s out of office by the time you read this, it’ll be the first ever case of regime change expedited by sod’s law. The latest person solemnly predicting Johnson’s doom is a man called John Armitage, who is a major Tory donor, as well as, rather eccentrically, a minor Labour donor – seems like an expensive way of telling the Lib Dems you don’t like them. He’s very upset about things, saying he finds “the lack of honour inherent in modern politics incredibly distressing”, but he’s given more than £500,000 to the Conservative party since Johnson became prime minister, so it’s hard to think what more he could have done. Armitage’s interview with the BBC is remarkable mainly for his uncanny vocal similarity to former cabinet minister Rory Stewart. It’s quite weird. He could make good money as a Stewart impersonator if he hadn’t already made £600m from managing a hedge fund. When asked whether he felt the prime minister was “past the point of no return”, Armitage said: “Well, personally, yes.” And that means “prime minister past point of no return, says Tory donor” can be added to the litany of teasing. The problem with this prolonged period of anticipation is that all the voices raised in protest against Johnson’s government start to sound shrill, like Kermit the Frog endlessly introducing an act that never comes on. The prime minister has understood this from the moment the current scandal broke. He’s let the evidence of all the various No 10 booze-ups accumulate, until the specifics get jumbled – the summer party, the assorted leaving dos, the cheese and wine, the Christmas one, the one the TV lady resigned for, the eve of the Duke of Edinburgh’s funeral drinks, was it? I think there was a birthday cake at some point? But not the one in the photo – that was presented to him by a school. He’s done a bit of piecemeal apologising as he went along, but for ages the main message was: “We have to wait for Sue Gray’s report so we can all find out what I’ve done. I’m as interested to hear as everyone else!” We waited for Sue to sort it out and produce a handy list, like a statement telling you exactly what items a fraudster has bought on your credit card, so we could organise our annoyance properly. But it never happened; before her report came out we’d already been told it wouldn’t be a proper one at the insistence of the relentlessly disappointing Metropolitan police. So the report is redacted and we’re waiting for the police to investigate. What could that possibly involve other than reading Gray’s report? Creeping round the cabinet room looking for remnants of party popper and carbon-dateable shards of Twiglet? No, they say they’re going to send round an email questionnaire that “must be answered truthfully”. That should do the trick. Some fines might be issued at some point. Perhaps the conclusions could be announced during the next World Cup. We all know that the longer this goes on, the more likely the prime minister will get away with it. There are so many distractions that could save him. There might be a war in Ukraine; he suddenly suggested he might end the legal requirement to isolate with Covid; he did a mini-reshuffle two days after refreshing his core team and he could always do another; even consternation about NHS waiting lists currently helps him because he can make Sajid Javid do the talking. The moaning Tories won’t fundamentally mind this. If he survives, they’ll stop saying he’s rearranging deckchairs on the Titanic and start saying he’s steadied the ship, refreshed by the sensation of a different cliche. They’ll congratulate themselves for having intervened, brought Boris to heel and bagged up all his little turds. But what are the opposition supposed to do? They’re still shouting about these parties, occasions of such hypocrisy, dishonesty and bad faith it beggars belief that they haven’t destroyed the government. More time passes and people get used to the parties. It’s not as if politicians seemed honest before the pandemic. Those who didn’t have to watch relatives die over Zoom will, if they don’t forgive, sort of forget, get bored. Another party photo emerged last week. You can feel the potency of the issue dissipating. It doesn’t look that shocking. An open bottle of champagne, crisps on the desk and tinsel round a man’s neck. If it’s a party, it’s a shit one. The Met announced that it will now review its previous decision not to investigate it. That sounds time consuming.It would be nice if the kids were grateful for us looking after them. This isn’t just about improving family relations in the here and now; ideally, they’d be so grateful that they’d be happy to look after us when the incontinence starts to kick in. An interesting new paper considers that thought pattern in the context of child labour in developing countries. This is largely a story about farming, with 70% of child labour happening in agriculture. The authors note that evidence doesn’t show the clear pattern we might expect of rising incomes leading to a fall in child labour. In Pakistan and Ghana, research shows land-rich families using more child labour than land-poor ones, while in the coffee-growing regions of Brazil higher incomes have led to more children working. Why might this be? The authors suggest it’s partly because decisions about whether children should work are shaped by the interaction between the need for money today (encouraging child labour) and desire for care in old age (discouraging it). To look after us later requires children to feel gratitude that, shockingly, may not materialise if their childhood included hard labour. The authors suggest the relationship between a parent’s wage and the intensity of child labour is U-shaped: parents with low wages need their child to work, those on middle incomes don’t put their children to work (they can afford not to and want gratitude/care in old age) while high-earning parents are fine for them to work (they don’t need support in old age). I think the big lesson is we should think twice about getting the kids to wash up if we want them to wash us in future. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgTime’s passing has done little to dim the horror of the 1966 Aberfan disaster, in which thousands of tonnes of coal waste thundered down a mountainside and engulfed a Welsh junior school. The sentiments it so powerfully evokes inform the opening of Jo Browning Wroe’s debut novel, A Terrible Kindness, which begins as hope of finding survivors dwindles. Responding to the appeal for help, newly qualified undertaker William Lavery, 19, loads a hearse with embalming fluids and heartbreakingly small coffins, and drives through the night from his Uncle Robert’s Midlands funeral home. There are still 140 bodies to rescue, most of them children, and the scenes he witnesses are captured in a sequence of crisply etched images, some plucked from history, others from the author’s imagination. Returning home, William finds himself prone to bad dreams and flashbacks. The experience solidifies something for him: never will he let himself become a parent – though when he tries to break things off with his cockney girlfriend, Gloria, she’s having none of it. And yet what really undid William in Aberfan was hearing the strains of Allegri’s Miserere playing on a radio. The music unlocked a memory he has fought to suppress, transporting him back to Cambridge where, five years previously, his career as a boy chorister came to an ignominious end amid a flurry of red tulip petals. It’s a scene – and it really is a scene – whose cause is rooted still further back, in his father’s death when he was just eight years old, and in subsequently worsening tensions between his insecure, grieving mother and her late husband’s gay twin brother. But there’s also the question of why William hasn’t spoken to his best friend, Martin, in half a decade. He turns out to be carrying a great deal of baggage for one so young, and it’s unpacked in a thoughtful period drama that skips confidently between his childhood and early adulthood, revealing that while, yes, he’s been dealt a lousy hand, he has also, as Gloria puts it, been a “big pillock”. Or as Martin more measuredly tells him: “You can’t bear anything to be more than one story.” This well-crafted tale contains many joys, the least expected its meticulous evocation of the hidden world of undertaking, with its clannish decorum. Browning Wroe can’t resist a scene in which William embalms to a soundtrack of Build Me Up Buttercup. Most of the music that flows through these pages is choral, however, striking a note of welcome profundity and counterbalancing the novel’s perkier attributes, such as Gloria’s simple loveliness, or the sustaining bond that Uncle Robert forges with his life partner despite living in an era of unchecked homophobia. But what does it mean to hitch such upbeat fiction to a real-life tragedy? It’s a qualm the novel itself acknowledges, albeit indirectly. Before its close, William returns to the Welsh village and is confounded to find that it hasn’t remained trapped in the moment in quite the same way as a part of himself has. Aberfan, he realises, is more than one “story”, and it’s not his to use when explaining his own. • A Terrible Kindness by Jo Browning Wroe is published by Faber (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe best thing about Sean Holmes’s chaotic production of Hamlet is that George Fouracres, of the sketch group Daphne, speaks with a Black Country accent (his own). Preconceptions about who is entitled to play the prince have been rapidly peeling away. Yet, as always in England, voice prejudice has stuck: the idea that RP is a default position – as if it were itself not an accent – has been hard to dislodge. A Brummie brooder is a good move. The rest, though – pretty much all of it – is violence, to the play. In a visual muddle that overemphasises Hamlet’s isolation, Fouracres is in Doc Martens, Claudius wears doublet and hose and the Ghost is bare-chested in gladiator kit (glad rags?). Though there is some crispness from Nadi Kemp-Sayfi’s Laertes and John Lightbody’s droll Polonius, most speeches are gabbled, squeaked or given bizarre emphases, as if the rhythm of the lines were something which needed to be clambered over. The jumble might be justified by the idea that it’s important to punch an audience with the rottenness of Denmark and the raging danger of its heir apparent: Fouracres is furiously defiant, while using his standup skill to rouse the audience into pantomimic exchanges. The trouble is that absolutely nothing matters. The governing mood is of slack facetiousness. “O! That this too too solid flesh would melt” is delivered with the exasperation of someone waiting for British Gas to answer the phone – and was greeted with gales of laughter on press night. Claudius tells Fortinbras to fuck off. Riffing in the gravedigger’s scene – playing his guitar, cracking telly jokes – Ed Gaughan congratulates the audience on sticking it out for so long. Have we, he wonders, in a line that is a true hostage to fortune, got “Stockholm syndrome”? More like Elsinore ennui. Hamlet is at the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, London, until 9 AprilUnder a glaring sky, Mauritian survey teams set off in two tender boats to measure Blenheim Reef. A line of breakers marked the outer line of the atoll. An inflatable, carrying two Swedish marine experts retained by the Mauritian government, found an entrance through submerged rocks and surf into calmer water inside. In the shallows, the two Swedes placed tide gauges on the sea floor to measure the water height – crucial evidence for a forthcoming case at the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. The survey and the tribunal case are proof that Mauritius is intent on asserting its rights to the Chagos Archipelago, as confirmed by successive international law rulings and a UN general assembly vote. The Foreign Office, outflanked by legal judgments, has so far avoided confrontation with Mauritius, claiming in its statements that it is cooperating with environmental research. The UK government still maintains that it holds sovereignty over British Indian Ocean Territory (Biot). The purpose of the Mauritian survey is to establish whether any part of the reef remains above water even at high tide. If it does, the UN convention on the law of the sea will allow the country to extend its baseline in calculating its 200-mile exclusive economic zone. It would take only a small rock or shingle beach staying above water all the time for the baseline to be extended. The dispute over marine boundaries is with neighbouring Maldives. The international tribunal has already ruled that the UK has no legitimate claims in the area. The second Mauritian survey team set off in an open motor boat, scanning the outer reef for signs of boulders or sand bars appearing above the ocean swell. At one point, one small protruding rock was visible in the troughs between waves. A barely submerged rock platform, perhaps a metre below the surface, was visible further along the reef. The outer survey team motored around the perimeter, a distance of at least 10 nautical miles until, at one point, the mother ship was a distant smudge on the horizon. Dolphins raced along beside the bows of the boat, leaping playfully out of the water. Flying fish erupted from the seas, remaining airborne for remarkably long periods. Back on the Bleu De Nîmes, the cruise ship chartered by the Mauritian government, Zola Oskarsson, the Swede leading the survey, said it would take time for tide calculations to be completed. “When we come back to pick up the tide gauges we will be able to work out the reef levels,” he said. “It would have been more fun if we had seen some bird shit, but we didn’t. If you see guano, that’s a sign that a rock is permanently above water.” He added: “There was a spot where I could stand on the sandy bottom with my head above the water. When you are measuring a reef, living coral doesn’t count: it would be like using the top of a tree to record a mountain height. But dead coral is OK. That counts.”Real snow finally arrived at the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics and disrupted events on Sunday, leading to mixed fortunes for the Alpine skiers who were breaking new ground for their countries in difficult conditions. Saudi Arabia’s Fayik Abdi finished 44th, but Haiti’s Richardson Viano failed to finish. Benjamin Alexander, Jamaica’s first ever Alpine skier, was slowest of those to complete the course, finishing more than a minute behind the gold medallist, Switzerland’s Marco Odermatt. The environmental impact of the artificial snow used by hosts China has been widely criticised, but with a blizzard affecting the north of the country on Sunday, at the Yanqing skiing venue it was the real thing that was the problem. The second run of the giant slalom event was delayed for over an hour waiting for conditions to improve. “You can’t see much, you don’t know where to put your feet, said the eventual bronze medal winner, Mathieu Faivre of France, after his first run. Abdi and Viano represented countries making their first ever appearance at a Winter Games, but the medals inevitably went to more traditional skiing powerhouses. Odermatt finished with a combined time of 2:09:35, putting him 0.19 seconds ahead of Slovenia’s Zan Kranjec. The debutants were all vocal in hoping to encourage greater participation in winter sports in their respective nations. Fayik Abdi had been fast-tracked by Saudi authorities into competing – he took up skiing only a year ago. He finished 44th, some 37 seconds off the pace of the leaders. After the race he said: “Our goal wasn’t just to finish − our goal was to ski as best as we could. I am happy I tried my best. It could have gone better for sure. The fact we finished is definitely a plus. “I don’t want it to be about me − I want it to be about Saudi and inspiring and encouraging Saudis to do what they love and to find a passion,” Abdi added. “I just hope I influence people and represent Saudi the right way.” Alexander, the 38-year-old former DJ who moved from the UK to Wyoming in order to improve his skiing, was representing Jamaica as their first ever Alpine skier. Ahead of the Games he had said his aim going down the giant slalom was “survival”. He finished ahead of eight skiers who did not finish their second run, and 35 others who scored a DNF on their first run. “Frickin’ hell, that was hard,” he said out loud in comments caught on camera after he crossed the finish line. Norway’s Henrik Kristoffersen, who finished eighth, praised the decision by the authorities to press ahead with the race despite the snow. “Definitely, the light is more than skiable, it just makes it difficult. I like it,” he said. “The snow is a little uneven so it is quite aggressive in spots. I think it was difficult for everyone.” The adverse weather in China on Sunday caused the freestyle skiing slopestyle women’s qualification to be cancelled, depriving the home crowd another view of gold medallist Eileen Gu. The men’s 4 x 10km cross-country relay race was completed in a time more than 20 minutes slower than at the last Olympics due to the conditions, and the women’s downhill training session at Yanqing was cancelled. Haiti’s flag-bearer at the opening ceremony, Viano, made it through the first intermediary checkpoint on his first run in the giant slalom before getting his DNF. The 19-year-old was adopted from an orphanage on the island nation by an Italian couple who live in Briançon, France. There he learned to ski, and later in life was contacted by the Haitian Ski Federation about representing them. He got his Haitian passport in 2019, and has since said that his aim includes going back to the orphanage he came from. “I am proud to show them my success. I really want to go back there to see my roots and especially to give dreams to young people through sport and its values.”When Elizabeth Chloe Romanis first considered the ethics of chosen caesarean sections, she was listening to a radio programme her husband had sent her. The programme was about how some NHS trusts refused to give medically unnecessary C-sections to people who wanted them. “He sent it to me like: ‘Have you heard this?’ and obviously I got very annoyed,” says the biolaw researcher at Durham University. Someone phoned in and asked, why should the NHS offer the choice when childbirth is natural and surgery costs money? Irritated, Romanis thought someone from her field ought to argue for the right to choose. “So that’s what I did,” she says. It’s a controversial topic. The World Health Organization says that C-sections are associated with risks for both mother and baby, which is why it campaigns to reduce unnecessary C-sections and considers them a last resort, only to be done when medically necessary, a stance with which some NHS trusts seem to agree. On the other hand, the charity Birthrights and the public body providing national healthcare guidance in England and Wales, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice), say if people truly want caesareans after carefully considering the facts, they should be given them. As the debate continues, the pattern in the UK is clear: C-sections are rising, and rapidly. During the 2010s, C-sections rose from 25% to about 30%-35% across England, Scotland and Wales, way above the now abandoned WHO target of 10-15%. Part of that rise comes from growing numbers of elective caesareans, and Nice believes an increasing proportion of those are requested by parents. So should we be worried? * * * While massive global inequalities in safety and access persist, caesareans are considered major but safe surgery in high-income countries. In the UK, just over half of those conducted are emergency C-sections, performed when a vaginal birth has gone awry. The rest are elective caesareans planned in advance, most commonly because of pre-labour complications, and a smaller proportion for non-medical reasons. Concerned that denying C-sections caused too much psychological harm, Nice changed its guidance in 2011 to say that if someone requests a C-section – a so-called “maternal request caesarean” (MRC) – they should be offered one with a willing doctor. But Nice guidelines are only recommendations, and reports from Birthrights and Tees Law have shown that many trusts do not offer MRCs in line with guidance. This is while investigations have revealed a culture at some trusts of pressuring people into vaginal births. This can have tragic results. For example, a 2015 UK Supreme Court case described how a mother with an unusually large baby was purposefully not told about the risks of her delivering vaginally to avoid her requesting a C-section. During the birth, her baby was deprived of oxygen and later developed cerebral palsy. The court ruled that she should have been made aware of the risk and of the alternative of a C-section, in order to give informed consent. But worries are still sometimes disregarded. Maria Booker, Birthrights’ programmes director, recalls recent contact with a woman whose hospital decided that her heart condition did not justify a C-section, despite her relative dying in labour of the same condition. “I think it would be inhumane to deny people caesareans in those kinds of situations,” she says. On the back of Birthrights’ MRC report and the Supreme Court ruling, Nice strengthened its guidance on MRCs and shared decision-making last year. However, the issue is complicated. Ana Pilar Betrán, who leads the WHO’s C-section campaign, says the WHO is especially worried by countries such as Brazil and Turkey, which now have rates of over 50%, but the UK’s rate is also considered too high. It is a concern shared by some UK doctors and midwives. According to Betrán, the high rates are increasingly driven by non-medical factors, such as the convenience to schedule the birth on a known day that can be prepared for and does not clash with work. “The WHO wants and supports and promotes respectful care during vaginal birth, and the use of caesarean section for women in need,” she says. But when there is no medical need, she argues, there is no benefit to the procedure. Fresh evidence on MRCs, however, shows that it might not be as straightforward as that. * * * When studying childbirth, researchers look at hospital records and note down how often certain outcomes happen after each kind of birth. For two reasons, this makes it difficult to study MRCs properly. First, MRCs are typically recorded as “elective caesareans”. But because most electives are scheduled to mitigate a risky complication, researchers say it is unfair to align their risks with those of MRCs, where everything might be fine. Second, the risk of vaginal birth is often underestimated, so the comparison is skewed. This is because researchers do not always account for emergency caesareans as an outcome of attempted vaginal births. In fact, many older studies lump in the emergency C-section risk with the risk of all other caesareans, despite the fact that they are clearly more dangerous and almost always the result of a vaginal birth not going to plan. As Nice makes clear, ideally, studies would compare people planning a C-section with those planning a vaginal birth, but this information is rarely available. These factors make it very tricky to estimate the risk of choosing a C-section versus planning a vaginal birth, but not impossible. In 2021, a team of Canadian researchers found a hospital database in Ontario that, unusually, had logged MRCs. This allowed them to compare MRCs to other low-risk pregnancies where the plan, but not necessarily the outcome, was a vaginal birth. The data shocked the study’s head author, Darine El-Chaâr, a perinatal researcher at the Ottawa hospital. In the planned vaginal birth group, there was a higher percentage of negative outcomes compared with the MRC group, driven by serious vaginal tears and babies admitted to intensive care. “I myself am challenged by the data,” she says, underlining that she believes vaginal birth is natural. “I wanted it to be the other way around.” The study is compelling but not quite perfect – yet. The relatively small amount of MRCs (1,827, as opposed to more than 400,000 planned vaginal births) meant that extremely rare outcomes such as death never materialised in that group. But now they have a database, El-Chaâr expects the evidence to grow over time. This will also allow her to investigate the long-term impact. In 2018, Sarah Stock, an obstetric researcher at Edinburgh University, led a review of 80 long-term studies of C-sections from high-income countries. The review did not distinguish between MRCs, other elective or emergency caesareans, so it can only say something about the surgery itself, not about the relative risk of choosing it over a vaginal birth. Stock found a combination of benefits and risks after a C-section, for both parent and baby. For example, parents had a lower risk of incontinence and babies a higher risk of childhood asthma. Effects in either direction were generally small. “There is no right answer here,” says Stock. “Women need to make decisions with their care-givers on what’s important to them.” The issue of future pregnancies was more one-sided. For example, people with previous C-sections had a small but increased risk of placenta complications in their next pregnancy and generally went on to have fewer kids. And while differences were small, the review found increased risks of later miscarriage and stillbirth. However, Stock says, if you’re just having the one baby, you don’t need to think about that. Having a C-section when you are 24, pregnant with your first child and wanting four more, is a different proposition to when you are 42 and not planning to get pregnant again. Overall, the argument against MRCs is not that clear-cut. But what about the phone-in radio caller’s worry about surgery costs? This is also less problematic than it first appears. According to a 2011 Nice analysis, the expense of MRCs is only marginally higher than that of planned vaginal births, if treatment for related issues such as incontinence is taken into account. El-Chaâr thinks this might be especially true for parents over 40, who are often induced early but then sit around for a long time, waiting for active labour to start. “I would not be surprised if it’s cheaper to have a planned elective in that group,” she says. * * * Whether a C-section is a good choice, then, depends on what is important to the individual. There also appears to be little reason to worry much about the population level in the UK, as the high rate does not seem to have negatively affected the most important outcomes: during the same decade that saw caesarean rates reach 30% and above, deaths of parents and babies decreased in both England and Scotland, though stark racial and socioeconomic inequalities remain. So, can choice advocates find reason to support reducing caesarean rates? For Romanis, the “perplexing” focus on MRCs must be dropped. Instead, numbers could be brought down by tackling the fact that doctors sometimes perform emergency caesareans that are not medically necessary. That phenomenon is partly due to doctors’ fear of being blamed for not intervening in time if something goes wrong, says Soo Downe, a midwifery researcher at the University of Central Lancashire and a WHO collaborator. It leaves some people with C-sections they never wanted and could have avoided. “I don’t think women who want caesareans get them, and I know for sure that women who want physiological labour and birth don’t get that,” she says. That rings true for Booker at Birthrights. “If we could support physiological birth in a better way, we would bring the caesarean rate down,” she says, “but I don’t think that translates to individuals being told that they cannot have a caesarean.” So, focusing on reducing caesareans that are both unnecessary and unwanted could be a golden middle way. In the end, it comes back to choice. “It’s about maximising health by allowing people to make the decisions for themselves,” says Romanis, who points out that a more open conversation about C-sections would also better equip people for giving consent in an emergency. The goal should be to improve outcomes for everyone, says Downe. “How can we build maternity services where this isn’t a debate any more?” she asks. “Where women have caesareans when they want them, where women have necessary caesareans when they need them and are properly consenting to them, but where women who don’t want any of that stuff have great births as well?”The term “fever dream” – employed to describe the woozy, boozy, blurred-around-the-edges kind of cinema that defies easy categorisation – is rather overused in film criticism, vut in the case of Petrov’s Flu, with its sickly delirium, baffling hallucinogenic tangents and a central character who spends most of the film coughing his lungs out, it is entirely fitting. Long, disorientating takes, with camerawork that oozes rather than flows, like slowly congealing blood, switch us from despairing buses crammed with passengers, germs and cigarette smoke to grotesque children’s parties, a memory twisted in Petrov’s (Semyon Serzin) overheated brain. The film unfolds over the course of what might be a day but could be decades, in post-Soviet Russia. Petrov, a comic-book artist, is semi-separated from his wife, Petrova (Chulpan Khamatova), a librarian who has violent fantasies of retribution exacted on members of the local poetry club. Or perhaps the fantasies bleed into reality and she genuinely is soaked in the blood of a customer whose lending history aroused her ire. Like much in this heady, unsavoury film, Petrova’s extracurricular activities are open to multiple interpretations. It’s possibly the most Russian thing ever created, and it’s most certainly not a soothing viewing experience. But there’s something grimly fascinating about it nonetheless.Vulnerable Australians are being forced into “hiding at home” and lower-income workers are skipping meals because of the cost of rapid Covid tests, unions and welfare charities warn, as they plead with the Morrison government to reverse its opposition to providing free testing kits for all. Despite the government’s recent move to make rapid antigen tests tax deductible, a coalition of advocacy groups including the Australian Council of Social Services (Acoss) and the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) warn the tax write-off plan provides a greater discount to higher-income earners. The groups also argue the existing concessional access scheme – which provides up to 10 free RATs over three months to eligible recipients and is loss-making for some pharmacists – has not done enough to allow all Australians to access tests when they need them. The ACTU will on Monday deliver a petition to parliament calling for free and accessible RATs for all Australians. More than 150,000 people had signed the petition by Sunday night. Michele O’Neil, the ACTU president, said making rapid testing kits free for everyone was “the only way we’re going to keep workplaces and the wider community safe from Omicron, and alleviate at least some of the immense stress being placed on our healthcare workers”. “Low-income workers have been on the frontline of this pandemic from the very beginning. It is unfair that they are having to shoulder the burden of paying for their own rapid antigen tests, just so they can keep themselves, their workplaces and their loved ones safe,” O’Neil said. The Acoss chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, said “for many the decision to buy a RAT means a missed meal or a bill that can’t be paid on time – those are real-time decisions which cannot be put off”. “People who have the least have borne the brunt of this pandemic for over two years. But the government’s announcement last week to give tax deductions for Covid tests gives greater assistance to those on higher incomes.” The ACTU and Acoss, together with charities including the Federation of Ethnic Communities’ Councils of Australia, Public Health Association Australia, St Vincent de Paul Society, Anglicare, Uniting Care, and Catholic Social Services Australia, have also issued a joint statement backing the plea. “The current distribution model centred on private retail sales to individuals and businesses is not fit for purpose. It leaves too many behind and too often the financial means of people will determine whether they have adequate access to RATs,” the statement said. “People at risk are hiding at home, unable to know who is safe; workers are expected to put themselves in harm’s way without access to tests; concession card holders struggle to access the limited number of RATs notionally allocated to them,” it said. The groups argue the government should follow the UK and US in providing free kits for the entire community. “The move to large-scale RAT testing has been beset with problems including reliance on market forces to ration inadequate supply, slow delivery, the PCR testing system collapsing under the weight of overwhelming demand, and price gouging from elements of the retail distribution network,” the groups said. Rapid antigen kits became the recommended Covid testing option in many states when PCR lab capacity became overwhelmed in December. The Morrison government has resisted calls to make kits free for all Australians, instead requiring people to meet criteria for the tests at testing hubs, or else purchase the tests themselves. In addition to the tax deduction and concessional card holder schemes, in late January the government made it possible for National Disability Insurance Scheme participants to dip into their core funding to purchase rapid antigen tests for themselves and their support workers. A spokeswoman for health minister Greg Hunt, when asked why the government does not provide universal free testing kits, told Guardian Australia: “we reject the premise of the question that we oppose free rapid antigen tests for all Australians.” “All Australians can currently access a free rapid antigen test through state run testing hubs if they have symptoms or are a close contact,” the spokeswoman said, noting the Commonwealth funds half of the costs of RATs provided in these settings. The spokeswoman also noted the government’s provision of 11.5m free RATs to residential aged care facilities since August last year, its concession card holder scheme – which he said had so far provided 8.3m kits to 2 million Australians - as well as the newly announced tax deductibility of RATs for workers. In January, the consumer watchdog referred retailers charging “beyond outrageous” prices for rapid antigen tests to the federal police for investigation.The mountain lion known as P22 has become something of a celebrity in the city of Los Angeles. The big cat resides in Griffith Park, a 4,000-acre park tucked in the Hollywood hills, and has inspired murals, songs and even an exhibit about his life. This February marks 10 years since scientists first found P22 while setting up camera traps in the area. His discovery was considered jaw-dropping, and scientists say that P22 has come to symbolize something uniquely LA, a city where wild landscapes rub shoulders with dense urbanism. “A city long bashed for being a concrete jungle full of smog proves the world wrong by making a home for a mountain lion,” says Beth Pratt, California director for the National Wildlife Federation. Pratt even has a tattoo of P22 and dubbed him the “Brad Pitt of mountain lions” – attractive, enigmatic and unlucky in love. He has plenty of deer to eat, no male competitors in his territory, but also no hope to find a mate. Pratt points out that in any other part of the country, P22 probably would have been removed or killed. In Los Angeles, he’s famous. P22’s journey to Griffith Park began many miles away in the Santa Monica mountains, which have been home to 100 lions and where P22 was born, around 2010. P stands for puma and the number corresponds to the individual cat that is part of a scientific study by National Park Service biologists, who are researching mountain lions in the Santa Monica mountains. Sometime around 2012, P22 left the Santa Monica mountains and set off on a remarkable 50-mile journey that took him across two major Los Angeles freeways, evading traffic and human detection. He eventually found the wilderness of Griffith Park to set up his range – at 8 sq miles, it’s probably the smallest roaming territory of any known mountain lion (typically a male cat’s territory is 150 sq miles). When he was caught on film in Griffith Park, he probably hadn’t been there for very long. He was soon fitted with a collar to track his movements, and the city started to fall in love. Gerry Hans still remembers the remarkable day that P22 was found. Hans, the president of the nonprofit Friends of Griffith Park, had just brainstormed a camera trap survey of the park, to see what kinds of creatures were making the area home. But he and biologists in the park were startled to discover that, alongside the coyotes, bobcats and foxes, their cameras picked up the unmistakable image of a mountain lion. Hans said he wanted to be sensitive about how others would take the news: “We released a study report of the camera traps, and gently slipped it in that there was a mountain lion,” he says. “There was a lot of nervousness from residents.” P22 has never posed danger to people, choosing to coexist peacefully and lurk in the night, keeping his distance from human neighbors. Scientists point out that P22 lives in an urban park visited by millions of people and is rarely seen. A few times over the past years, P22 has found himself in hot water. In 2014, he became sick after eating an animal that had been killed with rodenticide. That led to a public outcry about the availability of such poisons, and in October 2020 California passed into law AB 1788, which bans the use of the most lethal anticoagulant rodenticides. In 2015, he got trapped underneath a house, creating a media circus – and a desperate problem-solving effort to get him out. The following year, he leapt an 8ft wall into the LA Zoo and mauled a sleeping koala to death. Instead of singling out the cat, the Zoo changed its policy of letting animals wander outside during the night. P22 has also become a symbol of the need for wildlife crossings to reconnect habitats fragmented by human development. Los Angeles is set to break ground on the world’s largest wildlife crossing in early 2022, which will connect two parts of the Santa Monica mountain range, allowing P22’s kin – and animals from lizards to birds – to increase their range and allow for more genetic diversity. What might the next decade bring for the iconic puma? In the wild, mountain lions only live a dozen years, but in captivity they can live up to 20 or more, Hans says. “P22 is somewhere between being out in the wild and in captivity,” he says. “He likely is not going to ever die from interaction with other male lions.” That leaves him time to increase his rising stardom. P22 is a remarkable animal and so totally an LA cat, says Pratt. “Like many Angelenos, he’s chill, likes hanging out under the Hollywood sign, and managed to navigate the brutal traffic on the 101 and 405.” Pratt says she loves how this city has embraced an apex predator. “The LA area possesses a value of coexisting with wildlife that I celebrate – people share their Ring videos of P22 making an appearance in their back yard with excitement, not fear,” she says. Not bad for a small town cat – he truly did make it big in Hollywood.The Burrell Collection is majestic and abundant, a rich man’s hoard of 9,000 objects, industrial wealth transmogrified into Chinese porcelain and medieval stained glass, paintings by French impressionists and Scottish colourists, Persian carpets, suits of armour, Roman and Egyptian antiquities. Amassed by the Glaswegian shipping magnate Sir William Burrell, it was given by him and his wife, Constance, to the city of Glasgow in 1944. Eventually, in 1983, a new building was completed to house it, in Pollok Country Park, the city’s largest green space. It’s an exceptional work of architecture whose conception goes back to 1971, when the young Cambridge-basedarchitects Barry Gasson, John Meunier and Brit Andresen won a competition to design the collection’s home. Its principal aim was to make the most of its natural setting, in high, pillared, glass-walled galleries that allowed you to see a Rodin bronze or a Ming sculpture against a woodland backdrop. But it didn’t get you there immediately. As Meunier now puts it, you experienced “a gradual immersion into the magical world of the collection”. First, you wandered through rooms in red sandstone and timber, part castle, part domestic, part glasshouse, both crafted and industrial, intimate and grand, eclectic and varied like the collection, and responsive to both its personal and public aspects. Gothic doorways and window surrounds were built into the fabric. Confident concrete columns and robust timber beams stood alongside the art in relationships of mutual respect. The art and architecture worked together in a three-dimensional composition. Next month, the Burrell reopens after a £68.25m renovation lasting more than five years. The aim was to fix defects in the ageing fabric and reverse declining visitor numbers, from 1 million a year when the building opened to 150,000 by 2015. A rearranged interior allows a 35% increase in gallery space, enabling more rotation of the exhibits, which it is hoped will attract more visitors. A “hub” has been formed in the heart of the building, an atrium with stepped seating for events. A new main entrance has been formed, so as to encourage more passersby to enter from the park. In the original layout you entered through a portal in the end of a long pitched-roof wing that looked like a fragment of a monastery. This was felt to be too “ecclesiastical” and off-putting by the architect for the renovation, John McAslan + Partners, and the route through the wing protracted and awkward. The new entrance takes you across an open “piazza” through glass doors into the centre of the complex. Necessary steps have been taken to fix leaking roofs, improve climate controls and bring the collection up to current standards of sustainability, conservation and display. The engineer Arup has meticulously worked out a way of upgrading the extensive glazing, such that it looks the same as the more primitive system of the original structure. It is certainly welcome that more of the collection can be shown in better conditions than before. Most of the building’s magic is still there. It is like a man-made version of a walk in a park, where the glass-walled galleries achieve as close a connection as possible between art and trees. There are frequent inversions of inside and out: some internal walls are made of thick stone, as if they were external, and much of the glazed exterior skin wishes itself towards invisibility. From deep inside the building you see greenery through layers of space and objects. Daylight comes from many directions, sometimes flooding through a glazed roof, sometimes glimpsed at the end of a vista. There is also a pleasing contrast of building techniques: the stone is hewn and carved, made to last for ever, while the assemblies of concrete and timber have a basic, just-bolted-together feel. John Meunier, though, is not happy. He has publicly decried the relocation of the entrance, which has entailed the displacement of some stained glass. The original design also included the reconstruction of three rooms from Burrell’s home, Hutton Castle, two of which have now gone. Meunier objects, he tells me, to “the crassness of the abrupt transition from outside to inside, as opposed to the carefully orchestrated transition from the quotidian life outside to the exquisite, almost timeless life among the objects in the collection, a transition of light levels as well as space”. John McAslan says that the changes are necessary for ease of circulation, and that the lost rooms were little visited. What’s at stake here is a clash of cultures. The Burrell represents a road that turned out to be less travelled in modern British architecture, where buildings were considered as things composed, like music or poetry, an attitude that includes the possibility that a less than obvious route to a desired destination might be desirable. McAslan, who once worked for Richard Rogers, comes from the more dominant hi-tech approach, which is more about problem-solving and directness. His way aligns with that of modern museums, which seek accessibility and permeability. The old Burrell, says its management, no longer met “visitor expectations or standards required for a major cultural building”. They will do what they have to do to work with a listed structure such as the Burrell, but they don’t want the architecture to get in the way of their objectives. The subtle qualities of which Meunier speaks can get blown away in the process. The Burrell is run by Glasgow Life, a charity that “delivers a wide range of services on behalf of Glasgow City Council”. You can’t blame them for wanting the building to meet its needs, and conceivably there was no alternative to moving the entrance, but something has certainly been lost. Every part of the original building had personality and intent. Or soul, if you like. McAslan’s most significant interventions in the Burrell don’t really do soul: they do the job, often with quality and skill, but without particular feeling for this unique place. The main new moves – piazza, sliding glass doors, atrium – are the stuff of corporate and cultural buildings everywhere. The Burrell is a collection like no other, for which reason it had a building like no other. It still has, and in important ways it’s better than before, but it has become a little more normal. The Burrell Collection at Pollok Country Park, Glasgow, reopens on 29 MarchIn the days leading up to the outbreak of the second world war, writes Simon Parkin, the British police and intelligence services were “deluged with tipoffs about suspicious refugees and foreigners”. A beekeeper was detained when investigators found a diary entry reading “Exchange British queen for Italian queen”. An art historian was reported by a neighbour who had heard some suspicious knocking noises (perhaps a secret coded message?) produced by the bed while he was having sex with his fiancee. By the time Churchill became prime minister in May 1940, the mood was even more fevered. Imminent invasion seemed highly likely and the country, inflamed by sensationalist newspaper articles, was deeply worried about the “fifth column menace”. The government could therefore claim popular support for its decision to intern all “enemy aliens”. Yet these included thousands of Jews and other opponents of Nazism who now found themselves locked up with German prisoners of war and other committed fascists. This is hardly an unknown story, though it has attracted much less attention than the internment of Japanese Americans in the US, perhaps, as Parkin argues, because it “upsets the prevailing historical narrative of Britain’s role in the second world war: a united, courageous nation, fighting a just war to defend the persecuted”. While he makes clear that there were spies even among those who seemed to have impeccable anti-Nazi credentials, he nonetheless describes internment as “a panic measure born of historical ignorance and bedrock xenophobia”. The Island of Extraordinary Captives brings the broader issues to life through the story of aspiring artist Peter Fleischmann. He was only 18 when he was arrested in July 1940, “denied the civil rights that even convicts enjoy: no charge, no trial, no bail. None of his story mattered: not the fact he had been orphaned and made homeless by the Nazi regime. Not the fact that he was brought to England as a destitute child, nor that he had been carefully interviewed by one of the most senior judges in the land and deemed to pose no security risk to his adoptive country.” Instead, after other unpleasant experiences, he was sent to Hutchinson camp on the Isle of Man for almost a year and a quarter. This held up to 1,200 captives, including many lawyers, writers, musicians, academics and artists, most notably the Dadaist Kurt Schwitters. The commandant, Captain Hubert Daniel, sometimes baffled inmates by using the camp radio system to broadcast the latest cricket scores. But he was also humane and encouraged all the prisoners’ educational and artistic initiatives. In response, as Parkin puts it, they “turned a prison into a university, a camp into a cultural centre, a boarding house into an art gallery, a jumble of wires into a broadcasting station, a field into a fitness club, a lawn into a concert amphitheatre”. Lecture series explored everything from Greek philosophy to “the industrial uses of synthetic fibres” by way of Shakespeare’s sonnets. For those who had missed out on an education, “here was an opportunity to learn from some of the best-regarded scholars in Europe”. The young Fleischmann, we read, found himself imprisoned among “both rising stars and established luminaries of the German and Austrian art worlds”. By becoming a sort of apprentice, he was able to gain the kind of artistic training he had never had: “He learned to use toothpaste to size their painting grounds and how to find and crush minerals, then mix them with the oil from sardine tins to create oil paints. He persuaded several bushy-eyebrowed internees to let him have a few hairs, which he made into brushes.” He was also able to observe how Schwitters produced not only some very fine portraits but collages from cigarette packets, nails, pebbles and shells stuck into leftover porridge that “had acquired rainbow streaks of mould and now emitted a faint sickly smell”. The experience “seeded in him an indefatigable love of art and a belief in its capacity to liberate the human spirit” that he was later able to develop, at the Beckenham School of Art, into a distinguished career under the name of Peter Midgley. Needless to say, not everybody who went through Hutchinson camp found it such a transformational experience. Many prisoners were so terrified by the possibility of falling into German hands, Parkin tells us, that a clinical pathologist and a retired funeral director formed a “Suicide Consultancy” to “offer lessons to any interested parties on the best and most painless way of killing oneself in the event of invasion. The pair offered demonstrations – one of which proved almost fatal to a volunteer – on how to make a reliable hanging noose from either a washing line or a pair of twisted trousers.” In later years, many internees played down their hardships, not least because they seemed trivial compared with what relatives left behind in Nazi Germany had endured. Parkin’s rich and vivid account makes clear just how much the displaced artists did suffer, and the remarkable resilience and creativity with which they responded. The Island of Extraordinary Captives: A True Story of an Artist, a Spy, and a Wartime Scandal by Simon Parkin is published by Sceptre (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyFrom the steel sculpture by Fabian von Spreckelsen in the garden to the curve of Kaspar Hamacher’s Lounger chair inside the house, there is a compelling assortment of pieces to admire at the Belgian home of French writer and gallerist Lise Coirier. “For us, culture is not the cherry on the cake, it is at the core of everything,” explains Coirier. She and her Swedish-Italian husband, Gian Giuseppe Simeone, believe that being surrounded by art has a fundamental impact on quality of life. It’s a thread that weaves through their work. Both have founded their own creative agencies and written several books on design. Coirier is also the publisher and editor of the acclaimed biannual True Living of Art and Design magazine, while Simeone, an art historian and archaeologist by training, consults for the European Union on its cultural support programmes. This passion for art, design and photography is evident in their home on the outskirts of Brussels, in Tervuren, where the work of 30 artists they represent in Spazio Nobile, a gallery they own in the centre of Brussels, is very much on display. “It’s a way of experiencing what we recommend to our collectors – it’s important to know what it’s like to live with art objects,” says Coirier. Built in 1900, their home was originally conceived in the tradition of Flemish neo renaissance and neo baroque with a smattering of art nouveau, as was the rage at the turn of that century. It is also the house Simeone’s parents bought when he was 18, and where the couple have now lived for the past 23 years with their daughters, Juliette and Eva. When they moved here, after the death of Simeone’s father, the pair faced the dilemma of leaving their apartment in Ixelles, which now houses their art gallery, and the daunting prospect of doing up a large family home which was beyond their budget. “I waited almost 15 years to figure out the spaces and have the means to invest in this immense house,” says Coirier, who was keen on a substantial update while preserving period details. The couple also wanted to mix vintage design pieces and contemporary work with more exotic objets and ethnographic art pieces. Their friend, interior architect and art historian Anne Derasse, played a large role in designing furniture for the high-ceilinged rooms, while also creating much-needed storage areas. An original mosaic floor and neoclassical stained glass windows from 1900 line the hallway. A porcelain stoneware sculpture by Portuguese artist Bela Silva enhances the Swedish chest of Jugendstil drawers. The large living room with its high fireplace, towering ceilings and fluted columns with neoclassical details comes into its own when the couple host events – but it is in the kitchen, the dining room and small library on the first floor where everyday living happens. A Carina Seth Andersson vase in frosted glass sits on an oval dining table by Hans Wegner in the dining room. On the sideboard is a walnut tray by Kaspar Hamacher that was made for the couple’s 20th wedding anniversary and on which sits a small vintage enamelled horse by ceramicist Lisa Larson. Above the doorway is Piet Stockmans’s Wilde Strippen, which appears to dance on the walls and is a play on the decorative details typical of a 1900 house. On the mantelpiece, next to the Amy Hilton pastel and marble fragment, is a sandstone pendant used as a bookend. The living room, with wild silk curtains, is furnished with a large Hay sofa and on the fireplace, a vintage Mezza Chimera lamp by Vico Magistretti sits alongside stoneware and pottery by Vincent Van Duysen. “We love the fragility of ceramics and glass or the strength of wood to the touch and the patina it acquires over time,” says Coirier. The kitchen was renovated by Belgian architect Sebastien Caporusso, retaining the original cupboard fittings by Cubex, a striking example of the first American-style kitchens. An oval marble table has been added. “We didn’t want a typical kitchen, we wanted to curate it in such a way that we could show some of the pieces,” explains Coirier. An “enfilade” of glass made at Atelier Mestdagh displays Bela Silva and prototypes from Sebastian Herkner for a “Glass is Tomorrow” exhibition. The garden was landscaped by architect Aldrik Heirman, who has worked with Van Duysen and David Chipperfield. “We are on the edge of the forest of Soignes, so the garden really required the eye of an expert,” says Coirier. “It was important that it looked as natural as possible, and in keeping with the house – as if it had always been there.” spazionobile.com; tlmagazine.comDavid Lammy has written to the government asking it to pardon 70 abolitionists convicted for their role in the historic 1823 Demerara rebellion by enslaved people against British colonialists in the Caribbean. The shadow foreign secretary described the revolt, involving 10,000 enslaved people, as a “seminal moment” in the history of slave resistance. Although unsuccessful at the time, the event contributed to the abolition of slavery 10 years later, in 1833. Lammy said exercising the royal prerogative of mercy to grant pardons to those involved in the uprising, which was brutally crushed by the colonial militia in part of present-day Guyana, would be “a significant step in Britain’s acknowledgment of its role in the history of slavery”. The letter names 73 people who were tried, 70 of whom were found guilty, including 21 who were executed, including 10 who were decapitated after being hanged and had their heads put on poles. Hundreds of others were killed during and in the immediate aftermath of the uprising. Lammy highlights two particular cases, that of Jack Gladstone, a slave who was the principal organiser of the uprising, and John Smith, a young British Protestant minister, both of whom were sentenced to death before having their sentences commuted. Gladstone, who was “owned” by John Gladstone, the father of the future prime minister William Gladstone, was not violent, according to testimonies – and also intervened to prevent other acts of violence. After his death sentence was commuted he was transported to St Lucia for hard labour. Smith had his sentence commuted by King George IV but died in prison in 1824 before the decision was communicated to Demerara. A two-day debate on whether to pardon him posthumously took place in parliament in June of that year, but the motion was defeated. In the letter, addressed to the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, Lammy wrote: “In recent years, this country has entered into a discussion about its colonial history and the path to repair. The full pardoning of both John Smith and Jack Gladstone would be a significant step in Britain’s acknowledgment of its role in the history of slavery. Both John Smith and Jack Gladstone were pioneers of the abolition movement, and they must be remembered and celebrated as such. It is for this reason that I am requesting a pardon through the exercise of the royal prerogative of mercy.” Demerara was one of Britain’s most lucrative colonies, being rich in sugar plantations at a time when the British economy was heavily dependent on the crop. It was known for the harsh treatment of enslaved people, designed to discourage them from rebelling against the white colonialists they heavily outnumbered. Lammy, who has spoken previously about the legacy of slavery and its impact on black Britons, based the letter on research into the Demerara uprising contained in the book White Debt. In a reply from Raab sent to Lammy on Wednesday, the justice secretary said that following Guyana gaining independence in 1966 and the country becoming a republic in 1970, it would be for the president of Guyana to grant such pardons. Thomas Harding, the author of White Debt, described Raab’s response as “shocking”. He said: “Britain was responsible for this gross miscarriage of justice, not Guyana, and the British government should be the one to pardon those found guilty. The men and women who took part in the Demerara uprising of 1823 were attempting to abolish British slavery. It was a British court martial which found the 70 people guilty, a court established by a British governor in a British colony (later known as ‘British Guiana’), on behalf of the British king, under British military code. “Now is the time for the British government to take full responsibly for its legacy of slavery, to pardon the ‘Demerara 70’ and recognise them for what they were: heroes, for all of us.”The United States presents itself as the beacon of democracy in contrast to the autocracies of China and Russia. Yet American democracy is in danger of succumbing to the same sort of oligarchic economics and racist nationalism that thrive in both these powers. After all, it wasn’t long ago that Donald Trump – who openly admired Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin – encouraged racist nationalism in America while delivering much of the US government into the hands of America’s super-rich. Now state-level Republicans are busily suppressing votes of people of color and paving the way for a possible anti-democratic coup, while the national Republican party excuses the attack on the Capitol – calling it “legitimate political discourse” – and censures Representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, the only two congressional Republicans serving on the panel investigating that attack. America’s oligarchic wealth, meanwhile, has reached levels rivaling or exceeding those of Russia and China. During the pandemic, America’s 745 billionaires increased their holdings by 70%, adding $2.1tn to their wealth in just over a year. A portion of this wealth is going into politics. As early as 2012, more than 40% of all money spent in federal elections came from the wealthiest of the wealthiest – not the top 1% or even the top tenth of the 1%, but from the top 1% of the 1%. Now, some of this wealth is supporting Trumpism. Peter Thiel, a staunch Trump supporter whose net worth is estimated by Forbes to be $2.6bn, has become one of the Republican party’s largest donors. Last year, Thiel gave $10m each to the campaigns of two protégés – Blake Masters, who is running for the Senate from Arizona, and JD Vance, from Ohio. Thiel is also backing 12 House candidates, three of whom are running primary challenges to Republicans who voted to impeach Trump for the events of January 6. It’s not just Republicans. Last year, at least 13 billionaires who had previously donated to Trump lavished campaign donations on Democratic senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, according to an analysis of Federal Election Commission records. The combination of oligarchic wealth and racist nationalism is treacherous for democratic institutions in the US and elsewhere. Capitalism is consistent with democracy only if democracy reduces the inequalities, insecurities, joblessness, and poverty that accompany unbridled profit-seeking. For the first three decades after the second world war, democracy did this. The US and war-ravaged western Europe built the largest middle classes the world had ever seen, and the most buoyant democracies. The arrangement was far from perfect, but with the addition of civil rights and voting rights, subsidized healthcare (in the US, Medicare and Medicaid), and a vast expansion of public education, democracy was on the way to making capitalism work for the vast majority. Then came a giant U-turn, courtesy of Ronald Reagan in America and Margaret Thatcher in Europe. Deregulation, privatization, globalization, and the unleashing of finance created the Full Monty: abandoned factories and communities, stagnant wages, widening inequality, a shrinking middle class, political corruption and shredded social support. The result has been widespread anger and cynicism. Even before the pandemic, most people were working harder than ever but couldn’t get ahead, and their children’s prospects weren’t any better. More than one out of every six American children was impoverished and the typical American family was living from paycheck to paycheck. At the same time, a record high share of national wealth was already surging to the top. Starting last July, America did an experiment that might have limited these extremes and reduced the lure of racist nationalism. That’s when 36 million American families began receiving pandemic payments of up to $3,000 per child ($3,600 for each child under six). Presto. Child poverty dropped by at least a third, and the typical family gained some breathing space. But this hugely successful experiment ended abruptly in December when Senator Joe Manchin joined 50 Republican senators in rejecting President Biden’s Build Back Better Act, which would have continued it. They cited concerns over the experiment’s cost – an estimated $100bn per year, or $1.6tn over 10 years. But that’s less than big corporations and the rich will have saved on taxes from the Trump Republican tax cut of 2018. Repeal it, and there would be enough money. The cost is also less than the increase in the wealth of America’s 745 billionaires during the pandemic. Why not a wealth tax? The experiment died because, put simply, the oligarchy didn’t want to pay for it. Oligarchic economics coupled with racist nationalism marks the ultimate failure of progressive politics. Beware. When the people are no longer defended against the powerful, they look elsewhere. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comLeo Beckett, who has died aged 95, was my friend and co-conspirator as each of us in our own way supported Dame Margaret Beckett MP when she was environment secretary, then foreign secretary. Leo was Margaret’s most trusted counsellor for 50 years and ran her parliamentary office; they were married for 42 of those years. I was director of communications in her departments. An outstanding Labour and trade union organiser, Leo combined efficiency with care and concern for everybody involved. He was a genius in putting everybody at their ease. The son of Arthur Beckett, a soldier, and his wife, Marjorie (nee Holland), he was born in Brompton barracks, Chatham, in 1926, the year of the general strike, as he never failed to point out. He was named Lionel, but always known as Leo. Towards the end of the second world war, aged 18, he joined the RAF. These were formative years. His learning from fellow servicemen from mining and other working-class communities transformed his own political understanding. His family had settled in Leadenham, Lincolnshire, and after his RAF service Leo was taken on as an apprentice, then offered a job, with the Lincoln engineering company Ruston Bucyrus (later taken over by GEC). He soon became an influential figure in Labour politics in the city. After the deselection of Dick Taverne (now Lord Taverne) as Lincoln’s Labour parliamentary candidate in 1972, Leo helped Margaret Jackson, the party’s new candidate, to win the seat back for Labour in October 1974, and they married in 1979. Leo joined Margaret to win Derby South in 1983 and hold it ever since. Beneath an effortless affability and humorous, at times cheeky, charm was a smart operator, adept in navigating turbulent waters at Westminster, in Margaret’s constituency in Derby South, and at Labour party conferences. Leo held deep values expressed through his love of, and loyalty to, the Labour party and Margaret herself. The Becketts shared a steely sense of common purpose and were one of parliament’s most successful partnerships. Except for the past two years, when his ill health made mobility difficult, Leo was always by Margaret’s side, working tirelessly well into his 90s and adapting to at least 10 changes in party leadership, including Margaret’s own brief spell as leader after John Smith’s death. This included supporting Margaret as a member of every Labour government since Harold Wilson was prime minister. Leo and Margaret only properly switched off when they enjoyed their caravan holidays. Modest, with a genial personality, Leo made everybody feel that they were special and made friends across the political spectrum. He was predeceased by his first wife, Beryl Firth, and their two sons, David and Roger. Leo is survived by Margaret, and by his three grandchildren, Alison, Vicky and Jon.The staging is witty. In order to make an invisible man “visible”, an element of production usually hidden from audiences is laid bare. On a stage divided into two halves, one half is realistically set out to suggest the consultation room where Dr Kemp (Kate Louise Okello), star radio therapist, holds private sessions. The other half is a dark space in which stand a couple of benches strewn with seemingly random objects. This is the Foley area, where sound effects are created and other spaces suggested (pub, house, street, vicarage). When Daniel Watson’s Griffin finally succeeds in making himself invisible, he still seems to move before us thanks to the deft combination of Foley effects and his fellow actors’ reactions (to being beaten by unseen fists, for instance). Philip Correia’s new version of HG Wells’s much-adapted 1897 novel also plays with other notions of visibility/invisibility, but less successfully. The action, relocated to present-day north-east England, shuttles to and fro in time and space, exposing hidden forces that shape today’s society via the story of Griffin, a troubled teenager from a disadvantaged background who claims he can make living creatures invisible. When his actions inadvertently cause a tragic house fire, the authorities refuse to see the facts he presents and confine him to an institution. His new therapist, Kemp, has her own issues (of class, race and gender). She hopes, mad-scientist like, to exploit Griffin’s discovery so she might infiltrate corridors of power and exercise control over world events. This production is part of Northern Stage’s project to support developing talent in the regions. I appreciated the commitment of the four young actors (including Jack Fairley and Izzy Ions in several roles), as directed by Anna Girvan; also the effectiveness of Aileen Kelly’s design and Jeremy Bradfield’s sound and music. The play’s plot, though, is too chaotic; drama and social critique, lacking focus, disappear from view. The Invisible Man is at Northern Stage, Newcastle, until 19 February, then touring until 26 MarchHaving tussled rather inelegantly with the work of Agatha Christie once before, with 2017’s Murder on the Orient Express, Kenneth Branagh again sports the improbable moustache and gloopy camembert accent of her detective Hercule Poirot. In the long-delayed Death on the Nile (the second version of the book, following the Peter Ustinov-starring 1978 outing), the moustache gets its own pre-credits origin story, which is considerably more background detail than most of the other characters are afforded. In this heavily CGI-augmented and opulently styled north African odyssey, Poirot finds himself tagging along on the honeymoon of the fabulously wealthy Linnet Ridgeway (Gal Gadot) and her new husband, Simon Doyle (Armie Hammer). Others accompanying the happy couple include Linnet’s cantankerous champagne socialist godmother, the bride’s sour-faced former fiance, a feckless toff and his overbearing mother, and a celebrated jazz singer and her niece (the starry cast includes Annette Bening, Dawn French, Jennifer Saunders and Russell Brand). In addition, Simon’s jealousy-crazed ex-lover (Emma Mackey) is an uninvited but unshakable spectre at the celebrations. The sheer weirdness of this setup is Christie’s, but the film does little to assuage the dysfunctionality of the guest list. It does, however, go some way to explaining why the increasingly frazzled Linnet knocks herself out with sleeping tablets every night. As a piece of film-making, it’s demonstrative and showy, all flowing champagne, mirthless, tinkling laughter and sexless, grimly gymnastic grappling on the dancefloor. The camera whirls giddily, dizzy from the sparkle and spectacle, but not quite able to conceal the fact that this is an empty bauble of a movie.Alan Russell, who has died of cancer aged 78, was the production manager at the Birmingham Rep when its new theatre on Broad Street was being planned in the early 1970s. Theatre Projects Consultants had been appointed to oversee the project, and Alan joined their design team in 1971. I joined TPC two years later, and he and I soon became close colleagues and great friends. A theatre consultant may be involved in planning a new theatre or resuscitating an old one; the design of a theatre space fixed or flexible; or the design and specification of theatre technical equipment. The role varies depending on the relationships forged with the user and with the architect. There can be trouble with either an over ambitious publicly funded body or an artistic director with too many ideas. Support too eagerly a distinguished architect who has never built a theatre and you risk getting a theatre space that fails actor and audience, despite being set in a beautiful building. Alan had the necessary qualities in abundance: a show business background; inexhaustible energy; knowledge of tried and tested solutions; an inquiring mind; and the capacity to create working relationships on each project and to involve colleagues at Theatre Projects who had complementary qualities. He worked on many UK theatres, as well as on arts centres in Macao and Singapore. There was an annus mirabilis – over six months in 1994 Alan and I completed our double acts on two great theatres, the new Glyndebourne and the rebuilding of every part of the Edinburgh Festival theatre save for the original auditorium. Both were completed on time and on budget. After his retirement in 2011, Alan became treasurer and secretary of the Institute of Theatre Consultants. In 2018 he edited and designed a large and lavishly illustrated book presenting 112 projects by members completed all over the world during the preceding four years. Alan was born in Gosport, Hampshire, the son of Cyril Russell, who worked for the local authority, and Dorothy (nee Eyles). He studied electrical engineering at University College London but got distracted by student theatre in his third year and decided not to take a degree. He joined Birmingham Rep in 1966 as chief electrician, and a year later became production manager. At UCL he met Jo Hart, who had exchanged studying the law for the wardrobe. They married in 1968, and had two sons, Ben and Thomas, who, when young, if asked what Dad did in the theatre, would answer “spannering” – which is not a bad description of Alan’s talent for getting new theatres sorted. Outside work, Alan enjoyed sailing and good burgundy. He is survived by Jo, Ben and two grandchildren, Anna and Joe. Thomas predeceased him.The parents of a schoolgirl who has accused a stranger of rape have been told by police that there is not enough space in a Nightingale court for them to attend the alleged attacker’s trial. Instead, the family of the teenager have been advised that one of her parents should sit in an overspill room that would be shared with two members of the alleged rapist’s family. After being contacted by the Guardian, the Ministry of Justice has agreed to provide an extra seat so both parents can observe the trial of the man accused of sexually assaulting their daughter. But the girl’s mother questioned whether Nightingale courts – smaller courts set up to deal with a backlog of serious cases during the Covid pandemic – are adequate. “No family member wants to have to listen to this stuff on their own, so being told that either I could attend, or my husband, but not both of us, is very traumatising,” she said. “I was just so shocked to be told I’d have to spend up a week sitting in a small room, playing some macabre game of musical chairs with the family of the man who is being tried for raping my daughter.” The trial of the alleged rapist, after a lengthy wait, was supposed to be heard at a named London crown court earlier this year, but was diverted to a Nightingale site for later this year. In a crown court, there is usually enough room for the alleged victim and the family of the accused to sit separately in the public gallery. Last month, the alleged rape victim’s mother received an email from the investigating police officer saying there would not be enough room for both parents to attend. “To accommodate the jury, the public gallery is not in the court room and is in a separate room within the building where the proceedings can be viewed on video link,” the senior officer wrote. “I have been told the room only allows for 3 people and it would not surprise me if [the alleged rapist’s] extensive family will also be present. Therefore it may be utilised by them and could be upsetting for you to be in their presence and/or hear detail of the case. “[Named police officers] could instead keep you updated of proceedings. However it is a decision for you and [the alleged victim’s father] and if you really want to view I suggest only one of you due to the space issue.” The mother of the alleged victim said this was unacceptable because it would be her family’s first opportunity to hear the defendant’s case. “Our first and only opportunity to find out what his side of the story is, what witnesses have said, is in court. And the police are telling us we shouldn’t go. It sums up the utter insensitivity of the criminal justice system and the complete lack of empathy for victims and their families,” she said. Informed court sources said the police officer’s email accurately reflected the lack of space in the court. In July 2020, the government announced it would be opening Nightingale courts as part of its court recovery plan to address the impact of coronavirus on the justice system. There are at present 28 Nightingale courts. A Guardian analysis of Home Office statistics last year showed that fewer than one in 60 rape cases recorded by the police last year resulted in a suspect being charged. The family’s treatment has been condemned. Harriet Wistrich, the director of the Centre for Women’s Justice, said: “Clearly given the youth and vulnerability of the victim, this is not acceptable. Getting a rape case to trial is a major feat in itself given the less than 3% charge rate and it would be crazy if the prosecution fails because of inadequate court facilities.” The Ministry of Justice said space in the courtroom at the Nightingale court was limited and local officials had made every effort to enable a family member to be in the courtroom. An MoJ spokesperson said: “We are determined to support victims and will be providing extra seating so both parents can sit with their daughter. “The pandemic has placed unprecedented pressure on court space but measures such as Nightingale courts have allowed us to hear cases which would otherwise have faced significant further delay.”A synthetic fairytale for the era of livestreaming and monetised oversharing, Marry Me is a musical romcom that pairs a superstar celebrity, pop queen Kat Valdez (Jennifer Lopez), with Charlie (Owen Wilson), a divorced maths teacher in a shapeless cardigan. They are flung together after Kat, about to marry her boyfriend in front of 20 million viewers, discovers that he has cheated on her and plucks Charlie from the audience instead, forcibly marrying him in front of his traumatised 12-year-old daughter and the whole of Instagram. There’s something of the Notting Hill dynamic in this underpowered romance, in which the megastar, touched by the everyman appeal of her dad-joke spouting maths nerd, vacates her ivory tower to find love in the real world. It’s interesting to note that while the handsome prince in equivalent fairytales gets to retain his crown, the princess tends to be hauled down to earth. Or perhaps that’s reading too much into this silly, shallow romcom, which is as thin and predictable as Kat’s tinny pop songs.How do couples meet and fall in love in the 21st century? It is a question that sociologist Dr Marie Bergström has spent a long time pondering. “Online dating is changing the way we think about love,” she says. “One idea that has been really strong in the past – certainly in Hollywood movies – is that love is something you can bump into, unexpectedly, during a random encounter.” Another strong narrative is the idea that “love is blind, that a princess can fall in love with a peasant and love can cross social boundaries. But that is seriously challenged when you’re online dating, because it’s so obvious to everyone that you have search criteria. You’re not bumping into love – you’re searching for it.” Falling in love today tracks a different trajectory. “There is a third narrative about love – this idea that there’s someone out there for you, someone made for you, a soulmate,” says Bergström. “And you just need to find that person.” That idea is very compatible with online dating. “It pushes you to be proactive – to go and search for this person. You shouldn’t just sit at home and wait for this person.” As a result, the way we think about love – the way we depict it in films and books, the way we imagine that love works – is changing. “There is much more focus on the idea of a soulmate. And other ideas of love are fading away,” says Bergström, whose controversial French book on the subject, The New Laws of Love, has recently been published in English for the first time. Instead of meeting a partner through friends, colleagues or acquaintances, dating is often now a private, compartmentalised activity that is deliberately carried out away from prying eyes in an entirely disconnected, separate social sphere, she says. “Online dating makes it much more private. It’s a fundamental change and a key element that explains why people go on online dating platforms and what they do there – what kind of relationships come out of it.” Take Lucie, 22, a student who is interviewed in the book. “There are people I could have matched with but when I saw we had so many mutual acquaintances, I said no. It immediately deters me, because I know that whatever happens between us might not stay between us. And even at the relationship level, I don’t know if it’s healthy to have so many friends in common.” It’s stories like these about the separation of dating from other parts of life that Bergström increasingly uncovered in exploring themes for her book. A researcher at the French Institute for Demographic Studies in Paris, she spent 13 years between 2007 and 2020 researching European and North American online dating platforms and conducting interviews with their users and founders. Unusually, she also managed to gain access to the anonymised user data collected by the platforms themselves. She argues that the nature of dating has been fundamentally transformed by online platforms. “In the western world, courtship has always been tied up and very closely associated with ordinary social activities, like leisure, work, school or parties. There has never been a specifically dedicated place for dating.” In the past, using, for example, a personal ad to find a partner was a marginal practice that was stigmatised, precisely because it turned dating into a specialised, insular activity. But online dating is now so popular that studies suggest it is the third most common way to meet a partner in Germany and the US. “We went from this situation where it was considered to be weird, stigmatised and taboo to being a very normal way to meet people.” Having popular spaces that are specifically created for privately meeting partners is “a really radical historical break” with courtship traditions. For the first time, it is easy to constantly meet partners who are outside your social circle. Plus, you can compartmentalise dating in “its own space and time”, separating it from the rest of your social and family life. Dating is also now – in the early stages, at least – a “domestic activity”. Instead of meeting people in public spaces, users of online dating platforms meet partners and start chatting to them from the privacy of their homes. This was especially true during the pandemic, when the use of platforms increased. “Dating, flirting and interacting with partners didn’t stop because of the pandemic. On the contrary, it just took place online. You have direct and individual access to partners. So you can keep your sexual life outside your social life and ensure people in your environment don’t know about it.” Alix, 21, another student in the book, says: “I’m not going to date a guy from my university because I don’t want to see him every day if it doesn’t work out. I don’t want to see him with another girl either. I just don’t want complications. That’s why I prefer it to be outside all that.” The first and most obvious consequence of this is that it has made access to casual sex much easier. Studies show that relationships formed on online dating platforms tend to become sexual much faster than other relationships. A French survey found that 56% of couples start having sex less than a month after they meet online, and a third first have sex when they have known each other less than a week. By comparison, 8% of couples who meet at work become sexual partners within a week – most wait several months. “On online dating platforms, you see people meeting a lot of sexual partners,” says Bergström. It is easier to have a short-term relationship, not just because it’s easier to engage with partners – but because it’s easier to disengage, too. “These are people who you do not know from elsewhere, that you do not need to see again.” This can be sexually liberating for some users. “You have a lot of sexual experimentation going on.” Bergström thinks this is particularly significant because of the double standards still applied to women who “sleep around”, pointing out that “women’s sexual behaviour is still judged differently and more severely than men’s”. By using online dating platforms, women can engage in sexual behaviour that would be considered “deviant” and simultaneously maintain a “respectable” image in front of their friends, colleagues and relations. “They can separate their social image from their sexual behaviour.” This is equally true for anyone who enjoys socially stigmatised sexual practices. “They have easier access to partners and sex.” Perhaps counterintuitively, even though people from a wide range of different backgrounds use online dating platforms, Bergström found users usually seek partners from their own social class and ethnicity. “In general, online dating platforms do not break down barriers or frontiers. They tend to reproduce them.” In the future, she predicts these platforms will play an even bigger and more important role in the way couples meet, which will reinforce the view that you should separate your sex life from the rest of your life. “Now, we’re in a situation where a lot of people meet their casual partners online. I think that could very easily turn into the norm. And it’s considered not very appropriate to interact and approach partners at a friend’s place, at a party. There are platforms for that. You should do that elsewhere. I think we’re going to see a kind of confinement of sex.” Overall, for Bergström, the privatisation of dating is part of a wider movement towards social insularity, which has been exacerbated by lockdown and the Covid crisis. “I believe this tendency, this evolution, is negative for social mixing and for being confronted and surprised by other people who are different to you, whose views are different to your own.” People are less exposed, socially, to people they haven’t specifically chosen to meet – and that has broader consequences for the way people in society interact and reach out to each other. “We need to think about what it means to be in a society that has moved inside and closed down,” she says. As Penelope, 47, a divorced working mother who no longer uses online dating platforms, puts it: “It’s helpful when you see someone with their friends, how they are with them, or if their friends tease them about something you’ve noticed, too, so you know it’s not just you. When it’s only you and that person, how do you get a sense of what they’re like in the world?” Some names have been changedA restaurant in Bloomington, Indiana, has eliminated tipping and is instead raising hourly wages for its employees. An eatery in Portland, Oregon, replaced optional tipping with a mandatory service fee. A restaurant group in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, eliminated tips and raised their minimum wages to $16 an hour. A Texas brew-pub is touting its no-tipping policy as the main reason behind its low employee turnover. There’s no argument that a tipping model has its problems. “The case against tipping is compelling,” writes Kathryn Campo Bowen on Eater.com. “It facilitates racism, sexism and widespread wage theft; perpetuates a growing income gap between front- and back-of-house staff, particularly in cities like New York and San Francisco; and contributes to a stigma that service work is transitory.” And if you think that the “no-tipping” model is new and brought on because of the pandemic’s impact on restaurant workers, you’re mistaken. The practice in the US goes back to the early 20th century and became widely popular in the 1920s when prohibition cut into restaurants’ profits. But by the 2000s, a number of well-known proprietors (including famous restaurateur Danny Meyer) implemented, with much fanfare, no-tip policies in their eateries. A survey in 2016 found that of 503 randomly sampled restaurateurs, 18% said they had already adopted no-tipping policies, 29% said they planned to do the same and 17% said they would consider implementing no-tipping if others did. The no-tipping trend seemed to have reached a tipping point. And then … the trend reversed itself. So what happened? Turns out the tipping model was hurting restaurants because they couldn’t suddenly absorb the higher cost of wages. Maybe the brew-pub in Boerne, Texas (population 18,232) can get by with charging their limited audience higher prices. But restaurants in more competitive markets just can’t do that unless everyone rises prices together and that’s not going to happen anytime soon. But there was a much bigger problem: Meyer and others learned that eliminating tips hurt their employees. “The numbers don’t lie,” David Stockwell, the owner of an Italian bistro in Brooklyn told the New York Times. “We thought it was the rare instance when a good business decision lined up with a good ethical decision. But we realized all the problems that came with the model started rearing their heads in our business.” Stockwell’s restaurant had opened tip-free in 2016 but then reintroduced tipping in 2018. Meyer ended his no-tip policies. So did many other high-profile eateries. They couldn’t recruit people. They couldn’t retain good workers. Should this be surprising? Not to me. When I was in Australia a few years ago I ate at a bunch of places and was told never to leave a tip because employees were already fairly compensated. Similar models are common in many other parts of the world. Even in the UK, which I visit frequently, leaving a 20% tip as I normally do raises more than a few eyebrows. So why not here in the US? It’s because the US is, at its core, an entrepreneurial, free-market culture. And tipping is an entrepreneurial model. Customers are conditioned to tip and employees are conditioned to earn their tips – like any entrepreneur. And like any entrepreneur the better an employee – and their organization, and their team – the more money is made. “We treat our sections like our own small businesses,” write six workers with more than 50 years of experience in the restaurant industry. “To us, the restaurant floor is an interwoven system of independent entrepreneurs that runs like a well-oiled machine. We have no issue with an increased minimum wage for non-tipped workers, but for our industry the tipping model works for the guests, the employees and the company.” I have countless clients that are endlessly searching for ways to motivate their employees. They try team building apps. They give out awards. They offer performance bonuses. If only they had the built-in motivational tool that is the tip. When implemented the right way, it is a tool that turns an employee into a partner. It is all the motivation needed. Because in the end, tipping is more than just a wage and great workers want more than just a “fair wage”. They’re about making money for both themselves and their organizations. Tipping is the ultimate profit-sharing plan. It’s a chance for workers to have more control over their financial welfare. It gives them some skin in the game. If a restaurant is doing well because it’s safely operated, properly managed and delivers great food, and customers are enjoying the experience, then they will usually tip. The better the experience the better the tips. And when that happens, everyone – from the wait staff to the dishwashers – can share in the business’s success.Plans to make pornography websites carry out age checks are a “privacy minefield” thatcould lead to a digital ID system for accessing the internet, privacy campaigners have warned. Ministers confirmed this week that social media sites hosting large amounts of pornographic material, such as Twitter and Reddit, would also have to work under the same age-verification rules as adult content sites. It means the sites would have to introduce systems to remove adult material in the UK, or introduce age checks to determine whether users are over 18. The proposed changes to the online safety bill were targeted primarily at commercial pornography publishers, but privacy groups have warned that the move could establish the principle of age-gating across the internet. Big Brother Watch, a privacy campaign group, said the new age verification policy was a “privacy minefield”. Mark Johnson, legal and policy officer at Big Brother Watch, said the proposed amendment to the legislation could pave the way for a digital ID system for the internet. He said: “The online safety bill presents a clear attempt to age-gate the internet. This new announcement could lead to a new digital ID system for the internet more widely, even for sites like Twitter. This would be devastating for free expression and privacy and would inevitably result in digital exclusion.” Privacy campaigners are concerned that stringent age verification procedures will discriminate against people who wish to remain anonymous online, while requiring people to log in to commercial porn sites could expose them to the threat of blackmail or having their careers destroyed. Open Rights Group, which campaigns for privacy and free speech online, said there was “absolutely no question” that children should be protected from harmful content – but the changes would expose internet users to surveillance and discrimination. Mariano delli Santi, the legal and policy officer at Open Rights Group, said: “While the government argues that this is about porn websites, what is being proposed is a generalised duty to verify internet viewers’ age on websites and services with user-to-user content. This brings into scope not only pornographic websites but also search engines, social medias, blogs and almost the entirety of the internet as we know it.” Large sums of money have been invested in British age verification companies, with pornography age checks often perceived to be the vanguard that leads towards wider scrutiny for all sorts of sites and uses. If the British model is then copied elsewhere in the world, it could mean a boon for the businesses that make it work in the UK. A spokesperson for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport said claims that the internet would be “age-gated” showed a misunderstanding of the bill, which could be presented to parliament in an updated form within weeks. “We are not ‘age-gating’ the internet and this is a misunderstanding of how the bill will work. In-scope platforms will have a duty to protect children from harmful content, such as pornography, but those which do not pose a risk to children will not have the same duties,” said the spokesperson. “The bill does not mandate the use of specific technologies to uphold these duties, but age verification methods used by firms will have to be secure, effective and protect people’s privacy. The regulator Ofcom will hold them to account.” Under the bill, companies that fail to implement robust age checks face the threat of a fine of up to 10% of their global revenue or having their site blocked in the UK. Businesses that publish commercial pornography online will be required to tell Ofcom, the communications regulator, how they plan to verify users’ ages and the watchdog will either approve the measures or ask companies to introduce tougher methods. Beeban Kidron, the crossbench peer behind the Age Appropriate Design Code, which requires internet sites to protect children’s data online, said privacy was “at the heart” of protecting children but said parents were “desperately calling” for better protection of children online. She said: “It is crucial is that the statutory guidance on age checking that will accompany the restrictions on sites hosting pornography and other age restricted services are privacy preserving. Only through such a robust set of standards will we be able to ensure that any age check system, whatever the technological approach, is private, secure, clearly defined – and establishes age not identity. Nothing less will do.”Today in a nutshell: Actual real snow arrived suddenly in Beijing and disrupted events Next up: There is still some curling and ice hockey to come today. Tomorrow we will get the rescheduled freeski slopestyle qualification with Eileen Gu, and the medals in the ice dance competition One of the criticism’s of hosting the Winter Olympics in Beijing has been the negative environmental impact of the Games’ reliance on artificial snow. Well, not today at the men’s 4x10km cross-country relay, where the real-thing hampered the athletes – and the spectators – as the Russian Olympics Committee (ROC) team won a pretty slow race in difficult conditions. To put it into context, a winning time of 1:54:50 was over 20 minutes slower than the equivalent race at Pyeongchang in 2018. Norway were second, France third, on a gruelling course that includes 400m of climbing in the 10km. Rather them than me. The snow also disrupted events elsewhere, with Eileen Gu’s much anticipated qualifying run in the freeski slopestyle postponed. Organisers said the storm had left too much loose snow on the freestyle course and that in order to ensure the safety of athletes, they decided to postpone the events. The second training session for the women’s downhill race was cancelled, but the men’s alpine skiing giant slalom went ahead with delays. “Definitely, the light is more than skiable, it just makes it difficult. I like it,” Norway’s Henrik Kristoffersen said after his first run. Jamaica’s Benjamin Alexander put it more succinctly at the end of one of his runs, as he was caught on camera saying “Frickin’ hell, that was hard!” The gold eventually went to Switzerland’s Marco Odermatt who finished with a combined time of 2:09:35, putting him 0.19 seconds ahead of Slovenia’s Zan Kranjec. Saudi Arabia’s Fayik Abdi, his nation’s first ever Winter Olympian, finished 44th, two places ahead of Alexander. Richardson Viano, the first person to ever represent Haiti at a Winter Olympics, did not finish his first run. Indoors and away from the elements, victories for both the British men and British women in the curling this morning have got their campaigns truly back on track. Sweden top the men’s round robin table at the moment, unbeaten after five matches. Great Britain and Switzerland are joint second with three wins and one defeat each. Team GB’s men face a Denmark team yet to win in the evening match. Switzerland are unbeaten in the women’s contest. Japan, Great Britain, Sweden and the US are also in the hunt for semi-final places. Marte Olsbu Roeiseland took the gold in the women’s 10km pursuit biathlon. It is her third gold of the Games so far, and she still has the 12.5km mass start race on Saturday to go. The play-off and quarter-finals brackets in the men’s ice hockey will be finalised today. At the time of writing, the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) are the only team guaranteed a quarter-final slot. Czech Republic, Slovakia, Switzerland, Latvia and China are all destined for the play-offs. Finland will advance automatically as the winner of Group C after a remarkable 4-3 win over Sweden, who blew a 3-0 lead at the end of the second period and lost in overtime! Things you might have missed Jaclyn Narracott took Australia’s first ever medal in skeleton, finishing second behind Hannah Neise of Germany. “Indescribable, unbelievable, surreal,” Narracott said in an interview with Channel Seven. “It’s just everything that I’ve dreamt of. And to actually realise it ... it’s going to take a while to sink in. I would love this to be the catalyst to get more girls back into our sport. There’s no reason why we can’t be competitive at every Olympics and every World Cup.” Australia now have a record medal haul for a Winter Olympics … but Team GB face the real prospect of going home empty-handed. Slalom gold medalist Petra Vlhova is leaving the Beijing Olympics early due to an inflamed left ankle tendon and will miss the Alpine combined event where she had another medal chance. Marius Lindvik won a thrilling super-massive-enormous-gigantic hill ski jumping competition for Norway yesterday, stopping Japan’s Ryoyu Kobayashi making it a double gold with an incredible second jump of 140m. The briefing’s picture of the day Kaillie Humphries of the US leads the first ever women’s monobob after the the first two heats earlier today. It is a brand new event introduced for women only. Humphries went just over a second faster than her nearest rival, Canada’s Christine de Bruin. She said: “I know what it means to represent the United States. I’m so proud and honoured to be able to be here because nothing in life is guaranteed.” What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Sunday 13 February 8.05pm Curling – Team GB play Denmark, the US face China, and Italy v Switzerland are the final men’s games of the day 🥌 8.14pm Short track speed skating – the men’s 500m final 🥇 9.10pm Ice hockey – China’s ringers face Canada and the US face Germany as Group A wraps up in the men’s competition 🏒 9.56pm Speed skating – the women’s 500m 🥇 Tomorrow – Monday 14 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – would you be surprised to learn that there is curling all day long? 🥌 9.15am Figure skating – have they put the most romantic couples’ dancing on Valentine’s Day on purpose? Your guess is as good as mine. Twenty couples will free dance for the medals 🥇 10am-11.01am and 7pm-8pm Freestyle skiing – weather permitting, the morning is the rescheduled women’s freeski slopestyle qualification, the evening is the women’s aerials final 🥇 9.30am and 11am and 8.05pm and 9.40pm Bobsleigh – the first two sessions are the conclusion of the women’s monobob, the final two are heats one and two of the men’s 2-man contest 🥇 9.30am-11am and 1.30pm-3pm Snowboard – big air qualification day, the women go in the morning, the men in the afternoon 12.10pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – it is semi-finals day for the women, Canada v Switzerland and Finland v US 🏒 6pm-8.06pm Ski jumping – the men are doing their team competition 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 8pm Beijing time … with Norway back on top 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 9 🥈 5 🥉 7 total: 21 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 8 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 14 3 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 6 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 12 4 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 5 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 11 5 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 5 🥈 3 🥉 3 total: 11 Selected others 7 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 4* 🥈 4 🥉 7 total: 15 8 🇨🇳 China 🥇 4 🥈 3 🥉 2 total: 9 14 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 1 🥈 4 🥉 8 total: 13 15 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 19 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 - 🇬🇧 Great Britain 🥇 0 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 😱 [*includes the contested figure skating team event gold medal] The last word I think the intention is there but the execution has failed, the system has failed us as athletes ... we really need to take a step back and think about what the objective is. Sadly, it becomes that if you have money and you live in a certain area, you reap the benefits, and of course that it always going to happen, but how can we level a playing field enough so that people can at least try the sport? – Jamaica’s Jazmine Fenlator-Victorian, speaking about how the introduction of the monobob was supposed to widen participation in the sport.How do you repent an action that has ripped up someone’s life entirely? Carey Crim’s gut-wrenching play is a visceral interrogation of the lasting effects and consequences of rape. Weighty and forceful, it asks how life can continue after panoramic trauma. An interracial lesbian couple, Allison (Flora Montgomery) and Nadine (Amanda Bright), have successfully given Allison’s 20-year-old daughter, Eleanor (Meaghan Martin), the happiest possible childhood. But, now she’s announced her desire to find her father, their attempts to navigate the difficulties of parenting are set to come unwound. Long protesting that Eleanor was a product of a one-night-stand, and her only sexual experience with a man, Allison is forced to acknowledge head-on the years of suffering she has secreted. Montgomery gives a seismic performance as Allison. Sustaining a balance of composure and agony, after a half-hearted explanation from Eleanor’s father where he reasons he was “too drunk” to remember the events of a college frat party, she spits back that he raped her. Not once doubting his culpability, the audience shares her tears as she comes face to face with him for the first time. Despite a stretched-out beginning, once Eleanor’s father’s identity has been revealed, it hangs, dominant over the drama. Directed by Katharine Farmer, the stillness of the early home scenes knot into manic disintegration. Mid-panic attack Eleanor begins to question her existence; “Did you ever regret having me?” she breathes. Her mother’s response: “Never, not once,” closes the brutal 90 minutes. Left with questions over the shape of this family’s future, as the three women circle each other we are given hope they’ll find a way to survive. • Never Not Once is at the Park, London, until 5 March. • In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support for rape and sexual abuse on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlCentral banks are getting twitchy about inflation. Cost of living pressures are rising just about everywhere and the relaxed mood of last autumn has been replaced by an urgency that could soon become panic. In the US, where inflation is at its highest in four decades, the latest chatter on Wall Street is that the Federal Reserve will take every opportunity to raise interest rates between now and the end of the year, seven times in all. Inflation figures for the UK are out on Wednesday, and even though little change is expected this month from the 5.4% recorded in December, further increases are expected by the spring. Bank of England forecasts should be taken with a pinch of salt because they have been wrong for the past year, but for what it’s worth Threadneedle Street now predicts inflation to peak at just over 7%. The Bank of England and the Fed are getting stick for waiting so long before taking steps to rein in inflation. The US and the UK economies, it is said, are overheating as the threat from the pandemic recedes, one reason being that central banks have delayed putting up borrowing costs. This might seem a compelling argument but the idea that the US, the UK and the big economies of the eurozone are in the middle of a rampant boom doesn’t square with the facts. The fastest growing G7 economy over the past two years has been the US, where output has increased by 1.5% on average. The next best-performing country has been France, where growth has averaged less than 0.5% a year. UK output is 0.4% below its pre-pandemic level, while Germany and Italy have still more ground to make up. So where is the inflation coming from? The answer is that prices are rising more quickly than they were because of supply-side pressures. As economies lifted restrictions and demand has returned to more normal – although not boom – conditions, severe bottlenecks have emerged. Everything from computer chips to natural gas has been in short supply, and that has pushed up inflation. This was the explanation the Fed and the Bank of England trotted out last summer and autumn when price pressures first started to bite, and it was broadly right. Yes, they said, interest rates would need to be raised from their emergency levels but there was no great urgency because their economies were still operating short of where they would have been in the absence of Covid-19. In any event, increasing the cost of borrowing would have zero impact on global energy prices. The Bank of England had an additional problem, which was that Rishi Sunak removed some of the support the Treasury was providing for the economy last autumn. With the benefit of hindsight, the end of the furlough did not lead to the feared rise in unemployment, but there was no way of knowing that at the time. As a result, the Bank’s monetary policy committee responded to the chancellor’s tightening of policy by keeping interest rates lower than they might otherwise have been. As the National Institute for Economic and Social Research pointed out last week, it would have been preferable had policy been the other way round, with a less aggressive approach by Sunak providing space for the Bank to raise rates modestly. The Bank of England and the Fed subsequently realised price pressures were more acute than they had predicted, while unemployment fell more quickly. This raised concerns that workers would use the bargaining power provided by a tight labour market to secure higher pay awards. If, say, an annual inflation rate of 7.5% in the US led to salary increases of 8%, a wage-price spiral redolent of the 1970s would then set in. In the short-term, inflationary pressures are likely to persist. The first three months of 2022 will be an echo of last summer as restrictions are lifted and economies open up. Those people who have built up savings during lockdown now have cash to spare to buy a new car or book a foreign holiday. Firms will have trouble filling vacancies, while energy costs will remain high as long as there is a threat of Ukraine being invaded. The cost of a barrel of oil is already closing in on $100. Things look a lot trickier from the spring onwards. In the UK, energy bills and taxes both go up in April, and it will become clear to many workers that their wages are not keeping up with inflation. Cost increases that were initially inflationary will turn deflationary as they add to costs for business and squeeze consumer spending power. Against this backdrop, the Bank of England needs to calibrate its response carefully (as does the Fed). Central banks clearly feel their credibility will be at risk if they allow inflation to take hold, and that means a more aggressive approach to interest rates than seemed likely as recently as late last year. There is a way that central banks can emerge with their credibility intact. If they are right in believing inflation is currently a supply-side problem, only a limited tightening of policy will be needed. Inflation will come down with only a small increase in unemployment. The Bank and the Fed will then be the heroes of the hour. There is, of course, an alternative scenario in which central banks act tough but still damage their credibility, which is what will happen if they add to the pain already coming the way of their economies through interest-rate overkill. The growing risk of that would quickly turn the recovery of early 2022 into the recession of early 2023.From Ryūsuke Hamaguchi, a director who is already figuring prominently in awards nominations with Drive My Car, comes another delicately humane story of chance connections and unexpected emotional links. Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy premiered in Berlin last year, winning the Silver Bear, but was somewhat overshadowed by the ambition and scope of the Cannes prize-winning Drive My Car, which debuted a few months later. But this female-led triptych of stories, with its deft, empathetic camerawork and intimate, intricately crafted character sketches, is a minor masterpiece in its own right. Unapologetically dialogue-heavy, each segment is given levity by a certain playfulness of approach. The first story, about a young woman who realises that her best friend’s new boyfriend is her own ex, concludes with a teasing dual ending. The second – the darkest – deals with an attempted honeytrap seduction with a terrific extended scene powered by a sparky erotic charge. And the final segment takes a gentle sci-fi premise – a devastating computer virus – but relegates it to the background in favour of a story of mistaken identities between two women. The unexpected warmth and embrace of this final story makes it the most beguiling, but all three are tantalising glimpses executed by a film-maker who brings the precision of the very best short story writing to his cinema.For the visitor, the Hayward Gallery’s extraordinary new exhibition of the late work of the French-American artist Louise Bourgeois is a major undertaking. Thanks both to its size – the show gathers together some 90 collages, sculptures and installations, many of which have never been shown here before – and to the ever-confounding spaces of the gallery itself, inside it takes a little while to get oriented. The eyes must adjust to the Hayward’s permanent dusk; the body must fight a powerful sense of expectation. You want both to rush around in a frenzy and to commune with everything for minutes at a time. In the end, I did two circuits, one fast and one slow, and even then I wasn’t satisfied. Enfolded in the dark pleats of Bourgeois’s mind, the longest glance still seems somehow to be cursory. Here is a series of caverns, each one of which demands to be fully explored. What’s strange about this spirit of investigation is that Bourgeois’s practice would appear to work against it. Delicate though she may sometimes be, nuance is more or less unknown to her. This is art that’s easy to read, the messages it semaphores close to trite at moments (this may be one reason why the exhibition’s curator, Hayward director Ralph Rugoff, has kept his own interpretations to a minimum). What else could Femme Maison (2001), in which a fabric house has been stitched to a female torso, be about but the burdens of women? What more can be said of Do Not Abandon Me (1999), a piece that comprises the figure of a naked woman and her newborn baby, once you’ve finished speculating to which of them – mother or child – the fear suggested by its title most applies? And yet this lack of ambiguity impedes our curiosity and excitement not one iota. Why? I think it has to do, sometimes, with her media. Even if we’re not allowed to touch it, looking at Bourgeois’s art is a haptic experience: her textures are almost as thrilling as her feeling for narrative drama (for melodrama, sometimes). Mostly, though, it’s connected to a certain lurid intimacy. As Robert Hughes said, her work has a “queer, troglodytic quality, like something pale under a log”. Ugh! you think. And then: but just let me take another look. The Woven Child focuses exclusively on the last two decades of the artist’s long career, an astonishing burst of late life creativity in fabric and textiles that was born, in part, of memories of her childhood (she died in 2010, aged 98). We know that her growing up was traumatic – she came to regard her father’s affair with her teenage governess as a form of child abuse – but this fiery flurry isn’t only to do with psychological pain. Bourgeois’s parents were tapestry restorers, and in old age she returned to her roots, incorporating needles, bobbins, embroidery and weaving into her art. If everyday objects are here transformed into miniature horror shows – in Untitled (1996), cow bones are used for coat hangers; in Untitled (2010), pale woollen berets become swollen, severed breasts – what’s displayed is also intensely domestic. Her totemic “progressions”, which revisit her vertical, segmented “personages” of the 1950s, are now made from materials such as bed linen and tapestry work (the latter bring to mind church kneelers). Eugénie Grandet (2009), a series of 16 panels that uses the handkerchiefs and tea towels from the trousseau she brought with her when she moved to the US seven decades before, is (to me, at least) a kind of update of the samplers girls sewed in the 19th century, practising their stitches. (This piece is named, of course, for Balzac’s heroine, a character with whom Bourgeois identified on the grounds that her father, too, was oppressive.) How to pick out things for special attention in a show in which almost everything is fascinating, horrifying, strange, eerie, beautiful? The first object the eye sees is Cell VII (1998), one of Bourgeois’s enclosures: installations in which personal objects – in this case, a scale model of her childhood home in Choisy-le-Roi, and clothes that belonged both to her and her mother – may be spied as if through a keyhole. The peeping tom effect induced by such storytelling – a feeling of transgression on your part which, paradoxically, only brings you closer to the artist – is not, I should say, unusual. Moving on, I almost blushed at High Heels (1998), a kneeling figure angled carefully to expose both her buttocks and the soles of her impossible shoes. The curator describes The Reticent Child (2003), in which a series of soft pink figures – they represent the birth and early life of the artist’s youngest son, Alain – appear contorted in the concave mirror behind them, as a “diorama”, and in a literal sense, this is correct. Really, though, it’s so much more private – and dynamic – than the word suggests: a flickering home movie as shot by Dr Freud. Is there a spider? (A favourite motif of Bourgeois, arachnids, those super-weavers, stand for mothers in her world.) Yes, there are several, the biggest of which, Spider (1997), is in the upstairs gallery. This huge steel monster straddles a mesh “cell”, inside which are more of the artist’s belongings, among them a bottle of Bourgeois’s favourite scent, Shalimar. “The spider is a repairer,” she said, and perhaps this sense of restoration – a tapestry-covered chair is also inside the cage – is one reason why this piece induces a creeping sense of contentment as you circle it. More likely, though, it’s simply the result of its triumphant size. Bourgeois was doing what she did long before feminism finally made her fashionable; it wasn’t until the retrospective of her work at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1982 that she began to come out of the shadows as an artist. Nevertheless, it is inspiriting, at this point in the 21st century, to be able to claim her as one of our own; as a warrior who both embraces and disdains the domestic realm, who reads it as both haven and battlefield. The Shalimar, in particular, made me smile. Those heady woody-smoky-vanilla notes floating, in my imagination, in the air around all that metal! Somehow, this encapsulates Bourgeois for me. The female experience is her dominion, and it does not diminish her one bit to say so. But this realm must not merely be seen. It must be sensed, deeply, from within. Louise Bourgeois: The Woven Child is at the Hayward Gallery, London, until 15 MayLike so much else, the momentum built up by Big Thief’s two excellent 2019 albums was halted by the pandemic. They began work on their fifth album almost two years ago, but – with lockdowns and three of the band releasing solo material (with mixed results) – it’s been a lengthy gestation. In part, though, that was because they chose to record its 20 songs in four sessions, each in a very different location (upstate New York; Topanga Canyon, California; the Colorado Rockies; Tucson, Arizona), each with a different engineer. The result is their most varied and expansive record to date. With the running order hopping between the four sessions, there’s the feel of a carefully curated mixtape to proceedings, stark balladry rubbing shoulders with raucous hoedowns (from the Tucson sessions, thanks to the addition of Mat Davidson‘s fiddle) and bucolic country rock. As with all the best records, there are fresh highlights with every listen: the intimate Change, as affecting as Orange from their third album UFOF; the infectious Spud Infinity transcends the awfulness of its title to cut its metaphysical lyrics with references to garlic bread and potato knish; the loose, distorted groove of Little Things; Love Love Love’s meandering guitar parts that could have come from a Crazy Horse record – the list goes on and on. Wonderful.If you want proof that the process known as nuclear fusion can produce energy at scale somewhere in the universe, you need only look at the night sky: each pinprick of light is a natural nuclear fusion-powered reactor. For decades, scientists have sought to bring the power source of stars down to Earth and, in a stunning result recently announced, the Culham Centre for Fusion Energy in Oxfordshire has reached a new landmark in sparking and sustaining a mini star. Scientists working on a doughnut-shaped machine called Jet, or the Joint European Torus, were able to double the previous world record (set in 1997) for energy released by fusion reactions. While the experiment ran, the output of fusion power was equivalent to four onshore wind turbines – a step towards power production at an industrial scale. In keeping with Jet’s design and objectives, less fusion power was generated than was needed to heat the fuel. In fact, no experiment has yet yielded more energy from fusion than has been used to kick off the reactions – this remains an outstanding goal of fusion scientists around the world. What the latest results provide is a compelling indication that bigger and better star machines that work similarly to Jet, such as the internationally funded Iter project now under construction in France, will be able to produce more power than they consume. Also important is that although this experiment only ran for five seconds, the reactions stopped not because of a disruption within the fuel, as has previously been typical, but because supporting equipment got too hot. Cryogenic cooling systems will prevent this on the next generation of machines, so the leap from five seconds to five minutes, or five hours, or even longer, now seems feasible. Why should the rest of society care whether these scientists can recreate star power? Fusion energy has the potential to provide clean power on a planetary scale. If it can be perfected, there’s enough fuel for everyone on Earth to use as much energy annually as the average American for at least thousands of years, and probably millions. This form of power doesn’t produce carbon dioxide or long-lived radioactive waste, and there’s no chance of the meltdowns like those at Chernobyl and Fukushima. Today, energy is in short supply, is the leading cause of the climate crisis, and is being used as a dangerous geopolitical chess piece. You may well wonder why fusion energy hasn’t yet been cracked. Reproducing conditions similar to those found in stars, where fusion thrives, is a terrifying technological challenge – perhaps humanity’s greatest ever. Fusion machines must reach temperatures between four and 10 times hotter than the sun’s core. On Jet, a web of invisible magnetic fields 80,000 times stronger than the Earth’s is needed to control and confine the fuel. The fuel itself is a swirling mass of charged particles that is susceptible to instabilities that can halt the reactions in milliseconds. But fusion scientists are on a roll. In August 2021, a US experiment came excruciatingly close to smashing fusion’s most anticipated goal of producing more energy than was put in. Although the total energy was modest at just a 60th of Jet’s new record, the US facility beat its own previous record, set in 2018, 23 times over. In December, China’s Experimental Advanced Superconducting Tokamak (East) controlled matter at 150m degrees centigrade for 1,000 seconds, albeit without the special types of hydrogen fuel that will eventually be needed on commercial reactors. Meanwhile, there is a burgeoning private fusion industry: in the last three months of 2021, the total investment more than doubled to $4.2bn. To close out a stellar six months, Culham’s experiment has shown the world that sustained high power output from fusion reactions is possible. Despite the momentum, there’s some way to go before fusion powers your house. Even the most flush private fusion firm is only promising a pilot plant by 2025, and the current plans for publicly funded laboratories won’t see star power on the grid for three decades. We will need fission and renewables at immense scale much, much sooner to combat the climate crisis. Even so, it’s time to get excited about star power. Technology and research have always been the key to growing human wealth and prosperity. If fusion energy can be successfully rolled out, it will be a landmark in human history akin to the adoption of electricity or the invention of powered flight. Because our need for clean energy is acute, the sooner it does come, the better. But it will still be immensely useful regardless of when it arrives. And, as with any technology, progress doesn’t come with the passage of the years but with investment and societal will. With both, fusion could arrive sooner than we expect. Whatever the precise timeline, the advances of the past six months – and even the past week – suggest that star power has a very bright future ahead. Arthur Turrell is the author of The Star Builders: Nuclear Fusion and the Race to Power the PlanetKamila Valieva is so talented she does not need to take drugs, her choreographer has insisted, as the brilliant 15-year-old Russian skater waits to see whether she will be sent home from the Winter Games. The court of arbitration for sport met by video camera on Sunday evening in Beijing to discuss Valieva’s case after she tested positive for the banned angina drug trimetazidine, and says it will announce its verdict over whether her provision suspension should be reimposed on Monday. However when Valieva’s choreographer, Alexei Zheleznyakov, was asked on Instagram why she had returned a positive sample on Christmas Day, he strongly defended his skater’s integrity. “I’m not a god, I have no idea,” he replied. “There are a lot of options, but I’m sure of one thing: Kami doesn’t touch anything forbidden in life, with her talent it’s not necessary.” Earlier on Sunday Valieva continued to train in the hope of being given the all-clear to skate in the individual event on Tuesday, where she is an overwhelming favourite to win her second gold of the Games. After her routine she was applauded by her coach Eteri Tutberidze, who herself is under the spotlight, and the Russian press. Meanwhile the scrutiny of Valieva’s support staff has increased after the World Anti-Doping Agency said it would ask its independent intelligence and investigations department to look into the coaches, doctors and other adults surrounding her. Because Valieva is under 16 Wada’s code requires that an investigation is automatically required into her support personnel. However the Olympic Games executive director Christophe Dubi said it was important to remember the “human side of this story … to think about a person of 15 in this situation”, and added: “We need to treat this situation extremely carefully.” Cas will decide on Monday whether to reintroduce a provisional suspension that was first imposed by the Russian Anti-Doping Agency last week, before a committee overturned it on appeal. A decision on whether an offence has been committed – and whether the Russian Olympic Committee will keep its team gold – will be made at a later date.How do you conquer your Fomo (fear of missing out)? Richard Orlando, Quebec Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply Surely the pandemic has put paid to Fomo? We’ve all been missing out for nearly two years. TopGyre I find that I have the perfect antidote. Whenever I might fleetingly feel any envious Fomo propelling me towards taking some new action or other, it’s immediately and decisively nullified by my constitutional Itoba (inability to be arsed). ThereisnoOwl The world is big, and full of many wonderful things. You WILL miss out on many of them. Once I accepted that, I was free to start enjoying the wonderful things right in front of me. Therapy helps a lot. PumezaAbroad I have poor self-control with my phone, failing to impose/abide by any limits I set. To combat this, I have trialled, for over two years, deleting all social media accounts. I still spend far too much time on my phone (mainly reading the Guardian), but a small positive outcome is that I have no idea what everyone else is up to, so I never fear missing out. nogoodboyo89 Ditch Facebook. Unamika (and Pennyfeather) Avoid social media if it makes you feel worse. Organise the stuff you want to do. Text your friends to go to the pub, book the gig tickets, etc. Appreciate what you have. You have to be a Zen master not to feel sad if you’ve been left out of someone’s plans. I think everyone feels like that sometimes; it’s only human. Figaro2 The answer is to not sit around waiting for people to invite you to stuff. Get your validation from pursuing the things you enjoy to the extent that you don’t have time to worry about what other people are up to. Eventually, you will reach a point where you don’t care what other people are doing and are just happy that they are having fun, too. doowenday Build a nourishing life. For me, that includes time in nature, playing with my dog, cribbage with someone dear, reading printed books, drawing, playing musical instruments, small amounts of volunteering, and giving my co-workers specific, regular, positive feedback or thanks. It also means that I plan and relish my meals, even though they are simple sweet potatoes and beans, or oatmeal, or just a great coffee or tea. Take the time to journal a bit, to better treasure your life. Even cataloguing the books you’ve read – or movies you’ve watched, or walks you’ve taken – with little notes about what birds and plants you observed. Journaling is transformative and healing. Be sure to move your body each day. Maybe choose a new skill to learn. I’m learning country line dancing at home, so I can dance with or without a partner when the pandemic abates. quiettess Live your life, not what you are told to live. That way, you don’t miss out on your life by living someone else’s idea of the perfect life. Do what makes you happy and healthy. DewinDwl Once you master the art of enjoying time by yourself and being alone, then you will probably never get Fomo again. Remember, nobody is invited to everything, and often people’s memories, recollections, descriptions, videos or photographs of events make them look and sound a lot more fun than they actually were. The chances are that, during whatever you missed out on, the people present were secretly just waiting to go home. spat321 Miss out deliberately. Stay home. The next day, ask people how the evening went. (Spoiler: average.) Then be happy that you stayed home. DerDeutsche When I was a teenager (many years ago), I longed to go to the cool youth club that the really popular girls used to go to. They used to talk about it all week and, to 14-year-old me, it sounded wonderful. One week, I was invited, too. It meant two buses there and back and an agonising time choosing what to wear beforehand. Actually, it was quite boring. DoraMarr I find misanthropy does the trick. TheGoodThief Honestly? I’m too tired now, and everyone I know in real life is too tired. The toll of the past few years has made its mark, in that it is hard to look ahead or from side to side, and Fomo has been burned away. But it has also made me appreciate simple things like tea and cake with a friend. I look forward to those things now in the way I would have looked forward to travelling or a concert before. Forestdream You should read Oliver Burkeman’s book Four Thousand Weeks. He suggests that once you accept that, because you have limited time on this earth, you’ll miss out on most things, it becomes easier to enjoy the relatively few things you are experiencing right now. Don’t rush the current activity, and so ruin the enjoyment of it, just so you can satiate your Fomo by getting on to the next experience. Enjoy the ride while it lasts. TopGyre I grew older. Fear of missing out turned into relief at situations avoided. Live your own life, not your (often imaginary) view of someone else’s. BitBoringPeter Oh yes. The older I get, the more Fobi (fear of being involved) I have. NottyImp As a subsequent question, how do I stop myself from doomscrolling? musicforpleasureNow that travel restrictions are easing, the European city break is back on. But since it’s been so long for so many of us, why stop at just one destination? Step forward the multi-city break: put three cities together, link them with easy-to-book train or bus journeys and you’ve got a full-on adventure. I decide on Spain for my first post-Covid trip, plotting a route from Bilbao to Barcelona and then on to Madrid. Together, the trio of cities promises an unbeatable combination of food, art and beaches, and an insight into three different regions. Instead of wrangling with complicated foreign rail websites, I book tickets through an app, Omio, which pulls up timetables, reserves my seats and deposits tickets on my phone. After being grounded for so long, arriving in Bilbao is almost overwhelming. The city has undergone a renaissance in the past two decades, and the banks of the Nervión river are dotted with elegant fin-de-siècle buildings and flanked with wide boulevards. I dip into the city’s charming old town, and bag a table on the buzzy Plaza Nueva – a square edged with cafés. The city is famous for its pintxos: tapas-like snacks on a slice of baguette. I pick three – mushroom, stuffed with blue cheese and Serrano ham, soft-shell crab and roasted peppers with tuna. All are lipsmackingly good. Bilbao unarguably ticks the first of my holiday wishes – amazing food – but it also delivers world-class art, thanks to the city’s iconic Guggenheim Museum. Frank Gehry’s extraordinary building – a sinuous, metallic wrap – is home to works by Mark Rothko, Jenny Holzer and Anselm Kiefer, among others. The artworks extend outside: Jeff Koons’s 12m tall, flower-clad Puppy (currently under scaffolding for a refit) guards the front entrance, while Maman – Louise Bourgeois’s huge spider – looms over the riverside walkway behind. Between the art and all the eating I don’t make it down to Bilbao’s coastline, content in the knowledge that Barcelona’s sun-kissed beaches are my next stop. It takes almost seven hours to reach the Catalan capital, but although I’ve bought plenty of books, I spend most of the time watching the spectacular Spanish landscape. The further we travel inland, the more the landscapes open up: vast, rust-hued plains that feel like something out of the Arizona desert. After Bilbao, Barcelona feels almost like another country. The sky is an unbroken blue, La Rambla seethes with tourists and when I reach the beach, the sea is dotted with swimmers. A vast cruise ship glides past and as I settle into a bar and order a plate of paella and a cold beer, it feels almost as if the pandemic never happened. The chilled-out, beachy vibe is the perfect tonic after two years of blustery walks beside English seas. Having been starved of travel for so long, it feels as if I have a free pass to be as much of a tourist as possible. I jump on the sightseeing bus, stopping off at the Fundació Joan Miró for the chance to revisit paintings by one of my all-time favourite artists. Afterwards, I visit the Parc de Montjuïc and take a ride on the cable car, which gives extraordinary views over the city’s skyline to the towering spindles of Gaudí’s Sagrada Família. After the long trek from Bilbao, the two-hour journey to Madrid passes with lightning speed. A quick hop on the tube and I’m at my hotel in the heart of the historic Habsburg district. Madrid is best explored on foot; I stroll past the sprawling frontage of the pristine Royal Palace and pause on the steps of the Almudena cathedral to hear a busker playing Spanish guitar, before tipping up at the Mercado de San Miguel, a cast-iron and glass temple to all things foodie, dating back to 1916, where I settle in the sun and eat crispy empanada, a mozzarella pintxo and a cone of crispy fried squid. The following day I satisfy all my art cravings with a visit to the extraordinary Thyssen-Bornemisza museum. Rather like a greatest hits of the art world, the walls are filled with world-famous works by everyone from Picasso to O’Keeffe. After a happy afternoon exploring Retiro Park and through the tangled, bustling streets of Sol, I end my trip up on the roof terrace of my hotel watching the sun slowly drift and fade behind the city rooftops. Madrid’s frenetic buzz feels so different to Barcelona’s laid-back, seasidey vibe and Bilbao’s bustling port that it feels as if I’ve had not one holiday but three: the perfect antidote to months of Covid curbs. Annabelle Thorpe travelled with Melia Hotels (melia.com), the Bilbao Tourist board (bilbao turismo.net) and omio.com. Doubles at the Melia Barcelona Sky cost from £81, and Palacio de los Duques, Madrid, from £214 Tales of three cities Three more European multi-city breaks by rail Brussels-Ghent-Antwerp An easy triangle, with short journeys (half an hour from Brussels to Ghent, an hour from Ghent to Antwerp), this is a great way to feast on Belgian’s wonderful food, rich history and quirky artistic culture. Begin by feasting on moules frites on the opulent Grand Place in Brussels, before exploring Ghent’s perfectly preserved medieval town, complete with guildhalls, merchants’ houses and historic squares. Finish up in arty Antwerp, with a visit to the Rubens House and a stroll through the glittering Diamond District. More info: belgiantrain.be Rome-Venice-Florence See Italy’s three big hitters in one extraordinary trip. Venice is just over four hours from Rome, with Florence almost equidistant between the two. For a snapshot of Italy’s incredibly rich art heritage, visit the Villa Borghese in Rome, the Guggenheim in Venice and the Uffizi in Florence. Get away from the crowds with lunch in the Trastavere area of Rome, hop on a boat to Murano or Burano in Venice, and take a picnic to the Cascine, Floraence’s green lunchgoasis, on the banks of the Arno. More info: italia.it Lucerne-Zermatt-St Moritz SeeAdmire the best of Switzerland’s breathtaking lakes and mountains, along with on a journey onaboard the Glacier Express, which boasts some of the most spectacular views of any train ride in the world. Stroll by the lake in Lucerne before travelling to Zermatt (around 3hr 15 mins), which offers almost as much to do in summer as winter, with walking, mountain-biking, paragliding, fishing and adventure parks on offer. From here, ride the Glacier Express to St Moritz, one of Switzerland’s glitziest resorts – it’s a four-hour journey back to Lucerne. More info: switzerland travelcentre.com • This article was amended on 18 February 2022 to remove a reference to “Mediterranean food” in connection with Bilbao. The writer was referring to a style of food rather than the geographical location of Bilbao which is in the north of Spain.Northern Ireland’s Stormont assembly faces collapse “forever” because of Democratic Unionist tactics, a rival party leader has warned. Only two years after power sharing was restored following a three-year hiatus, Doug Beattie, the leader of the Ulster Unionist party, said the DUP’s decision to resign from the first minister role 10 days ago, combined with its veiled threats not to return to power sharing unless the UK government meets its Brexit protocol demands, is putting democratic institutions at risk. Northern Ireland faces one of its most transformative elections on 5 May, with opinion polls projecting Sinn Féin will overtake the DUP as the largest party in Stormont. Beattie fears the DUP is signalling it will refuse to share power if it is returned as the second-largest party, and is using the protocol as an early excuse. This is despite the party knowing “the protocol will still be there” after the elections, because the Conservatives have made clear it is not being scrapped. “Stormont will be gone if Sinn Féin come back as the largest party and the DUP second. It will be gone forever,” said Beattie. “The UK government and Northern Ireland Office are being dragged around by the scruff of the neck by the DUP. “They are creating divisive politics and until somebody stands up to them and says ‘no, you can’t do this’, it’s not going to end well. And that’s what’s happening here,” he adds. The Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, said all unionists parties should give a commitment they would nominate ministers in the event of Sinn Féin becoming the largest party after the next election. The UUP has refused to give a public commitment, but is unlikely to be in a position to take the deputy role. Beattie’s party is on 14% in the polls, in joint third position with the Alliance party, while the DUP stands at 17%. The DUP has repeatedly refused to say whether it would accept the office of deputy first minister, a sign of things to come if Sinn Féin is victoriious, critics believe. Legally, under the Good Friday agreement the deputy first minister role is equal to first minister with parties sharing power at the top equally. Last week, the DUP leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, gave the electorate another glimpse of its strategy, warning it would be “difficult” to return to Stormont if the protocol was not resolved by the elections, remarks that horrified rivals. Speaking from his offices in Portadown, Beattie accused Boris Johnson of being part of what he believes is naked electioneering. “The UK government had the opportunity to legislate to make the first minister and deputy minister equal in name. They chose not to. They are both gambling with Northern Ireland. It is beyond reckless,” he said. Beattie has cast his party as more liberal and progressive than his rivals, but is as opposed to the protocol as the DUP. However, Beattie believes his party respects democracy. He said: “The difference between us and the DUP is we’re not willing to collapse institutions to do something that we can do through dialogue and engagement and speaking to people.” The UUP has presented the Tories and the EU with a five-point blueprint to fix the protocol. It includes the elimination of all checks on goods from Great Britain destined to stay in Northern Ireland through a self-certification process, a new law enabling fines for any company in GB that certified goods to NI but sent them on to the Republic, and a legal indemnity for the EU against cross-border breaches of the new protocol. It also wants to see Stormont’s four-year rolling vote on keeping or ditching the protocol scrapped, as well as tackling the role of the European court of justice and the “democratic deficit” that leaves Northern Ireland with no say on potential new laws coming out of the EU. However, Beattie does not trust Johnson’s repeated promises to deliver on fixing the protocol. “I do not trust him a jot. He’s all rhetoric and soundbites. I don’t dislike him personally, but he is just not connected. I don’t think he’s a good prime minister,” said Beattie. He said he had faith in Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, but asked “what on earth was Johnson doing giving her the Brexit role?” when she had to deal with Ukraine and China. The DUP was approached for comment. • This article was amended on 14 February 2022. Power sharing was restored two years ago, not one as stated in an earlier version.A leading media defence lawyer has urged MPs to show “guts” and act to protect public interest journalism in England and Wales from the existential threat she says is posed by public figures and bodies attempting to shut down criticism. Caroline Kean, a partner at Wiggin, represented the journalist Catherine Belton when she was sued by multiple Russian billionaires including Roman Abramovich and the Russian state oil company Rosneft. Kean is also defending FT journalist Tom Burgis against a lawsuit brought by an arm of the Kazakh mining company ENRC. Both libel actions have been criticised by free speech campaigners and were highlighted in a recent debate in the House of Commons about abusive legal actions known as strategic lawsuits against public participation, or “Slapps”. Kean said the interest in Slapps was welcome but must be backed by legislation to prevent public interest journalism from being shut down. “You can look at the balance of power and the type of person that’s bringing it [the lawsuit],” said Kean. “If it is somebody who is in a controversial area and they have quite often had a lot of material written about them in the past and they are very wealthy, you should expect them to tolerate a degree of criticism – I mean that in the proper sense of the word, not necessarily negative criticism – and exploration of what they’re doing, how it impacts on society, what their motives might be, what their working practices should be. “I think it is healthy for democracy and in the public interest to have that debate, without being afraid that one aspect of that criticism will meet the displeasure of somebody who has the wealth to squash it.” Kean said publishers often settled cases because of the costs of proceeding to trial and fears they would be deterred from investigations into important issues such as the origin and purpose of foreign investment in the UK, big pharma and cladding companies. “It’s really important for everybody who cares about this to put their shoulders to the wheel and make sure that something does happen,” she said. “It is interesting to know whether the MPs will have the guts to pass something.” Her suggestion to “level the playing field” is for judges to decide at the outset of a case whether it relates to public interest journalism – in other words, is the subject matter and company or individual worthy of scrutiny – and if so, it should be halted and resolved by granting a prominent right to reply. “I think Catherine’s case is a really good case in point,’” said Kean. “That [Putin’s People] is a really serious book on a really serious subject. I think that would be a perfect book for a judge to read and say: ‘OK, if you’ve made any mistakes or not given as much balance to something as somebody wants then they’ve got to have the right to reply – but, no, they can’t sue you.’” Belton and her publisher, HarperCollins, were sued over a number of matters in the book. All of the claims were subsequently settled or withdrawn. Abramovich, the owner of Chelsea Football Club, ended his case after HarperCollins accepted some information concerning him was inaccurate and agreed to make revisions to the book. HarperCollins apologised and agreed to make a payment to charity in recognition of a particular error, but otherwise no damages were paid and both sides agreed to pay their own costs. Kean acknowledged that it was difficult for the public to understand why there should be any inaccuracies in journalism but said: “The real public interest is in having debate. When you take a sentence or two out of a book of five or 600 pages, and you say: ‘Oh, those two might not be quite completely right, and therefore you shouldn’t have an interest in publishing it,’ what happens then is the journalist goes on trial and … everything is put under the most minute scrutiny, which is holding people up to an impossible standard.” In the Commons debate, the justice minister, James Cartlidge, agreed that Slapps represented “an abuse of the legal system”, but said the government response must be “proportionate … balancing individual rights with the public good”.The former Brexit minister David Frost has joined Conservative MPs in writing an open letter to Boris Johnson calling for a resumption of fracking in the UK, in another indication of the ongoing battle within the party over environmental issues. Lord Frost argued that extracting domestic shale gas would give the UK a “competitive and reliable source of energy”. But Zac Goldsmith, a key green voice in the government, said it would not reduce energy prices and would put ministers at “war with furious communities”. The letter to the prime minister was organised by the Conservative Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG) of Conservative MPs, which argues against many green levies and targets, saying the government should prioritise lower energy costs and more secure supplies. Last week, leading climate scientists told the Guardian that the group appeared to be trying to delay a shift towards lower emissions by including climate policies in a culture war and spreading disinformation, a charge the NZSG rejects. The MPs’ letter, shared with the Sunday Telegraph, said shale deposits around Lancashire and surrounding counties offer “at least 50 years of cheap and sustainable gas”. It read: “If levelling up is to mean anything it must be centred around empowering communities, rather than telling them what they can and cannot do … With the lack of public debate about our strategy to reach net zero, we have abandoned this fundamentally conservative principle … It’s time to reverse this moratorium.” The Sunday Telegraph said 29 MPs had signed the letter but named only five of them – Craig Mackinlay, Steve Baker, John Whittingdale, Bob Blackman and Julian Knight. The organisers of the letter declined to reveal any more names. Frost, who has emerged as a leading dissident voice on the Tory right since resigning from his ministerial role in December, told the Telegraph that fracking would bring “a competitive and reliable source of energy” and reduce reliance on imports. But Goldsmith, a Foreign Office minister and peer, said that to even replace half the gas the UK imports would require 6,000 fracking wells “with all the associated industrial equipment and endless movements of trucks ferrying toxic chemicals and wastewater to and from sites. It’s hard to imagine communities across the UK being OK with that.” In a series of tweets, Goldsmith said fracking was deeply unpopular with the public, and that since any shale gas extracted would be sold at international market prices it would have no impact on UK bills. Gas was still needed, he said, but added: “To have any impact at all, government would need to rig the market and go to war with furious communities. On every level the cost would be enormous.” The former Tory chancellor George Osborne, who offered fracking companies generous tax breaks in his 2013 budget before drilling licences were later revoked, told a House of Lords committee that extra gas production would only increase employment. He said fracked gas would be a small proportion of global production and would therefore have little influence on the international prices that dictate what UK households pay. The government’s position remains that fracking is “unproven” as a resource in the UK, and that the inability to accurately predict Earth tremors associated with it meant it could not be supported. The NZSG is campaigning alongside Cuadrilla, the company that operated two shale wells in Lancashire. Work at these was stopped in late 2019 when the government halted fracking in England after warnings about possible quakes. On Thursday, Cuadrilla announced it was plugging and abandoning its two shale wells at the Preston New Road site in Lancashire, on the instructions of the government’s Oil and Gas Authority. News of this was announced in a joint press release between Cuadrilla and the NZSG, including quotes from the group’s chair and vice-chair, Tory MPs Craig Mackinlay and Steve Baker, calling the decision “utter madness”. Similarly, the Telegraph article about the NZSG’s letter was published alongside a comment piece from the chief executive of Cuadrilla, Francis Egan, calling domestic fracking “a no-brainer”.It wasn’t the sort of coverage Sajid Javid was hoping for. “Is that all we get for £12bn?” thundered the front page of Wednesday’s Daily Mail. The source of its frustration was the health secretary’s admission in the Commons 24 hours earlier that the length of the waiting list for hospital care in England, which now stands at a record 6.1 million people, would continue its relentless rise until March 2024. Javid’s candour came while he was launching NHS England’s “elective recovery plan”, its strategy – endorsed by the government – for addressing and, it is hoped, ultimately reducing that colossal backlog of care. The £12bn a year the forthcoming 1.25% rise in National Insurance will raise via the new health and social care levy will help fund the work involved. The plan itself is a classically NHS document: 49 pages featuring a blizzard of statistics, examples of hospitals using innovative ways of reducing patients’ waiting times for care and a raft of detailed proposals aimed at “increasing health service capacity ... prioritising diagnosis and treatment ... [and] transforming the way we provide elective care”. However, the bits of most relevance – politically for ministers and practically for patients – are the targets setting out when indecently, sometimes dangerously long, and historically unprecedented, delays for treatment – for new hips and knees, cancer care, heart operations and much else besides – will finally end. Under the NHS constitution patients have a “right” – now often merely theoretical – to receive such care within 18 weeks. The key targets – which are really just aspirations – include ensuring that by July no one has been waiting more than two years, 18-month waits are eradicated by March next year and one-year waits – 306,996 patients have recently faced a delay of that magnitude – banished by March 2025, and that the waiting list starts shrinking by March 2024, two months before the next election. Javid gamely talked up the plan as embodying “a new national mission” to bust the backlog and offering “a bold and radical vision” for improving healthcare. He promised that hundreds of new “community diagnostic hubs” and “surgical hubs” would ensure speedier access to tests and treatment. All that may or may not prove to be the case over the next few years. Patients need it to happen. But in the short- and medium-term the backlog is fraught with political danger, not just for Javid, but also for Boris Johnson, whose election win in 2019 was in part due to his eye-catching and oft-repeated NHS pledges. Commitments to hire 50,000 more nurses, build 40 new hospitals and recruit 6,000 extra GPs, which helped to neutralise the NHS as a negative for the Conservatives, played their part in the landslide. A key determinant in the success of the plan is the known unknown of how many of the estimated 10 million people who avoided seeking NHS help during the Covid pandemic will belatedly do so. It could be 30% or it could be 80%, Javid told MPs. “Even if half these people come forward, this is going to place huge demand on the NHS” – that is, huge extra demand on a service that by its own performance metrics is increasingly unable to cope with the unceasing need for care it is already facing. That is why he made clear that delivering the plan’s key dates was an “ambition”, not a pledge. That realism was an implicit admission that he is not in control of events; that he cannot guarantee any fall in the headline number of people forced to wait by any set date. There are serious doubts that the ambitions will be fulfilled. Privately, NHS bosses, health experts and doctors concur with what Max Warner of the Institute for Fiscal Studies said on Friday: that “there is almost no chance that the NHS will clear the Covid backlog and get the number of people on the waiting list back to pre-pandemic levels before the end of this parliament”. The NHS’s lack of staff, beds and equipment relative to EU and OECD countries, noted in a recent National Audit Office report on waiting times, will inhibit the plan’s ambitions being fulfilled. The backlog “is one of the big challenges for the government. The scale of it is enormous,” said a source in Javid’s department. Ensuring that the waiting list is reducing by spring 2024 will be “really tough”. Projections prepared for ministers show that the backlog could reach 9.2 million by March 2024 under a best-case scenario and 10.7 million in the worst case. A tenth of England’s population is already on the list. Under the latter projection that would rise to one-sixth. That could mean that every sixth voter Tory campaigners canvass in 2024 will be waiting for a procedure of some sort in hospital. While some may be sanguine about waiting, others will be frustrated, or even angry. Who will they blame: Covid, the government or the NHS itself? One Tory MP, an ex-health minister, observes that: “MPs are getting very little flak from constituents about long waits for surgery. People in general, for now at least, have accepted that Covid has been disruptive to aspects of NHS care.” That suggests Javid’s self-serving attempt to portray the waiting list as “the Covid-19 backlog” may be working. However, the MP adds ominously: “But if long delays are not addressed before the next election I suspect this will pose political risk for Boris Johnson and become a major issue for many MPs in marginal seats who wish to be re-elected.” Delays will most affect, and most worry, a key Tory demographic – older people. As the Tory MP Edward Leigh said: “People of a certain age, of which unfortunately I am one, are terrified because they think that if something goes wrong, they may have to wait in pain for two years and we can’t wait until March 24 to join the back of a slightly shorter queue.” The backlog could intensify tensions within the government, especially over the national insurance hike, and also between ministers and an NHS receiving record funding that they believe is guilty of backsliding on its part of the deal. But the greatest risk it poses for Johnson is the gift it hands to opposition parties. As the waiting list continues ever upward, a potentially growing mismatch between the public’s need for prompt care and the NHS’s ability to provide it could prove politically toxic. And the reality of NHS waits is not just undone surgery. It’s also delays in accessing all key types of NHS care – to see a GP, get A&amp;E care, for an ambulance or to receive mental health help. When Labour left office in May 2010, the waiting list stood at 2.6 million. It then rose slowly until 2015 and has been rising relentlessly ever since. Given it was at 4.4 million when Covid struck in March 2020, the pandemic is responsible for only 1.7 million – or 28% – of the 6.1 million total. Wes Streeting, Javid’s agile Labour shadow, stresses that “this isn’t a Covid backlog; it’s a Tory backlog”. It is a charge that he and Keir Starmer will doubtless hammer home regularly and one which, if supported by patients enduring the pain and fear of long waits, could help decide who wins in 2024.Cable news ratings are in sharp decline, public trust in journalists is at all-time low, and one of the most famous names in the media business is in a post-pandemic C-suite crisis ahead of an important midterm election. But the money keeps rolling in, at roughly a billion dollars a year in profit to its parent company, AT&amp;T’s WarnerMedia, while data-driven content decisions push the network toward tabloid-like obsessions and a tone rooted in exaggeration and alarm. CNN, the company founded in 1980 by Ted Turner, has found itself at a crossroads that internally at least resembles a crisis. Two weeks ago CNN president Jeff Zucker was abruptly fired for failing to disclose a romantic relationship with a senior colleague. Few believe the narrative, since the relationship had been common knowledge for years, and at least one CNN host, Don Lemon, shed on-air tears at Zucker’s departure. Zucker’s departure appeared more likely related to another scandalous firing, that of show host Chris Cuomo, who is suing the network for up to $60m after being axed for playing an outsized and undeclared role in shaping the defense of his brother, former New York governor Andrew Cuomo, against sexual harassment allegations. The scandals echo previous episodes in which executives at top American TV organizations have been accused of operating a culture of impunity for other senior, almost always male, executives. It seems to illustrate a broader problem in the top echelons of these firms: supremely powerful organizations whose leaderships seem to have assumed that normal rules did not apply to them. Take CNN’s great rival, Fox News. In 2016, Fox News chief Roger Ailes was fired after a sexual harassment scandal. A lawsuit filed by shareholders, naming Ailes’ estate as well as 21st Century Fox’s controlling shareholder, Rupert Murdoch, alleged that Ailes had “sexually harassed female employees and contributors with impunity for at least a decade” and that Murdoch and others had allowed Fox News anchor Bill O’Reilly to harass several female employees. The company paid out $55m to settle claims of sexual harassment, and lost top female anchors including Megyn Kelly, Greta Van Susteren and Gretchen Carlson in the aftermath. The Fox News scandal was followed two years later by a sexual harassment scandal involving CBS CEO Leslie Moonves that included allegations of an attempted cover-up by CBS executives. Moonves was later denied a $120m severance package. That followed the firing of Charlie Rose, co-anchor of CBS’s morning show, in November 2017 after several women accused him of harassment and misconduct. But CNN’s problems, while lacking comparable accusations against Zucker, whose relationship was consensual, suggests other problems are at play in a new sector in a state of near constant turmoil. CNN viewership in the first week of January was down 90% overall and in the critical demographic coveted by advertisers from a year earlier, while the network – like that of its ideological and previously scandal-plagued counterpoint Fox News – is drawing criticism for editorial positions. According to Ariana Pekary, public editor for CNN at the Columbia Journalism Review and MSNBC journalist who now focuses on the systemic flaws of commercial broadcast news, a narrative of a toxic, male-dominated culture does not fully describe the issues at hand in the US broadcast sector. Instead some of the problems involve what’s on the screen, not who is behind it. “Zucker was hyper-focused on ratings and financial incentives and that drove the changes in news toward opinion because opinion drives ratings,” said Pekary. “CNN is more about trying to create a narrative that they think the audience will follow, so they build the coverage around certain characters that are in the news every day or will reappear.” Zucker had been brought in to CNN in 2012, two years after leaving NBC, where he had driven the entertainment division’s ratings with shows like Donald Trump’s The Apprentice, which helped re-establish his public image and, some argue, made his presidency possible. Despite Zucker’s background in reality TV and morning news, CNN’s then-parent company, Time Warner, hired Zucker to improve ratings and inject “more passion” into programming. According to the Washington Post, Zucker succeeded in making the network profitable, by expanding programming beyond news. Anthony Bourdain’s Parts Unknown was among the new offerings, along with a new documentary division designed to create programming for weekend viewers. Pekary walked out of MSNBC in 2020, writing on her website that coming from public radio, “where no decision I ever witnessed was predicated on how a topic or guest would “rate” , at cable news “I saw such choices – it’s practically baked in to the editorial process – and those decisions affect news content every day”. The pressure of making editorial decisions based on polling and audience data, Pekary explains, starts in the morning news meetings – where Zucker was famously an ever-present force at CNN. “That’s why the coverage from hour-to-hour sticks to the same stories and narratives. They make decisions on what they think is going to rate the best, based on what has done well, and to social media.” Pekary noted recently that in the absence of Donald Trump to drive ratings, CNN had pushed aggressively into “the realm of tabloid-like material”. There was Gabby Petito, the Long Island woman murdered by her boyfriend in Wyoming, and Alec Baldwin’s involvement in the death of cinematographer Halyna Hutchins. The problem is not exclusive to cable news, but only exaggerated. Devotion to ratings, reasons Pekary, has warped editorial control and the credibility of cable news and the news business overall. According to data from Edelman’s annual trust barometer, 56% of Americans agree with the statement that “journalists and reporters are purposely trying to mislead people by saying things they know are false or gross exaggerations”. An even larger percentage – 58% – said they thought that “most news organizations are more concerned with supporting an ideology or political position than with informing the public”. For CNN, the Cuomo saga began with Chris Cuomo often interviewing his brother on air – a clear conflict of interest – before morphing into a sexual harassment confrontation. After Jeffrey Toobin, a longstanding CNN legal analyst, exposed himself on a Zoom call with colleagues at the New Yorker, he was put back on air. Devotion to data has created opportunities for competition from other, occasionally contentious, sources. Two weeks ago, podcaster Joe Rogan found himself in a public feud with Neil Young and others over Covid misinformation. Pekary says that cable news could redeem itself if it focused more on news gathering and less on selling opinion, which is cheaper to produce outside the massive salaries for on-air talent. It matters less is who is in charge. But with CNN making $1bn in profit for its parent company, the incentive to change is limited. “No matter who is in charge I don’t see that format changing as much as I believe it should,” she said. “They spend an awful lot of time, especially in primetime, rehashing the outrage of the day when they could produce much better news programming with a different format that actually informs a larger audience but they’re going for the lowest common denominator.” • This article was amended on 16 February 2022. An earlier version suggested that Ted Turner founded CNN using funds from the MGM film library; in fact he purchased that library after the station was founded.Vincent van Gogh is perhaps equally famous for his sunflowers and his act of self-mutilation. Apart from his paintings, when people think of the artist, they also think of his ear – or lack of it. But references to Van Gogh’s missing ear, and mental health, in souvenirs on sale at the Courtauld Gallery in London have attracted criticism. Currently displaying a major exhibition of his work, including his self-portrait with bandaged ear, some of the Courtauld’s products – such as a £6 eraser in the shape of an ear – have been branded insensitive. The range to celebrate Van Gogh features sunflowers aplenty, on socks, scarfs, and in packs of seeds, as well as jigsaw, postcard and print mementoes of his best-known self-portraits. But critics have attacked gift shop items highlighting the severe mental health crisis Van Gogh experienced, and which culminated in his suicide. By cutting off his left ear, after a row with fellow artist Paul Gauguin, the Dutch painter became a legendary “tortured artist”. Apart from the eraser ear, visitors can buy a £5 bar of soap, marketed as ideal for “the tortured artist who enjoys fluffy bubbles”. An “emotional first aid kit”, priced at £16, is described as “a box of wise emergency advice for 20 key psychological situations”. Some have been left distinctly unimpressed at the attempt at humour. Charles Thomson, a co-founder of the Stuckist group of artists, said: “Suicide is not a joke and mental illness is not a joke.” “This is shallow, nasty and insensitive,” he told the Mail on Sunday. “What next? Van Gogh’s suicide pistol?” Art critic David Lee, the editor of The Jackdaw magazine, told the newspaper: “I can’t believe this isn’t someone in marketing’s attempt at tasteless humour in the pub after work.” “Would they, for example, be prepared to sell pencils in the shape of a false leg at a Frida Kahlo exhibition?” he added, referring to the Mexican artist who lost a leg to gangrene. Van Gogh, a heavy drinker, is thought to have been experiencing psychosis when he cut off his ear in 1888 while living in France, after a row with Gauguin. Thought to have had either bipolar disorder or temporal lobe epilepsy, he spent more than a year at the Saint-Paul asylum in Saint-Remy, and in 1890, aged 37, shot himself, dying two days later. The Courtauld has been approached for comment. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Caroline Weir maintained her record of scoring in every home Manchester derby with a stunning late chip from distance to earn Manchester City a 1-0 win and a crucial three points in the race for Champions League football. “I don’t remember too much about it, a bit of a blur, but I know what I am like when I hit the ball in that area,” the Scotland international said afterwards. “I can’t help but try it. Luckily for me it sometimes goes in.” Weir’s 81st-minute goal in front of a club-record home crowd of 5,317 moves City to within two points of Manchester United in third place and capped off a dominant performance against their neighbours. “I think it was a year yesterday she did that when we beat them here,” the manager, Gareth Taylor, said. “It was a different feeling today with a full house, record crowd, it just felt amazing. The celebration was great and I arguably think that is a better execution than last season, which was some goal.” After City’s first run of back-to-back league wins this season (they won four on the trot from 20 November), the two points dropped as a result of Tobin Heath’s 90th-minute equaliser for Arsenal and a 1-0 defeat against Chelsea had slowed their momentum. The title may now look beyond them, but the improvement in the team since the easing of an injury crisis that disrupted the club’s opening fixtures has been clear. As the sides spread out before kick‑off, an upbeat Ellen White walked towards the stands, geeing up the sellout crowd. To maintain hopes of a top-three finish and a place in the Champions League a win in this game was sorely needed. Five points separated the two Manchester teams before kick-off, with United in third and City in sixth. United are also a different beast, having found their rhythm under the manager, Marc Skinner. At the Academy Stadium, though, United were without the influential winger Leah Galton and, for a second weekend, the centre-back Aoife Mannion. The new recruit Diane Caldwell, making her second start in Mannion’s place, and the right‑back Ona Batlle struggled to contain the constant threat presented by City winger Lauren Hemp, the relationship between the centre-back and full‑back perhaps a little too new. It did not take long for the England forward to get the better of the usually impressive Batlle. In the seventh minute she beat the Spanish defender on the left and the ball was worked out to the right before being swung back towards her by Demi Stokes, but Hemp sent her shot flying over the bar from a few yards out and with the goal gaping. There was more hesitancy to United, with perhaps the less established back four and fear of conceding inhibiting their usual swaggering forward play. But with four points between themselves and second-placed Chelsea, and six between them and the league leaders Arsenal, staying in the title race will be hard after this result. Despite the stakes City looked the more threatening side, with United’s forward three starved of the ball as City pressed high and hard, winning every second ball. “I would agree that they won a few more of those second balls,” said Skinner. “I mean, they were helped a little bit by the referee in terms of an unfair bias at times, I felt, but that’s not a deflection away from the result. But I would agree, one of my reflections is we need to be way more aggressive in those one-v-one duels and those challenges.” In the 81st minute City finally took a deserved lead, having previously gone closest when Jess Park smacked the ball off the bottom of the post. The substitute Weir pressed to rob Katie Zelem and Hayley Ladd before chipping her 25-yard effort beyond the goalkeeper Mary Earps and into the far corner. “They’re disappointed, they’re devastated in the result, but I’ve asked them to feel it because that’s the fuel for when you play them next time,” Skinner said of his team, who will have a chance at revenge in the FA Cup in two weeks.Perhaps Alt-J don’t get enough respect for their creative promiscuity. Joe Newman’s choirboy croon is so distinctive, often cooing an incomprehensible plaint while sparsely arrayed instruments cluck in sorrowful sympathy, that their songs’ ambitions can be unfairly overlooked. There’s nothing as startling on this fourth album as 2018’s impressive sally into hip-hop, Deadcrush remix, but The Dream proves how good they’ve become at seeding American music such as blues, funk and house into their typically English choral, classical and folky forms. Perhaps this is a largely commercial decision – it’s the bluesy Left Hand Free that got them into the US charts, rather than delicate delights Taro or Tessellate. Either way, The Dream is another enjoyable stroll around the band’s latest curiosity shop. Crypto cowboys get called out on perky Hard Drive Gold, and there’s some extravagant wordplay on U&amp;ME. Yet death also hangs over the album, with murder ballad Happier When You’re Gone and the intense Get Better, one of their most painfully direct and emotional songs yet, about watching someone slip slowly away in Covid times. Technically proficient, beautifully sung and lyrically acute, it exemplifies what The Dream does so well.Some telling stats here. Here’s the WSL table. There’s plenty to play for. Caroline Weir, the goalscorer, speaks to the BBC. I don’t remember too much about it, a bit of a blur but I know what I am like when I hit the ball in that area. I can’t help but try it. Luckily for me it sometimes goes in. It was a really close game, I knew if I got the chance I knew I’d have that little bit more space. It took a piece of class, and what a goal Caroline Weir scored to win a very tight match. City are in the hunt for a Champions League place, and with United in their sights. The title talk cannot be ruled out, no matter how outlandish that seems. City’s class told against a very organised and determined United. 90+3 min: United give the ball away in a difficult position and it’s Raso who almost seizes on it, and keeps the ball down the other end. That will be that - full-time, and cheered to the rafters. 90+2 min: City back in numbers to prevent that late United charge. United have brought on a late sub in Fuso. 90 min: United mount an attack at last and Thomas chases down the ball, looking to get to it first, but Roebuck gets there first. Three minutes are added on. 89 min: More City pressure, as Hemp is tackled last-ditch. United can’t get out. City’s greater quality, particularly from the bench, has told here. 88 min: Raso has been a real problem for United since coming on, her running keeping them occupied when they need to get down the other end. 5,317 - attendance watch, a record for this stadium 87 min: United being kept at bay at the moment, and City are chasing another as the sub, Raso speed down the right, and the United centre-back, Thorisdottir, has to come out and clear. 85 min: City try to take the steam out of it, with some calm passing before a long ball is aimed at Ellen White, who has had a frustrating afternoon. 84 min: Sub: Hayley Raso has come on for City, replacing Jess Park. 83 min: Almost immediately, United try to hit back and Katie Zelem’s ball in causes real problems for Ella Roebuck. Spoke too soon...what a goal. Superb skill to take the ball down in midfield, then real vision to spot Earps off her line. The ball chipped to perfection and in. A derby classic. 80 min: City have been a little incoherent of late, the changes seem to have taken the sting out of this game. 78 min: United change, off goes Russo, on comes Hanson to inject some pace down the flanks. 77 min: United get a corner and the best set-piece delivery of the game sees Martha Thomas head down and just head wide. A real warning for City. 76 min: Weir almost makes an instant impact, only for stout defending for United to rob her at the moment of truth. 75 min: On comes Weir to great cheers, off goes Vicky Losada who had a decent game. 73 min: United have dug in impressively, and Caroline Weir is going to be coming on for City. 71 min: Hemp again active down the left, and United have to hurry the ball behind. The delivery of the corner is this time far better, this time from Losada, and Bronze might have got more on the ball. Another corner comes in, this time claimed by Earps. 69 min: City try to rouse themselves for a big push. In pre-match there was talk of their still being in the title race. It seemed a tad ambitious. And a draw here would almost certainly extinguish such talk. 67 min: City free-kick in a dangerous position, but can they do better than before? The answer is no, with Greenwood trying to use the wind but undercooking it. 66 min: Martha Thomas leads the press for United as Bruun takes up the position behind her. Meanwhile, Georgia Stanway sets off at pace and with typical intent, firing wide of the goal. Opening up at both ends now? 64 min: Risa off for United, with Thomas coming on. Risa struggled today, but had very little service. 63 min: United mount an attack, and Roebuck is scrambling as two shots come in, the first from Toone. 61 min: All City, and off the post. Jess Park cuts in from the right, and gets her shot in, the ball beating everyone as it comes back out, Ellen White unable to get on the end of it. 59 min: Mary Earps is being kept busy but nothing too strenuous for her so far, with Park’s touch on a Stokes cross not enough to trouble the England keeper. 57 min: A Manchester United “One Love” flag in a Stone Roses style is waved in the away end. Their team is doing them proud, unlike the men’s team. 55 min: Greenwood’s free-kick is a waste, and jeered by her former United fans. The wind caught it, to be polite. 54 min: United have done their job well so far, holding off City at arm’s length, preventing their rivals from ever getting too clear a chance. But: Diane Caldwell is booked for smashing into a speeding Lauren Hemp. 52 min: Blundell can’t prevent a corner, and Greenwood takes. Katie Zelem clears from deep in the United box before another results, with the same result of Zelem heading it away. 50 min: City begin in control again but it’s scrappy, too. Georgia Stanway wallops into Hannah Blundell by the sideline. Tempers fraying? Let’s hope so, this game does need a bit more of something. 48 min: Alex Greenwood, by the way, is back out and playing in her mask. She takes a free-kick that nestles in the arms of Mary Earps. The wind was a factor there and may well have been for United in the first half. 46 min: We go again, with the BBC offering up the stat that United have never had a goalless draw in the WSL. Admittedly they have only been in the league since 2019 but still, a small amount of history may be in the making. It’s been all City in truth with the best chances falling to Lauren Hemp and Ellen White with Lucy Bronze causing problems but United will be happy with that. Marc Skinner is a good organisers of defences, as he was at Birmingham, and the plan now must be to hit City on the counter. 45+5 min: City close out the half on the attack, with Ellen White down the flank and forcing a corner. Vicky Losada booed by the United contingent in the corner and United get that clear. That’s half-time. 45+4 min: There’s a long break in play and we are in the dark as to how much longer will be added on. City continue with ten players, and they appear to be marking time until a half-time decision can be reached on Greenwood. 45+2 min: Three minutes are added on, and while Greenwood is still down on the floor. There’s applause as she gets up off the floor, and there’s a shake of the head as she leaves the field. 45 min: Some real worry here as Alex Greenwood, already wearing a mask, smashes her head into the back of Katie Zelem’s head. It’s a nasty one, and she’s down for a while, looking very groggy. 43 min: Lucy Bronze again causing problems on the overlap, scampering on, causing such havoc and her chip meets the head of Ellen White who misses the chance. The City chances are stacking up. 42 min: Gareth Taylor is up and doing off the sideline, asking his City players to switch up for him. 40 min: United have kept their shape OK, but at the cost of attacking incursions. Bronze gets down the wing and her cross and Hemp gets to the back post again but can’t get enough on the header. That switch from left to right is the problem area for City. 38 min: Still all City, United’s attacks reduced to counters, and few and far between when they do happen. 36 min: Stanway again in the thick of it as she receives a pass from Hemp and her shot is scrambled behind. White flicks the header over from the corner, well delivered by Vicky Losada. 34 min: Jess Park again makes space down the City wing, and her ball in again finds Hemp, it’s a rather more difficult chance than before, and Hemp heads over. At the other end, and after some attacking from Ella Toone, Greenwood has to clear the ball from danger. She’s wearing a mask, the former United player. A protective one in the style of Paul Gascoigne/Michael Crawford rather than a ffp3 32 min: Anna Blundell does really well in defending deep for United but can’t find a teammate. Ball retention has been a dead loss for them. 30 min: And United get another free-kick, which Zelem again does the same with as Roebuck holds firm. 28 min: Free-kick in a decent position for United but Katie Zelem’s kick goes straight to Ellie Roebuck in City’s goal. Rare territory for United and they need to make more of it. 27 min: City need to make their dominance of this half count, but United have been dogged enough in digging in. They are pressing hard. 25 min: All City at the moment and United manager Marc Skinner looks concerned on the sidelines. 23 min: Better from City, but Ellen White is outnumbered despite Vicky Losada charging forward to help her in true style. 21 min: Georgia Stanway has been busy, and sets off down the left, only to have her shot deflected. City’s forwards are plentiful but they don’t seem to have linked up properly yet. 20 min: This hasn’t quite had the blood and thunder of Chelsea v Arsenal, perhaps as a result of a little less quality. 18 min: City settle into a rhythm of passing, and then Hemp is set away down the left and almost gets her pass to the feet of Ellen White, only for Mary Earps to collect. 16 min: Bruun, the United striker, has a dig from distance but cannot trouble Roebuck. United pushing up a bit, and growing into this game. 14 min: United do look vulnerable to a City break at speed, their midfield a little lacking in numbers in a 4-2-4. Georgia Stanway gets caught in a tackle, and looks to be hurt. She gets back up but gingerly. 12 min: City get a corner, taken by Alex Greenwood, and then play themselves offside. That’s a waste of a good position. 10 min: Chances at both ends but City should be ahead. The teams look evenly matched at the moment, though Ella Toone almost stops Ellie Roebuck in her tracks when the keeper tries to play the ball out. 8 min: What a miss from Lauren Hemp, as Jess Park gets down the flank, the goal is gaping but somehow she manages to miss. City should be a goal up. 6 min: Lucy Bronze sets off like a Rolls Royce down the flank, taking players out with her, and when the ball comes in, United have problems with it, the ball being cleared only for Hemp to play it back in from the other side, before Vicky Losada smashes the ball over. 4 min: United have a corner, the ball having drifted in those windy conditions. Stokes comes across to clear, but with some difficulty. 3 min: The early signs are a cagey affair but Lauren Hemp charges on in true style before the ball dribbles to Mary Earp in the Manchester United goal. 1 min: The players take the knee and away we go in the Manchester derby. City have never lost this WSL fixture; this is the ninth in total. The teams are out on the field at the Academy Stadium, with the news being that Leah Galton suffered a concussion in training. City goalkeeper Ellie Roebuck celebrates her 100th appearance for City, having displaced the legendary Karen Bardsley. Friday’s big game, the top of the table London derby, was a goalless draw but a decent match, and opened the door slightly ajar for Manchester United. When last they met: a real pulsating derby match with Ellen White to the fore. An update on the teams: Norway’s Vilde Boe Risa takes the place of Leah Galton United’s sole change from their 1-1 draw with Arsenal. Manchester’s weather, so much to answer for. Some pre-match quotes from the City striker, Ellen White, talking to the BBC. I don’t want to rule that [the title] out because you don’t know what could happen. As we’ve seen this season, a lot of clubs have been taking points off different opposition. I think it’s probably one of the most competitive WSLs there’s ever been, which is exciting, so I don’t think you can rule out the title just yet. Unfortunately, the aforementioned Leah Galton, WSL player of the month for January, is not in the United team, and neither is Aoife Mannion, who it is suggested has a knee problem. What do those teams mean? For City, Ruby Mace, Caroline Weir and Bunny Shaw, who all started against Chelsea, make way for Alanna Kennedy, Vicky Losada and Ellen White. It’s a strong City team. The excellent Suzanne Wrack will report from the game later, and here’s her preview chat with United’s Leah Galton. After Friday night saw Chelsea and Arsenal draw 0-0, a small window of opportunity for United. It’s admittedly a very small window but by winning the Manchester derby they can go significant distance to claiming a Champions League place. City, revived under Gareth Taylor after such a tough start, lost 1-0 to Chelsea, and played well at Kingsmeadow in running the champions close while never quite finding a cutting edge. United drew with Arsenal last week, it taking a Stina Blackstenius equaliser to save the Gunners. Setting aside those matches against two WSL powerhouses, both teams are in decent form and the Academy Stadium will host a match of considerable significance. Kick-off at 12.30pm, UK time. Join me.The mother of a German-born Guantánamo Bay detainee held at the camp for six years and tortured has said she is still waiting for an apology or compensation as a new film sheds light on a story she says remains an “open wound”. In Rabiye Kurnaz vs George W Bush,which premiered at the Berlin film festival on Saturday, the director, Andreas Dresen, whose socially engaged film-making has led him to be described as Germany’s answer to Ken Loach, revisits the case of Murat Kurnaz, who was arrested without explanation in Pakistan in October 2001, a month after the 9/11 attacks. Kurnaz, a Turkish citizen born and raised in Bremen who says he had travelled to Lahore to study the Qur’an at a school affiliated with the ultra-orthodox Tablighi Jamaat missionary movement, was handed over to the US even though he had no ties to al-Qaida nor had he visited a terrorist camp. He spent 1,600 days enduring various forms of torture at Guantánamo. Kurnaz plays a walk-on part in the film but its focus is on the story of his mother, Rabiye – played by the comedian Meltem Kaptan – and Bernhard Docke (Alexander Scheer), the lawyer she won over to fight for her son’s release. Aided by the British actor and activist Vanessa Redgrave, Kurnaz became one of the prominent faces of a class-action suit in the US that eventually won her son the right to legal representation from the supreme court. Fifteen years after Kurnaz was reunited with her son in August 2006, her lawyer has said the blame for his client’s miscarriage still lies above all with the US. “President George W Bush set up an offshore legal vacuum in the Caribbean and destroyed all the procedural safeguards the western world has known since the age of Enlightenment,” Docke told the Guardian in an interview. Prisoners at Guantánamo Bay were held as “enemy combatants”. “They were treated like outlaws in the middle ages,” said Docke. “Because they rejected our laws, the argument went, they did not deserve the protection of our legal system either.” Thirty-nine prisoners remain in the camp, more than 20 years after it first opened. Kurnaz, however, also places blame for her son’s ordeal with the country she has lived in since she was 14. “I hold the German government responsible for what happened,” she told the Guardian. “They should have acted more quickly. After all, Murat was born here.” Three German intelligence agents interrogated Kurnaz at Guantánamo a year into his detention and came to the conclusion he was innocent and did not pose a threat to national security. According to cables cited by the news magazine Der Spiegel, neither the Pentagon nor the CIA objected to the idea of releasing Kurnaz to Germany, but the Social Democrat-Green German government in power at the time did not act and the then 20-year-old continued to be subjected to torture at the camp. “Instead of using that chance for a humanitarian act, to help Murat Kurnaz escape torture and give him a fair trial, Germany rejected the US offer and withdrew his rights to residency and return,” said Docke. “Germany wasn’t responsible for Kurnaz’s torture, but it was responsible for his malady lasting a lot longer than it should have. This guilt has not been recognised in any way.” Frank-Walter Steinmeier, re-elected as Germany’s largely ceremonial president on Sunday, was chief of staff at the German chancellory at the time and thus tasked with coordinating ties between the country’s domestic and foreign intelligence agencies. According to Der Spiegel, Berlin conveyed to Washington in November 2002 its “express wish” that Kurnaz would not be returned to Germany. In 2007, Steinmeier denied there had been an “official offer” from the US, while stating it was right to consider the Guantánamo detainee a security risk at the time. “Steinmeier has a dark stain on his conscience, and he doesn’t have the decency to admit it,” said Docke. “As president, you are meant to have moral authority, and in my view he is not up to that job if he doesn’t correct the mistakes of the past.” Kurnaz said she remained grateful to the former German chancellor Angela Merkel, under whose tenure Murat was released. “Merkel brought my child back to Germany. For me, she was the best.” The pair also criticised the Turkish government, which had taken in other Guantánamo internees and monitored Kurnaz’s case but failed to engage itself for his release. It was quick to rediscover Kurnaz as one of its citizens after he returned to Germany. “One day after he had returned to Bremen, there was a letter from the Turkish consulate … reprimanding him for not doing his obligatory military service,” said Docke. Rabiye Kurnaz vs George W Bush gains comic mileage by playing up the cultural differences between the housewife-lawyer pair from northern Germany: Docke zips between court dates on a rusty old bike, while Kurnaz roars around Bremen in a wide Mercedes Benz, her tires screeching. “The Germans are smart but slow,” her character tells a friend in the film. “You know the saying: ‘Start it like a Turk, but finish it like a German.’” In real life, the pair said, they were less of a study in contrasts, Docke’s law firm a bit less provincial and with more expertise in the US justice system, and Kurnaz’s apartment a bit more tidy. One of the film’s best comic moments, however, was real, they both confirm. After Murat Kurnaz’s return to Germany had eventually been secured, his mother and lawyer were to announce their triumph at a press conference. But with minutes to go, Rabiye was nowhere to be found. Her mission on the global stage complete, she had reassumed her maternal role and gone shopping to find new clothes for her son instead. “We were so annoyed at the time, but afterwards we couldn’t stop laughing,” said Docke. Murat Kurnaz, who now works with young people as a social worker at an outdoor sports centre in Bremen, had seen the film and enjoyed it, his mother said. But she said she struggled to join in the laughter during the screening. “It took me right back to that time, and sometimes that made it difficult to laugh. But a smile, yes, maybe I can smile about it sometimes.”The final live action of the day is over in the men’s ice hockey. Germany went goaltender-less for the last couple of minutes in a desperate attempt to claw back a 3-2 deficit against the US. It was to no avail. Canada beat China 5-0 in Group A’s other match. That finalises the play-off and quarter-finals bracket. The US, ROC, Finland and Sweden are all through to Wednesday’s quarter-finals with an extra rest day. Everybody else will face a play-off game on Tuesday. Those matches (I think – this hasn’t been confirmed on the Olympics website yet) will be Slovakia v Germany, Czech Republic v Switzerland, Denmark v Latvia, and bizarrely, China and Canada face an immediate re-match. What an odd tournament format. It is also important to note that Canada and the US are on a semi-final collision course, with ROC looking the strongest team on the other side of the draw. Here is what I put in our daily briefing that we could look forward to tomorrow. 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – would you be surprised to learn that there is curling all day long? 🥌 9.15am Figure skating – have they put the most romantic couples’ dancing on Valentine’s Day on purpose? Your guess is as good as mine. Twenty couples will free dance for the medals 🥇 10am-11.01am and 3pm-3.45pm and 7pm-8pm Freestyle skiing – weather permitting, the morning is the rescheduled women’s freeski slopestyle qualification, the evening is the women’s aerials final. They’ve had to newly shoehorn the aerials qualification round in at 3pm as it was cancelled today 🥇 9.30am and 11am and 8.05pm and 9.40pm Bobsleigh – the first two sessions are the conclusion of the women’s monobob, the final two are heats one and two of the men’s 2-man contest 🥇 9.30am-11am and 1.30pm-3pm Snowboard – big air qualification day, the women go in the morning, the men in the afternoon 12.10pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – it is semi-finals day for the women, Canada v Switzerland and Finland v US 🏒 6pm-8.06pm Ski jumping – the men are doing their team competition 🥇 We’ll see you all again tomorrow. I’m off to watch what is left of Newcastle v Aston Villa, you can join Tim de Lisle on his live blog for that here. Snow caused chaos, disrupting the men’s giant slalom and causing the freeski to be cancelled. Switzerland’s Marco Odermatt took giant slalom gold for Switzerland. Jamaica’s Benjamin Alexander finished 46th of the 46th skiers who finished – but plenty didn’t. The Russian Olympics Committee (ROC) team won a pretty slow men’s 4 x 10km relay cross-country skiing race in difficult conditions. Erin Jackson won the women’s 500m speed skating for the US – she’s only at the Games because her friend Brittany Bowe initially gave up her place. Marte Olsbu Roeiseland took the gold in the women’s 10km pursuit biathlon. It is her third gold of the Games so far, and she still has the 12.5km mass start race on Saturday to go. Quentin Fillon Maillet of France won gold in the men’s 12.5km pursuit – despite having to deal with a frozen rifle. Liu Shaoang of Hungary won the gold in the men’s 500m short track skating. ROC’s Konstantin Ivliev took silver. Canada’s Steven Dubois got the bronze. Suzanne Schulting, Selma Poutsma, Xandra Velzeboer and Yara van Kerkhof gave the Netherlands gold in the women’s 3,000m relay short track speed skating. Kaillie Humphries of the US leads the first ever women’s monobob after the the first two heats earlier today. Humphries went just over a second faster than her nearest rival, Canada’s Christine de Bruin. Women’s slalom gold medalist Petra Vlhova is leaving the Beijing Olympics early due to an inflamed left ankle tendon and will miss the Alpine combined event where she had another medal chance. In the men’s team pursuit speed skating the semi-finals on Tuesday wil be Norway v Netherlands and US v ROC. Canada missed out. Team GB’s men won both their curling matches today and are handily placed second in the round robin standings, having won four of their five matches so far. Finland staged an incredible comeback from 3-0 down at the end of the second period to win their men’s ice hockey match with Sweden 4-3 in overtime. We are just waiting now for the final two group stage hockey matches to finish, and that will be a wrap on the day’s action. The US lead Germany 3-1 and Canada lead China 5-0, with around eleven minutes of regulation time left in the matches. There are more goals in the ice hockey. The US are now 3-1 up against Germany. Canada are beginning to rack up the kind of score we expected against China – it is 5-0 now. And what has that all done for the medal table? You can see it in full here: 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 9 🥈 5 🥉 7 total: 21 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 8 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 14 3 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 6 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 12 4 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 6 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 12 5 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 5 🥈 3 🥉 3 total: 11 OK, deep breath. That was the last of the medals to be awarded today. Let me catch you up with what is happening elsewhere. The two Group A men’s ice hockey matches have reached the end of the second period. Canada raced to a 3-0 lead against China in ten minutes, but then haven’t scored since. The US have a narrow 2-1 lead over Germany. The last two curling games have finished as well. The US beat China 7-6 in their match, but more significantly, Italy have beaten Switzerland 8-4. That is a big result for Team GB’s men, who won their own match against Denmark earlier. Here is how the top of the round robin group stage standings now look after seven sessions. 1 Sweden W5 L0 2 Great Britain W4 L1 3= Canada W3 L2 3= ROC W3 L2 3= Switzerland W3 L2 There are four semi-final spots to be had. Tomorrow’s matches are Canada v Italy, Denmark v Norway, ROC v Sweden and Switzerland v Great Britain The last race is finished and the gold medal goes to Erin Jackson of the US. Miho Takagi of Japan has silver. Angelina Golikova of ROC is third. It is an incredible story. Jackson looked set to miss out on Beijing after making a terrible mistake in the US trials. Then her friend Brittany Bowe gave up her spot on the team so that Jackson could go in her stead. And now Jackson has won it! Bowe, who picked up a later qualifying slot, finished 16th. Absolute scenes. Erin Jackson of the US takes top spot with only two skaters to go. Incredible effort from her on the ice there! The time is 37.04. Miho Takagi still not guaranteed a medal at all, though she has lead for much of the evening. The last pair are about to race. Angelina Golikova of the Russian Olympic Committee goes into the medal positions in the women’s 500m speed skating - but it is the silver position. She is 0.09 slower than Miho Takagi. Four skaters to go! The US have taken a 2-1 lead in the men’s ice hockey against Germany in their final Group A game. Tian Ruining of China got the crowd excited as she initially set of at a pace that looked like it could be gold medal bound, but it all fell away. There are six skaters to go. We are down to the last eight skaters in this women’s 500m speed skating, and Miho Takagi of Japan is still just quietly warming down on an exercise bike while waiting to see if anybody can beat her time. Austria’s Vanessa Herzog and Jutta Leerdam of the Netherlands are in the virtual silver and bronze positions. They had a quick pause in the women’s 500m for ice maintenance again. So far seven of the fifteen pairs have gone. Miho Takagi of Japan is in the virtual gold position at this stage with a time of 37.12 The second period has just started in the men’s ice hockey Group A matches. The scores remain Canada 3-0 China and US 1-1 Germany. Reuters have this on how the conditions were affecting athletes today, with Quentin Fillon Maillet of France explaining that he had problems with a frozen rifle at the National Biathlon Centre in Zhangjiakou. “There was a little bit of ice on my magazine and it would not go down (into the rifle). I had big gloves on today because of the cold and it was difficult to get it down normally, it just went down a little bit late today,” Fillon Maillet told reporters. With his fingers hindered by his larger, warmer gloves, he resorted to slamming the weapon with the heel of his hand before firing off a salvo of five perfect shots in terrible weather conditions. Fillon Maillet was able to make the most of several misses by rival Johannes Thingnes Boe to take over the lead after the halfway point of the race despite driving snow and whirling winds, and after that he never looked back. He shot a clear round and won gold. “I worked a lot this summer to prepare for these conditions, with the cold, with the rain, and today that is the gift of my profession,” he said. “It’s incredible to do it again, to be in the medals - four races, four medals.” The British men’s team have wrapped up victory over Denmark 8-2 with two ends to spare. That gives them four wins out of five. In the other matches the US look set to beat China, they are 7-3 up after seven ends. Italy are leading Switzerland 5-4 after seven ends. It is Belgium v Argentina in the first pair of the women’s 500m speed skating. Mihaela Hogas had the better of Maria Victoria Rodríguez and sets the first benchmark. It is three-and-a-half seconds off Olympic record pace at 39.45. While we wait for the women’s 500m speed skating to start in just under fifteen minutes, here is an update on the scores in the men’s curling. After seven ends Team GB still look to be comfortable against Denmark, leading 5-2. But you know how quickly those scores can swing. The US are 7-3 up against China after six ends. Italy have just scored three in the sixth end to take the lead against Switzerland 5-4. Tight, that one now. There has already been a flurry of goals in the ice hockey. Canada have put three past China in the first ten minutes to make it 3-0 early doors, and the US and Germany have exchanged a goal each to make it 1-1. Through a skeleton career almost derailed by a lack of funding and a severe concussion, Jackie Narracott found a way to win Australia’s most unlikely Olympic medal. Steven Bradbury became part of folklore with his speed-skating gold medal heroics while Chloe Esposito snatched a surprise modern pentathlon gold, but Narracott winning a silver medal in a sport where Australia has no facilities or training program tops the lot. The 31-year-old, who has not been home to Queensland since 2019, scorched to second behind German Hannah Neise. She made history, winning Australia’s first Olympic sliding medal, and it is the first time Australia has won four medals at a Winter Games. Team chef de mission Geoff Lipshut admitted he thought he would never see an Australian sliding medal, with Narracott finishing 16th in PyeongChang. “We actually tried to run a skeleton program from 2006 to 2014 and we actually didn’t get the results and that’s why Jackie is so remarkable,” Lipshut said on Sunday from Zhangjiakou. “She’s found a way to do something that’s truly incredible.” Read more here: Jackie Narracott’s wild ride from bad concussion to unlikely Olympic silver The Netherlands and Canada were watching anxiously to see if China or the Russian Olympic Committee could push them out of the semi-final spots in the men’s pursuit. China were well off the pace and nearly got caught. It was more touch and go with ROC – they eventually finished strongly, despite the slow Chinese team getting in their way and/or providing air assistance depending on whether you support Canada or not. Their 3:38.67 was enough to push Canada out of contention, so the semi-final line-up will be Norway v Netherlands and US v ROC and Canada miss out. The semi-finals are on Tuesday. There will be a pause now while they do ice maintenance, and then we will have the women’s 500m, which sees thirty skaters race each other in 15 pairs, and then the fastest gets the gold. Denmark have pinched a stone back against Great Britain in the men’s curling. It is 4-1 to Team GB after five ends. The US and Norway both seemed to get off to slow starts, but then recovered well enough to go first and second, with Norway being the fastest by 0.04 at 3:37.47. That means South Korea and Italy are out. China and the Russian Olympic Committee go next, and they know if they go faster than 3:40.17 they will be in the semi-finals. The next quarter-final in the men’s pursuit has seen terrific runs by Canada and the Netherlands. The Dutch posted 3:38.9 to go into the lead. Canada slot into second with 3:40.17. There are four more teams to go. Only four teams can progress. The US and Norway are up next. The US posted a new world record in Salt Lake City back in December last year, and must be strong favourites to medal. A curling score update after four ends – Team GB 4-0 Denmark, China 2-5 US, Switzerland 2-2 Italy. The four fastest teams overall progress to the next round in the men’s team pursuit. South Korea have posted 3:41.89, Italy have posted 3:42.04. Last time out in PyeongChang 3:41.18 was the benchmark to reach the semi-finals. Neither of those sides may end up qualifying. You can be forgiven for moaning that most of the matches in the ice hockey in this Winter Olympics have been low stakes, with the group stages not eliminating anybody in the men’s competition, but this is very much not the case for these men’s teams pursuit quarter-finals in the speed skating. Each of these match-ups looks brutal. QF1 South Korea – Italy QF2 2014 Champions Netherlands – 2010 Champions Canada QF3 World record holders US – Olympic record holders Norway QF4 Hosts China – ROC Eight laps and the winner takes it all. Or goes through to the semi-finals anyway. The men’s ice hockey starts at ten past the hour. I’m not a psychic but this is how I expect the last games in Group A to play out. A young NHL-star free US side should still have enough about them to see off Germany, and claim top spot in the group with three wins and an automatic quarter-final slot. Canada should be able to score freely against a China team who have already shipped 11 goals in two games, but it won’t be enough to make a difference to them. Sweden’s point gained in overtime defeat to Finland earlier was enough to guarantee the Swedes will have the best second-placed team record and also advance direct to the quarter-finals. The play-off round is on Tuesday, the quarter-finals on Wednesday. Pejman Faratin has put together a brilliant picture gallery of some of the more outlandish helmet designs that competitors have been sporting in Beijing during these Winter Games. You can find that here. A quick curling scores update after two ends of session seven of the men’s round robin stage: Team GB lead Denmark 2-0, Switzerland and Italy are tied 1-1, and the US lead China 2-1. Before I joined you on the live blog today I was putting together my daily Beijing Briefing. Catch up on what happened late yesterday and earlier this morning all in one place – all with emojis. You can read it here: You can also sign up to get it sent to you by email every single day for the rest of the Games. It is completely free. Forty seconds of blistering racing decides the 500m short track skating for the men – and the gold medal goes to Liu Shaoang of Hungary! ROC’s Konstantin Ivliev takes silver. Canada’s Steven Dubois with bronze! I feel like I could have been there today if I hadn’t spent so much time at Lea Valley Ice Centre in the 1980s eating chips in the cafe rather than doing the actual skating. They just false-started at the first attempt to get the 500m men’s short track skating final underway. The 500m short track B final has just finished. Wu Dajing of China, the reigning Olympic champion in this event until the very next race, came first. Pavel Sitnikov of ROC was second. Today’s final round of curling has got underway. There are three men’s matches: Great Britain (W3 L1) v Denmark (W0 L4), Switzerland (W3 L1) v Italy (W0 L4) and China v US (both W2 L3). We get the B final first, and then the A final in the men’s 500m. Surprisingly World and Olympic record holder Wu Dajing of China didn’t make the A final. Hello, it is Martin Belam here to take you through to today’s close of play. Coming up is the men’s 500m short track, the kind of event that is over before I’ve typed out who is racing. In about an hour we get the men’s pursuit quarter-finals in speed skating which should be great, followed by the women’s 500m. There’s some ice hockey as well – China face Canada and the US face Germany as Group A wraps up. The freestyle skiing women’s aerials qualification has been postponed though due to snow. Boooooo! And then there’s curling. There’s always curling. When I close my eyes at night I see only curling. My work here is done. Martin Belam will take you through the rest of the day. Suzanne Schulting brings it home for the Dutch, for an Olympic record of 4min 03.409sec. A great team effort from Schulting, Selma Poutsma, Xandra Velzeboer and Yara van Kerkhof, who dominated the race pretty much from start to finish. South Korea in silver, Canada bronze, China in fourth, unless there is going to be a VAR check ... and China are subsequently bumped up to third and the bronze-medal position. The slalom gold medalist Petra Vlhova is leaving the Beijing Olympics early due to an inflamed left ankle tendon. She will miss the Alpine combined event in which she would have been a challenger to Mikaela Shiffrin, the favourite. Mauro Pini, Vlhova’s coach, said they did not want to risk making the injury worse by trying for a medal in the combined. By winning the slalom, Vlhova became Slovakia’s first Olympic medalist in Alpine skiing. Pini added that Vlhova also wants to make sure she has time “to go home and share this medal with those closest to her.” Vlhova had already sat out the super-G and the opening downhill training session. The Alpine combined is scheduled for Thursday. (AP) In the short track women’s 3,000 relay Final B, it is confirmed that Italy have beaten Poland after a lengthy review by the judges ... now it’s time for Final A. Netherlands, China, Canada and South Korea will contest it. You can see the full schedule here: Real snow finally arrived at the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics and disrupted events on Sunday, leading to mixed fortunes for the Alpine skiiers who were breaking new ground for their countries in difficult conditions. Saudi Arabia’s Fayik Abdi finished 44th, but Haiti’s Richardson Viano failed to finish. Benjamin Alexander, Jamaica’s first ever Alpine skiier, was slowest of those to complete the course, finishing more than a minute behind the gold medallist, Switzerland’s Marco Odermatt. So Ivliev (ROC), Sighel (Italy), Liu (Hungary) and Azhgaliyev (Kazakhstan) are through to the ‘A’ final in the 500m short track men’s event. The semi-final results are here. 500m short track skating: Liu (Hungary) wins semi-final two. But the result is under review. Azhgaliyev second and Dajing third for the moment ... Ivliev, Sighel and Sitnikov were the top three in the first semi-final, with Nikisha fourth. The gruelling nature of cross-country skiing was laid bare on Sunday when Norway’s Ingrid Tandrevold, on the verge of winning a medal in the women’s 10km biathlon, hit the wall, plummeted back through the field and collapsed on the finish line. Fellow Norwegian Marte Olsbu Røiseland had been ahead and clear en route to her third gold of the Games, but Tandrevold, 25, was locked in battle with Swede Elvira Öberg behind her. With only around 300m to go, however, Öberg forged clear as Tandrevold came to a virtual standstill. She recovered enough to start gliding, but skier after skier passed her and another Norwegian, Tiril Eckhoff, took bronze before Tandrevold crossed the line in 14th place. Such was the sudden nature of the turnaround that the Eurosport TV commentator called Tandrevold as the bronze medallist, not realising his mistake until minutes after the race. Tandrevold immediately collapsed to the snow - not a particularly unusual sight after cross-country and biathlon races - but needed lengthy medical attention before getting to her feet and being helped away. “She tried as hard as she could and she did everything to follow Elvira,” Norway team doctor Lars Kolsrud said. “She went empty on top of the hill and hardly got to the finishing line. When she got there she was very sad and sorry, because she lost this medal and she was all empty for power. She was not unconscious but she was very, very exhausted. She said nothing except: ‘I’ve spoiled everything’.” Tandrevold, a relay gold medallist at the last three world championships, finished fifth and eighth in the sprint and individual Olympic races during the week and had been hoping to take part in two further events. “We will talk to her and see her and see that she get the proper food and proper drink tonight and then the days that follow and we have to decide whether she should compete anymore,” Kolsrud said. (Reuters) Quentin Fillon Maillet of France crosses the finish line! He wins gold with a time of 39min 07sec – and he hit 20 out of 20 on the range! Tarjei Boe (Norway) will take silver, Eduard Latypov (ROC) will win bronze. That was a spectacular collapse in the shooting from JT Boe of Norway, who missed seven shots on the range and paid a heavy price ... it sounds like he had the worst of the conditions, with the wind dropping in time for his French rival to nail his shooting. Men’s ice hockey: Incredible scenes. Two late goals from Iiro Pakarinen pull Finland back to 3-3 against Sweden, on 56 and 58 minutes. And Harri Pesonen knocks in the overtime winner for the Finns! As a result, Finland top Group C with three wins out of three. Men’s 500m short track skating: Liu (Hungary) wins the fourth quarter-final. Dubois (Canada) qualifies alongside him. Men’s biathlon 12.5km pursuit: Wow. Boe misses three shots on his third visit to the range! It’s all going wrong for the Norwegian. He’s down to fifth! Fillon Maillet leads, Latypov second, Lukas Hofer (Italy) third. It just shows you how impressive that dominant win by Røiseland was earlier in the women’s event. Men’s 500m short track: The qualifiers from the quarter-finals so far are Nikisha (Kazakhstan), Sitnikov (ROC), Dajing (China), Sighel (Italy), Ivliev (ROC) and Dae Heon (South Korea). Men’s biathlon 12.5km pursuit: Boe misses twice! His lead is down to 19.9sec. Fillon Maillet second, Latypov of ROC third, 36sec off the pace of the Norwegian. A correction on that women’s round robin curling table from Mike Todd on email. Great Britain are third thanks to the head-to-head record against USA and Sweden. The official table is here. The men’s 500m short-track skating has officially begun. These pursuit biathlon events, perhaps needless to say, favour the fast, skilful skiers in the field. Earlier on Marte Røiseland dominated in the women’s 10km pursuit. It looks very much like JT Boe is going to do the same for Norway in this men’s event. Biathlon – men’s 12.5km pursuit: The latest biathlon fun has kicked off. Sadly it doesn’t seem to be on TV anywhere ... but wait! I’ve found it in the Eurosport app. Happy days. Johannes Thingnes Boe nails five out of five on his first visit to the range. The usual suspects are there: Quentin Fillon Maillet of France, Maxim Tsvetkov of ROC. Fillon Maillet gets back in Boe’s face with five out of five ... but he’s 41sec off the pace. The next closest athlete is Eduard Latypov of ROC, 1min 21 sec down. Women’s round robin curling: Following a win against Denmark earlier, Great Britain’s team are fifth in the standings. Switzerland top the table, with five wins from five, Japan next with four out of three, then the USA, Sweden and Great Britain all have three wins out of five. Men’s ice hockey: Finland pull a goal back against Sweden, in Group C, and they now trail 3-1. In case anyone is not clear on the format of the ice hockey competition, by the way, thanks to Pawel Smrek for emailing in: “Both Slovakia and Latvia [in Group C] can still advance to the quarter-finals. Three group winners and one runner up with the best record advance automatically to the quarter-finals. Remaining eight teams will play a one match playoff to determine who gets remaining 4 spots.” So it’s all to play for, even for the teams that are left trailing in their respective groups. USA currently top Group A, with Canada second. ROC and Denmark occupy the top two spots in Group B. And Finland and Sweden lead the way in Group C. As for that men’s 500m short track speed skating, the event briefly flashed up as live and then promptly disappeared, hence a bit of confusion at this end. Anyway, it does seem to be starting in half an hour or so. So keep it locked. Men’s ice hockey: Both Finland and Sweden had two wins from two before this Group C encounter, so something has to give. Sweden lead 3-0 after three power play goals, moving into the third period. Another near-perfect shooting performance gave Marte Olsbu Røiseland of Norway her third gold medal of the Beijing Olympics when she cruised to victory in the women’s 10km pursuit at the National Biathlon Centre. The Swedish prodigy Elvira Öberg took her second Olympic silver medal in 48 hours with Røiseland’s teammate Tiril Eckhoff winning bronze. A thick layer of fresh snow covered much of the man-made course as the race got under way, making the going heavy and punishing those who missed shots and had to endure a penalty loop of 150 metres. With the staggered start based on the results from Friday’s sprint, Roieseland, 31, was not initially troubled as she hit her first five shots. A miss by Öberg allowed Dorothea Wierer to slide into second place early on but the Italian was unable to exploit a miss by the Norwegian leader at the third shoot, missing two of her own five shots to fall more than 90 seconds behind on the fourth lap. With her biggest rivals struggling, Røiseland was never going to turn up her nose at such an opportunity and she flashed off her last five shots in perfect fashion before skiing away from the range, safe in the knowledge that only a broken pole or ski could keep her from gold. Behind her the battle for silver gathered pace as the rest of the pack followed Wierer on to the range, with the 22-year-old Oeberg making a stunning comeback to retake second place ahead of the final lap. Norway’s Ingrid Tandrevold was hot on her heels as the two exited the final shoot, but Oeberg quickly dropped her to secure the silver medal, her second at the Games after second place in Friday’s sprint. Tandrevold’s challenge fell apart completely on the final lap, allowing Eckhoff to glide past and take the bronze, with Tandrevold eventually finishing in 14th place before collapsing. She needed medical attention before being helped off the course. (Mitch Phillips, Reuters) Men’s ice hockey: Sweden have raced into a 3-0 lead against Finland! Anton Lander tucks in the third goal after 31 minutes of the second period. Finland have given up a couple of costly penalties, and now have an icy mountain to climb. On the sidelines of the doping scandal involving the Russian figure skater Kamila Valieva, the skaters of Japan are hoping to receive their medals for the figure skating team event, the Japan Olympic Committee said on Sunday. “They’re not really thinking about the doping issue or what medal they’ll get. They’re more interested in the medal ceremony and wondering whether they will be able to collect their medals while in Beijing,” said Japan’s chef de mission, Hidehito Ito. The Japanese skaters came third in the team figure skating event on Monday, behind Russia and the USA, before news broke of a positive doping test involving 15-year-old Valieva, part of the winning ROC ensemble. Valieva’s future at the Games is due to be decided at a Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) hearing on Sunday, with a decision expected on Monday. Teams from the USA and Japan are also awaiting the results. “The athletes are a bit disappointed that they have to wait for the medal ceremony to happen – they had really worked so hard for that medal,” Ito said. The chef de mission said the Japan Olympic Committee would accept the results of the doping case. “It’s a shame that the timing of the medal ceremony hasn’t been decided yet, but it doesn’t concern Japan, so we would like to refrain from commenting on Valieva’s case,” Ito said. “We believe that the relevant organisations will take the necessary steps so we won’t comment on the issue.” (Sakura Murakami, Reuters) Men’s ice hockey: Sweden lead Finland 1-0 in the second period of that grudge Group C match. Bodies continue to smash into each other on the ice with regularity. There will be some bruised bodies among those players in the morning. We just saw the replay, and Tandrevold simply seemed to run out of gas at the end of the 10km pursuit biathlon. Eckhoff powered past her on what I think was the final climb before the finish. Eckhoff looks suitably delighted to have grabbed a medal at the last, while Tandrevold collapses in a heap at the finish, and not just through exhaustion. She is devastated. Tiril Eckhoff (Norway) has jumped into the bronze medal position! It wasn’t on camera, but it looks like Ingrid Tandrevold must have fallen, or had a technical problem, and she falls out of the top 10. Sweden’s Elvira Öberg wins silver! Røiseland skis across the finish line, waving to the crowd all the way and smiling. She’s got it! A massively accomplished performance of endurance and accuracy. Røiseland is beaming as she skis away from the range. She knows she’s got the gold secured, unless something astonishing happens. Wierer misses once and she is going to be under pressure in the silver medal position ... and in fact she is bumped down to fourth! Elvira Öberg (Sweden) and Ingrid Tandrevold (Norway) now occupy the second and third places on the virtual podium. Öberg is only a couple of seconds ahead of Tandrevold! Røiseland hits five out of five at her last visit to the range! She is closing in on a third gold medal of these Games! Biathlon – women’s 10km pursuit: Røiseland has missed just the once at the shooting range so far, in three visits, and has amassed a lead of 1min 33sec over her closest challenger, Wierer of Italy. Røiseland is having a seriously impressive Olympics and I can only imagine the Norwegian snow sports fans are going crazy for this. Biathlon – women’s 10km pursuit: Marte Røiseland of Norway currently tops the charts by a healthy 38.7sec. Dorothea Wierer, of Italy, second on the course at the moment. Røiseland is halfway around the course now, having started with a 38sec advantage, after dominating the sprint event. Elvira Öberg (Sweden) is third. Women’s round robin curling: China clinched a dramatic 6-5 win against South Korea after they were tied at 5-5 at the end of 10 ends. Switzerland’s Marco Odermatt won gold in the men’s giant slalom at the Beijing Olympics on Sunday, fending off a superb effort from Zan Kranjec of Slovenia. Odermatt finished with a combined time of 2min 9.35sec, putting him 0.19sec ahead of runner-up Kranjec with France’s Mathieu Faivre taking bronze. The first run took place in driving snow with poor visibility but the decision to delay the second run by 75 minutes paid off, with better conditions producing a thrilling battle. “It’s unbelievable. It was a hard day, with the conditions, with such a long wait between the two runs,” said the 24-year-old Odermatt. “It was more than five hours for me, it was such a long time to rethink everything and it was hard to stay focused. I tried to sleep some minutes in between. I actually never dreamt about it but now it still feels like a dream.” As the overall World Cup leader, Odermatt was the clear favourite having had four wins and a runner-up spot in five races in giant slalom this season. But Kranjec, who finished fourth in Pyeongchang four years ago, produced a magnificent second run to put himself top of the podium. Austria’s Manuel Feller took a risky, aggressive line and skied out, and Italian Luca de Aliprandini struck a gate. Henrik Kristoffersen of Norway almost missed a gate, sliding wide and although he recovered to finish he lost valuable time that left him in eighth. Austria’s Stefan Brennsteiner had finished just 0.4sec behind Odermatt in the first run but he too paid the price for almost missing a gate in the second. Odermatt had to keep his cool on the second run and he did just that with his smooth, classic technique delivering a time of 1min 6.42sec, which was 0.59sec slower than Kranjec’s second effort but just enough to secure him his first Olympic medal. Kranjec’s run meant that the Swiss could not afford to be too conservative but his aggression was controlled enough to avoid the errors that had plagued so many of the challengers. “I really risked everything in the second run because I wanted not just the medal, I wanted the gold medal,” Odermatt said. “It’s difficult because you can lose everything but today it paid off.” Odermatt’s triumph continues an impressive Beijing Games for the Swiss Alpine team following Beat Feuz’s gold in the men’s downhill and Lara Gut-Behrami’s victory in the women’s giant slalom. The Swiss also have three bronze medals in women’s races and are top of the Alpine medals table. There was an excellent fourth-place finish for 24-year-old American River Radamus but disappointment for French pair Thibaut Favrot and Alexis Pinturault, who had to settle for fifth and sixth. Kranjec’s disappointment at seeing Odermatt pip him to gold was tempered by his delight at getting on the podium. “I don’t fully understand it yet. In Korea I was fourth so you never know if you will get another chance to fight for a medal,” he said. “After the first run I said maybe it’s over, I don’t have any more chance. But my second run was really good. It’s unbelievable.” (Reuters) On to hockey: in Group C of the men’s competition, Finland and Sweden is goalless with nearly seven minutes of the first period played. The Swedish goalie just got smashed into the net by a body-check from a Finnish opponent. The officials have had a look at it, and have decided it’s fine. Sweden’s coach, watching on, looks unimpressed with that decision. Germany currently top the medal table with eight golds, five silvers and a bronze: Sergey Ustiugov has plenty of time to grab a Russian flag and coast home, into the arms of his waiting teammates who cheer him over the line. Another dominant effort from the ROC team in cross-country. Silver for Norway, France win bronze. Klæbo looks dejected as he crosses the line despite winning his duel for silver with Manificat. He, and the Norway team, wanted more. In contrast, the French team celebrate lustily as they welcome Manificat over the line. Norway v France. Klæbo v Manificat for silver in the men’s 4x10km cross country. Women’s round robin curling: South Korea and China are locked at 5-5 after 10 ends, and they’re playing an extra end to determine the winner. Drama. Biathlon – the women’s 10km pursuit and men’s 12.5km pursuit are coming up today. The women’s 10km is slated to begin in about 10 minutes. Inside the final 4km of the 40km race. It seems ROC have gold secure, barring disasters, while France and Norway will duke it out for silver. Scratch that! France have caught Norway! Maurice Manificat storms past Klæbo and takes his team into the silver medal position! ROC, and Ustiugov, lead the cross-country by 53sec ahead of Norway. They have surely got this in the bag. France are further back, but only by 16sec. Great Britain, in the women’s round robin curling, close out a 7-2 win against Denmark! Sweden beat USA 10-4. Women’s curling team member Vicky Wright speaks to the BBC: “We had a really strong start out there, we were going well, we were a couple up early on ... We always felt in control, we had a game plan and we stuck to it every end ... Eve put the brush in the right place today. We take every game as it comes, we’ve just got to keep going one step at a time. Tomorrow’s another day. Hailey Duff: “It’s just the same as what we’ve been doing, coming out with confidence, knowing exactly what we want to do. There’s never any easy games, especially here, we have to come out with the exact same mentality ... everyone’s really tough.” Great Britain face Canada tomorrow. On commentary for the BBC, Rob Walker (often spotted at the Crucible for the snooker) speculates that Klæbo may be biding his time and skiing steadily before an all-out effort later on. Cross-country skiing: The leading teams have handed over for the fourth and final leg in the men’s 4x10km. This course, which contains plenty of tough climbing, leaves the finishing athletes completely spent. Johannes Høsflot Klæbo, a cross-country galactico, is the man chasing down ROC. Can he overhaul their lead of almost a minute ... ? Not so far! Sergey Ustiugov has extended the ROC lead to 58sec at the first time check on the fourth leg. Will Great Britain come home empty-handed from the Beijing Games? Here’s Sean Ingle: With nearly 30km raced in the men’s 4x10km cross-country and the ROC lead is holding steady, more or less: They’ve got 53 seconds right now, a commanding lead, and they are looking well set to continue ROC success in cross-country after the women triumphed yesterday in the 4x5km relay. Women’s round robin curling, latest scores: Switzerland 6-4 Canada Korea 4-3 China USA 4-7 Sweden Denmark 2-4 Great Britain The race leader, Spitsov of the ROC team, just went through a time split on this third leg, and the gap has widened a bit more, to 54.4sec. Holund of Norway is second with Burman (Sweden) and Parisse (France) next in the chase group bunched together. Thanks Geoff. Hello everyone. Here we go for day nine. The ROC team continue to lead the way in the cross country skiing (Men’s 4x10km Relay). Norway, Sweden, Germany, France and Finland giving chase. That’s enough from me for the day, next it will be Luke McLaughlin. Marco Odermatt seals it with the last run of the day! He has the worst conditions too, it has got quite dark and foggy, visibility is poor, and the track is icy. His second run is slower than Kranjec’s by about 0.4 of a second, but his first run was so fast that he has enough of a buffer. He wins gold by 0.19 of a second. Kranjec silver, and Mathieu Faivre takes bronze for France. Cross-country: Bolshunov taps his countryman away for the third leg with a lead of 59.4 seconds. Norway and Sweden get away next, then Finland only 10 seconds behind them! Niskanen, way back in the field, has produced one of the great races. Gobbled up almost everyone in front of him, and got his country back into medal contention. France, Germany, Italy after that. Cross-country: Bolshunov is nearly 56 seconds up now! And Niskanen has got Finland up to sixth, having made up 50 seconds on the leader. Incredible stuff. Italy have dropped back to seventh. Poromaa has Sweden up to third. Germany and France to follow. Giant slalom: Henrik Kristoffersen nearly crashes out, but somehow regains control to get through a gate. He was ahead of the pace but with that slip he finishes sixth. Three contenders to come, Kranjec still top. Giant slalom: Zan Kranjec goes top for Slovenia. Only five contenders to come. Cross-country: Bolshunov is out to nearly 47 seconds in front now. Niskanen has made up 35 seconds of the two-minute gap he started with. Outstanding. Finland back up to eighth and closing. Norway, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland in front of him. Curling: The score still just 3-2 in favour of Great Britain in the seventh end. Giant slalom: The lead keeps changing here. Pinturault of France takes it, Caviezel of Switzerland comes in second, then the USA go top via River Radamus. Cross-country: Bolshunov is all on his own out the front, looking like he’s enjoying a nice scenic Sunday ski. Making his own pace, setting a high cadence on the uphills. He’s extended the lead to nearly 40 seconds. Norway have come up to second place, Italy third, Germany, France, Sweden to follow, with the talent of William Poromaa racing this second leg for the Swedes. Giant slalom: Andorra take the lead! Joan Verdu gets down in 1:06:80, fastest run today so far. There are racers to come who had faster first legs, but still. Quite a moment. Cross-country: Behind the top three are Norway, France and Sweden. Cross-country: Italy and Germany come through 23 and 24 seconds behind the ROC time. Finland, with the great Iivo Niskanen skiing their second leg, trail on the first by nearly two minutes. Even he can’t make that up over 10km. Cross-country: ROC finish the lap first in 30:14:7, and now Alexander Bolshunov takes off. Already has one gold at these Games. Giant slalom: The American Tommy Ford takes top spot off Zampa. I bet he can’t even bowl. Still a stack of racers to come. Giant slalom: I know I’ve mentioned cricket too many times today, but Adam Zampa has just set the fastest time on the course so far today. Multi-talented. Not sure why he’s skiing for Slovakia though. Cross-country: Alexey Chervotkin has the ROC team 27 seconds ahead about three quarters of the way through his first leg. Germany and Italy placed next. Cross-country: It’s actually snowing on the course today. Real stuff, from the sky, not the machine-era thing we’ve had so far. The men’s race is tightly packed, big groups of racers punched together. Giant slalom: The men’s second round, the one that will decide the medals, has begun as well. It seems quite icy on the run today, the skis are sliding and scraping rather than taking purchase. It’ll be a tough run. Cross-country: The men’s 4x10km relay is underway, with the first-leg racers out on course. Updates to come. Curling: With the chance at scoring one point in the fourth end, GB decide against it, because not scoring means they will keep last stone for the subsequent end, where they could score more than one. We’re all learning here. Curling: In the other matches, Korea lead China 2-1, same score for the Swiss over Canada, and the USA and Sweden are 2-2. Curling: The Danes score in the third end, so it’s 2-1 now into the fourth, where GB has last stone again. Curling: The Brits set up a stone in the house and a couple of blockers, but a good shot from Denmark uses some ricochets and clears out everything. No stones in play with seven to come. The second end winds up being a blank end, no score. Ice hockey: Slovakia wins over Latvia 5-2 in the end, with five individual scorers as well. Curling: A good start for GB, scoring two points in the first end to lead. Curling: We’re about to start, in the women’s round robin match. Great Britain will shoot last in the first end. That sentence makes no sense anywhere outside curling. Eve Muirhead, Vicky Wright, Jennifer Dodds, and Hailey Duff are up against Madeleine Dupont, Denise Dupont, Mathilde Halse, and My Larsen. Ice hockey: Here come the Latvians. Back to 3-2 in the third period with Slovakia having a player sent off for two minutes. Ice hockey: Slovakia up 3-1 now over Latvia, with three goalscorers. And of course, make sure to check out our picture gallery from day eight. Some great shots as usual. Here’s a much more cheery story on Jamaican skiing. Sean Ingle has the latest on the 15-year-old skater Kamila Valieva - as Barney Ronay pointed out, if she is found to have used a banned substance, she’s a victim of abuse rather than someone to be vilified. Here is Martin on an unusual Australian medal in the skeleton. And here is a bit more on that snowboard win, from Bryan Graham. This should be your first stop on every Olympic day: Martin Belam’s daily briefing. Time to catch up with the Guardian coverage from Beijing. As someone who has just spent the southern summer covering cricket, this British angst feels slightly familiar. Right now, not much. Slovakia are playing Latvia in the men’s ice hockey Group C match, and the wily Slovaks lead 2-1 in the second period. Much coming up though. Here are the times in GMT, so add eight hours for China, 11 hours for the east coast of Australia, subtract five hours for the east coast of the USA, and eight hours for the west coast. Other zones, you’ll have to do your own homework. Ok, the Marshall Islands are plus 12 hours. 6:05am: Women’s curling round robin matches, including Great Britain v Denmark and the USA v Sweden. 7am: Men’s 10km cross-country relay, and the medal-deciding run of the men’s giant slalom. 8:40am: Finland and Sweden in the men’s ice hockey Group C match. Then at 1:10 pm we’ve got China-Canada and USA-Germany from Group A. 9am: Biathlon women’s 10km pursuit final. 10:45am: Biathlon men’s 12.5km pursuit final. 11am: Women’s aerials qualifiers, should be spectacular. 11:44am: Women’s 3000m short track relay final. Midday: Men’s curling round robin, including Great Britain v Denmark again. 12:14pm: Men’s 500m short track final. 1pm: Men’s team pursuit quarters in the speed skating. 1:56pm: Women’s 500m speed skating final. Hello, ice to see you! Welcome to the Winter Olympics action once again. It is day... nine, maybe? I don’t know, my dreams are a blur of the sound of blades on ice. Everywhere I look, all I see are Austrians flying down hills. Plenty more medals up for grabs today for those who can keep their balance and hold their composure. Let’s jump in.Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, has cut short a half-term holiday overseas with his family after one day because of concerns about a possible imminent Russian invasion of Ukraine. Wallace had been in continental Europe with his wife and children after talks in Moscow on Friday, but will return, he announced in a tweet. “Having returned from Moscow early on Saturday morning and because we are concerned about the worsening situation in Ukraine I have cancelled a planned long weekend abroad with my family and will be returning,” he said. A senior defence source said Wallace had been on the trip, at an undisclosed location, but was heading back to the UK. They said: “As events worsen the secretary of state has cut short a planned long weekend with his children for half-term.” Wallace’s discussions last week with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Shoigu, appeared to deliver little, with Shoigu describing levels of cooperation with Britain as “close to zero” and criticising the UK’s supply of arms to Ukraine. Their talks came a day after a similarly frosty encounter in Moscow between Liz Truss, the UK foreign secretary, and Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, who characterised the pair’s talks as a discussion of the “mute with the deaf”. The idea of ministerial holidays amid international crises is a particularly sensitive one in Boris Johnson’s government after intense criticism of the then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, for remaining on a family holiday in Crete in August while the Afghan government collapsed. Raab declined to be contacted about some government business while on holiday, sources said, and handed over decisions to a junior minister in the days leading up to the Taliban’s takeover. Raab said he had stayed in touch with decisions at all times, but did accept he told another minister to make a call to assist in the evacuation of former British military translators. He resisted calls to quit, but was demoted to justice secretary in a reshuffle the next month, while keeping his largely courtesy title of deputy prime minister. In December, a Foreign Office whistleblower provided a statement to MPs describing what he said were chaotic scenes in London even after Raab returned, saying he took “hours to engage” with critical evacuation cases, before requesting the files be submitted in a different spreadsheet format. Allies of Wallace also sought to clarify his controversial comments on Sunday afternoon, in which he compared the west’s talks with Russia to the Munich agreement, the attempts at diplomacy that failed to stymie the second world war. In an interview with the Sunday Times, Wallace said: “It may be that he [Putin] just switches off his tanks and we all go home but there is a whiff of Munich in the air from some in the west.” The Wallace allies emphasised that the significant word in his remarks was the initial “if” – meaning that the comparison to the failed appeasement of 1938 applied only if Vladimir Putin was negotiating in bad faith and always intended to invade Ukraine. Vadym Prystaiko, Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK, had earlier complained that the alarms being sounded by the west risked playing into Putin’s hands. “It’s not the best time for us to offend our partners in the world, reminding them of this act which actually not bought peace but the opposite, it bought war,” the diplomat told the BBC.A doctor has been arrested on suspicion of sexually assaulting a child patient, prompting a widespread police investigation into his conduct at two hospitals in the West Midlands. The Royal Stoke university hospital in Stoke-on-Trent and Russells Hall hospital in Dudley have both opened up helplines for parents of children who may have been treated by the 34-year-old, as well as past patients. Staffordshire police confirmed the arrest without naming the man or his occupation, saying he had been bailed pending further inquiries. He was arrested in December on suspicion of sexual offences, the force said. Officers had previously investigated the same man in 2018 “at which time there was insufficient evidence to take further action”, a force spokesperson said. He is no longer working as a doctor. According to the Sunday Times, which first reported the case, hundreds of files, including those of vulnerable adults, are being reviewed as part of what police have called Operation Anzu. At least 109 have been identified as cases of concern, among them nine potential child victims, the paper claimed. Concerns were first raised about the doctor in 2018 when the parents of a vulnerable female raised concerns about his examination of her at Royal Stoke, where he worked in the accident and emergency (A&amp;E) department, the Sunday Times reported. An inquiry identified further concerns and Staffordshire police began an investigation. The doctor was suspended for about 12 months. He returned to work in 2019 after police dropped the investigation because of lack of evidence. In 2020, he moved to Dudley, where he worked in both A&amp;E and obstetrics and gynaecology, before a complaint was made against him last year. The Staffordshire force has reported itself to the Independent Office for Police Conduct in regards to its 2018 investigation. An IOPC spokesperson said: “We assessed a referral from Staffordshire police in December and decided on the information available that the force should continue to deal with the matter.” The doctor was excluded from the Dudley Group NHS foundation trust in March last year and restrictions were put on his practice by the General Medical Council. He was suspended from practising in October. Staffordshire police and the NHS formally established Operation Anzu in December when he was arrested. Operation Anzu is focusing initially on reviewing the clinical records of children seen by the doctor but the hospitals will then consider the records of patients aged 18 to 25, the Sunday Times said. The doctor saw more than 800 patients at the Dudley hospital between August 2020 and March last year, including more than 350 children. Parents of potential victims are to be sent letters advising them how to contact the operation. These cases have been identified by a specialist review of medical records for patients seen by the doctor. The medical directors of the two hospital trusts said the doctor no longer worked there and they were working with police and could not make further comment. The Care Quality Commission said it was aware of the case. The watchdog’s deputy chief inspector of hospitals, Fiona Allinson, said: “We continue to liaise with the police and both trusts regarding these concerns to ensure people’s safety.” The University Hospitals of North Midlands trust said it had set up a helpline for concerned patients on 01782 672540. A separate helpline for patients at the Dudley hospital can be contacted on 01384 322 311.The unprecedented Russian military encirclement of Ukraine has not only brought closer the prospect of a devastating war in that country, it has also raised the risks of triggering an unintended wider conflict. The US and Nato have been adamant that their troops will not enter Ukraine no matter what happens, and the Pentagon has pulled out the 160 national guard soldiers who were acting as military advisers. Even during the cold war, Washington and Russia made sure their forces did not clash, and Joe Biden has made clear he would seek to keep it that way. “That’s a world war when Americans and Russia start shooting at one another,” Biden said. However, the massing of Russian troops in Belarus and the deployment of a substantial Russian naval force in the Black Sea, matched on a smaller scale by Nato land, sea and air reinforcements on the alliance’s eastern flank, means there is far more military hardware in close proximity than is normal. And with proximity comes the increased danger of accidents and unintended consequences. “The risk of something going down like a mid-air collision, or a trigger-happy Russian or American, can really escalate things quickly,” said Danny Sjursen, a former army major and director of the Eisenhower Media Network. “You’re setting yourself up for accidents and miscalculation, and that’s when you can get out of control real quick, because there are domestic considerations both in Russia and in the United States. An American pilot dies – now what? I’m not saying that necessarily means we go to cataclysmic nuclear war but it escalates things.” The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, told CBS News on Sunday that the US had sought to be transparent about its troop deployments in eastern Europe in order “to avoid mistake, miscalculation or escalation and also to send a very clear message to Russia we will defend every inch of Nato territory”. There is a long history of close encounters over the Baltic and Black Seas. Earlier this month US jet fighters scrambled to intercept Russian warplanes operating close to Nato airspace while British and Norwegian planes took off to monitor Russian aircraft flying into the North Sea. While Russia has shut off large parts of the Black Sea to conduct its manoeuvres, Nato navies have stayed out of the immediate vicinity for now, while building up their presence in the Mediterranean. If they do decide to go through the Bosphorus in a show of strength, or to safeguard commercial shipping, the risk will rise again. Elisabeth Braw, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, said the danger was further heightened by Russia’s suspected use of “GPS spoofing”, interference with the navigational equipment of other vessels. On several occasions recently, civilian ships traveling in the Black Sea have encountered mysterious GPS troubles that showed the vessels being in a different part of the Black Sea or even on land. It was widely though the incidents were caused by Russia testing its technology. “It raises the risk for naval vessels that are in the Black Sea, which we should remember is not that big, and it’s crowded,” Braw said. “There’s enormous shipping activity in the Black Sea, and so all those crews face the risk of having no GPS.” The transfer of combat troops from Russia’s far east to Belarus has not only significantly increased the imminent threat to Ukraine, but also made eastern European Nato members increasingly nervous. “The closest training ranges in Belarus are 150 to 200km from Vilnius or Warsaw,” said Kristjan Mäe, the head of the Nato and EU department at Estonia’s ministry of defence. “This is a Russian force posture that hasn’t been there previously.” A refugee crisis at the Polish-Belarus border last year led to a close encounter between the troops facing each other, with Warsaw complaining that Belarus forces opened fire in the direction of their soldiers. “We have to remember that the people who are actually out on the frontline are very young men and women and they face enormous responsibility,” Braw said. “Yes there is a chain of command but if there is some sort of provocation or aggression, intentional or unintentional, that is directed against them, then they have to respond.” The close encounters so far have occurred in peacetime. In the event of war, nerves will be far more on edge, communications could be hampered or flooded with disinformation. “We cannot be entirely confident that in the lead-up to or during a conflict that Nato and Russia will be able to communicate, especially as current civil and military communication systems between them are not as robust or technically resilient as they should be,” Sahil Shah, a policy fellow at the European Leadership Network, said. “The world’s two largest nuclear-armed states have returned to the brink of conflict exactly 60 years after the Cuban missile crisis. If diplomacy is not pursued to the fullest extent, the risks of miscalculation and miscommunication could potentially pull in wider Europe into a devastating war. Without dialogue on how to manage de-escalation, it will be as if our leaders are running into a monsoon with newspapers over their heads.”An energy company has thanked “honest” customers who did not try to cash compensation cheques for trillions of pounds sent out in error. Compensation is being paid to tens of thousands of people who were left without power when severe “once in a generation” winds swept across the UK in November last year during Storm Arwen. Northern Powergrid admitted on Sunday it did not mean to send out cheques for trillion-pound sums to 74 customers in the north of England, with some customers receiving more than £2.3tn. The energy firm blamed a clerical error in which the customers’ energy meter numbers were used instead of the amount payable. The mistake came to light when one customer contacted Northern Powergrid on Twitter to share a photo of the cheque he had received. He wrote: “Thank you for our compensation payment, Northern Powergrid, for the several days we were without power following Storm Arwen. Before I bank the cheque, however, are you 100% certain you can afford this?”. The picture shows the customer had been written a cheque for £2,324,252,080,110. The tweet accrued more than 27,000 likes in 24 hours, as others joined in to poke fun at the error. “Bank it! Then share it equally between us all,” one Twitter user wrote. “I think you own Northern Powergrid now,” another joked. Specsavers even got in on the joke, tweeting “Hang on a minute …” The supplier confirmed 74 of their customers with Halifax and Newcastle postcodes had been given compensation cheques with an incorrect payment amount. A spokesperson for Northern Powergrid said: “As soon as we identified the clerical error, which was caused by the electricity meter reference number being incorrectly quoted as the payment sum, we ensured all 74 customers’ cheques were stopped so they could not be cashed. “We have been investigating how this error happened and carrying out checks of previous payments. All indications are that this was an isolated incident. “We thank those customers who were honest and contacted us and we have been making contact directly over the weekend with all 74 customers affected to make them aware, apologise for the error and reassure them that a correct payment will be issued to them on Monday.”In December 2001, the US government was ramping up its “war on terror” and 19-year-old Murat Kurnaz was about to board a plane home from Pakistan to Germany, where the Turkish national had legal residency and lived with his parents in Bremen. Reportedly as a result of the Americans offering “bounties” for suspected terrorists, Kurnaz was arrested and detained in Guantánamo Bay without trial or evidence; he was only released in 2006, as a result of a passionate letter-writing campaign by his formidable mother, Rabiye, culminating in her lawyer taking their case to Washington DC and sensationally submitting a writ of habeas corpus in federal court: Murat Kurnaz v George W Bush. It is this harrowing true story to which German film-maker Andreas Dresen has given the Hollywoodised feelgood-underdog treatment, concentrating on Murat’s gutsy mum played – often for sentimental laughs – by German-Turkish comedian and TV personality Meltem Kaptan. Her lawyer, Bernhard Docke, is played by veteran Berlin actor Alexander Scheer, very much in the traditional style of the stressed, fallible but idealistic lawyer who gallantly takes up the impossible pro bono case (much like Albert Finney for Julia Roberts in Erin Brockovich). Dresen is a director known for tough, challenging movies including Cloud 9 from 2008 and Stopped on Track from 2011, but here has gone to the bland commercial mainstream. This is a film that certainly pays a well-intentioned tribute to Rabiye Kurnaz’s courage and passion, but is sucrose and shallow. The film has admittedly some sharp things to say about the way the German government, keen to stay onside with the Americans, repeatedly disavowed all interest in Kurnaz on account of his (technical) Turkish nationality – and also about the Turkish government, which coldly regarded Kurnaz as a German problem. But tonally, the film relies on the essentially comic turn from Kaplan, and the anger and the tragic anguish that should be part of this story are watered down. Moreover, the English-language scenes in Washington DC are stilted, and the film bafflingly invents a Hollywood liberal called “Tim Williams” to take an interest in Rabiye’s case. A basically misjudged drama, though one with its heart in the right place. • Rabiye Kurnaz Vs George W Bush screened at the Berlin film festival.“The Valentine’s Day ads are driving me crazy,” my mother tells me an hour into our phone conversation a week before 14 February. It’s the kind of impromptu, rollicking chat you can only have when neither of you are in a rush because neither of you have a partner waiting for you to go to bed. My mother has more right than I do to be sensitive about the subject. We both became single in 2021. She lost her partner of 33 years to illness; my relationship ended after a little over a year. What bound us together tighter last year was the grief we felt as we mourned no longer having that romantic love in our life. For three years my mother cared 24 hours a day, seven days a week for my father, with increasing difficulty as vascular dementia took hold of his capabilities, his muscles losing their memory. I thought it was duty that bound her to do so. It was only in the last week of my father’s life that I understood it was love. That last week was the clearest I ever saw the depth of the love between them. As he entered a coma, the palliative care team told us that hearing was the last sense to go. With no acknowledgement of whether he could hear her, she spent the entire night before he died telling him every 10 minutes she loved him. In the subsequent months, as we spent more time together, my mother and I returned endlessly to discussions of what constitutes true love in a romantic partnership, its different iterations and the choices people make. In its absence in our own lives, we are left to marvel at how powerful a source it is not only of happiness but, ultimately, identity. But at the same time the year that passed was also a testament to the necessity of having love outside the romantic sphere – diversifying your love portfolio. Without my dad, my mum needed my love and that of my sister, my mum’s friends and our extended family, all the more. When my relationship ended, the same was true for me. Another friend reflected to me, after they broke up with their long-term partner, that they realised how much of their own self-worth they’d hung upon that single hook of being in a relationship. And, bearing all that weight, the fall is all the more shattering. Valentine’s Day as a commercial enterprise has homed in on a celebration of romantic love, to the exclusion of love’s other guises. This commercialisation can trick you into thinking that just because you don’t have romantic love in your life, you don’t have love at all. I like to think back to the day in lockdown when my mother and I rode our bikes to La Perouse in Sydney’s east. It was a Sunday, which I would have spent with my boyfriend had we not broken up the week before. Lockdown seemed a time that couples were more ubiquitous than ever, with no opportunities for group outings and the rules favouring visits with “intimate partners”. La Perouse was full of couples – elderly couples, couples with young kids, couples who could have been on a first date. But I was lucky to be part of my own couple, sitting on the sand and enjoying watching the waves with my mum, whom I love very much. The part I remember most in Virginia Woolf’s novel Orlando is when Orlando is among Gypsies: One evening, when they were all sitting round the camp fire and the sunset was blazing over the Thessalian hills, Orlando exclaimed: ‘How good to eat!’ (The gipsies have no word for ‘beautiful’. This is the nearest.) All the young men and women burst out laughing uproariously. The narrator explains: It is a curious fact that though human beings have such imperfect means of communication, that they can only say ‘good to eat’ when they mean ‘beautiful’ and the other way about, they will yet endure ridicule and misunderstanding rather than keep any experience to themselves. I like this passage because it resonates with my experience that being lonely isn’t an inevitability of finding yourself alone. The times I have felt the loneliest have been a visit to an art gallery, where I might see a really beautiful painting; or when I read something I know someone I love would find particularly funny, and think to myself: “I wish they were here with me.” I think back to those moments to remind myself to always be grateful for whatever love – whether it’s romantic or maternal or the love of an animal – that shows up in your life to share it with you.The event’s lineup was formidable and the audience at the 2021 Sydney writers’ festival was expectant: Cathy McGowan, Annabel Crabb, Kate Ellis and Mehreen Faruqi in a discussion on “women in politics” chaired by Clare Wright. It was a lively session, if also depressing, traversing the discrimination Faruqi and Ellis faced from opponents in the parliament, and in Kate’s case, from within her own party. Faruqi described how difficult she found it to even enter Parliament House since it had been revealed as a house of harassment, bullying and assault. She told the audience that, despite her previous career in the highly masculine profession of engineering, she had “never felt more marginalised and sidelined” than as a politician. For Faruqi, as a migrant brown woman, the parliament was a “very lonely place”. Ellis described the “unspoken code of not acknowledging the sexist and unfair treatment that has long bubbled away in the background of parliament”. She told the shocking story of a Liberal staffer, now a member of parliament, introducing himself by asking how many men she had fucked to get elected. Steeped in the post-production of her immensely enjoyable series Ms Represented, Crabb provided a historical perspective on women’s quest for electoral representation. But it was McGowan who stole the show with her rallying cry for more women to get involved in politics as independents, to follow in the footsteps of Zali Steggall, Rebekha Sharkie, Kerryn Phelps, Helen Haines and McGowan herself – to accept their voice, grasp their collective power, and get out there with courage and capacity to “do the work that needs to be done for the country”. She advocated for a strong, independent and female crossbench. “It can be done,” she said, exhorting the overwhelmingly female audience at Carriageworks to share her vision of an Australia whose citizenry, rejecting the status quo, got themselves elected to parliament to change it. She believed it possible. She had done it. “This could change things overnight,” she said emphatically, gesturing at the despicable anecdotes that hung in the air. “For too long, we have underplayed the power of our vote. We haven’t been strategic.” She challenged the audience to be brave, “to be the change you want to see”. If we do, she assured us, we can have “women of quality and courage and capacity and principle holding the balance of power”. Politics is a numbers game, she said, and we needed to be deliberate and strategic and go out and get those damn numbers. It was inspiring stuff from McGowan, delivered in a brisk, firm way, accompanied by invitations to get involved, to attend workshops coordinated by Women for Election Australia. Community-based politics runs somewhat in McGowan’s family, with her sister Ruth a principal in the Women for Election organisation, and her brother-in-law Denis Ginnivan, niece Leah Ginnivan and nephew Ben McGowan all instrumental in her first campaign for Indi. Denis subsequently founded Voices for AU, which seeks to inspire grassroots involvement in democracy across the nation, and he travels the country tirelessly, through Covid lockdowns by Zoom and now in person, to share his experience of the success of the Indi campaign, offering it up as a model for people to get involved in their community and consider backing – or being – candidates for election. The story of McGowan’s success in Indi is well known. After frustration at the neglect of the seat by the unlikeable incumbent Sophie Mirabella, in September 2012 a group of locals formed the community organisation Voices for Indi. Supported by Melbourne-based group Indi Expats, they created a community-focused strategy to shake things up, with the aim of turning Indi into a marginal seat at the September 2013 election. With a commitment to ensuring Indi’s “electoral voice is heard and represented at the national level”, they developed what became known as Kitchen Table Conversations. Interested individuals were trained to facilitate discussion between small groups in their networks, serving both to provide Voices for Indi with insight into the issues important to locals, and to seed the idea of the community supporting a grassroots independent candidate at the next election. Initially reluctant to stand herself, after urging from others, McGowan accepted she would be a competitive contender and “began the process of reconciling [her]self to six months of campaigning”. Although the initial objective had merely been to shock the Liberal party out of complacency by dramatically reducing its margin, McGowan invested all that she could on the campaign trail and was rewarded by the narrowest of victories 11 days after election night, when final prepoll and postal votes were counted. Against the odds, McGowan had defeated Mirabella by 439 votes and was going to Canberra. *** At Al Gore’s Asia-Pacific training for climate change advocacy, organisers promoted the idea of “lighthouse projects”. Said one attendee, Jane, who went on to work on Zali Steggall’s 2019 campaign, “It is something new that then acts as a lighthouse for everyone else. There is something that is now possible that wasn’t possible before.” McGowan’s victories in 2013 and 2016 became lighthouse projects for other electorates and community-based independents disgusted by the state of federal politics, particularly those frightened or ashamed of our inaction on the existential question of climate change. They inspired Kerryn Phelps to run as an independent in the Wentworth byelection in October 2018 triggered by the resignation of Malcolm Turnbull after his ousting from the prime ministership. Phelps’s strong victory saw a swing of 20% against the government, giving her 57% of the two-party-preferred vote, and it marked the first time in the seat’s 117-year history that it had been surrendered by the Liberal party. It forced Morrison into minority government, with six crossbenchers holding the balance of power. With the exception of long-term maverick conservative Bob Katter, the parliament’s crossbenchers rallied to support Phelps’s first foray into the legislative arena, the migration amendment (urgent medical treatment) bill 2018, the so-called medevac bill that provided critically sick refugees and people seeking asylum who were held in offshore detention with a pathway to be transferred to Australia for urgent medical treatment. Phelps worked on the bill with McGowan and Rebekha Sharkie of the Centre Alliance, the remnant of the Nick Xenophon Team that had also delivered Stirling Griff and now independents Rex Patrick and Tim Storer to the Senate – albeit in a convoluted way after Xenophon’s resignation from running for the South Australian parliament in October 2017, and Skye Kakoschke-Moore’s forced resignation in November 2017 after falling foul of the dual citizen crisis that engulfed federal parliament. Liberal defector and now independent Julia Banks was also an important supporter of the bill following her resignation from the Liberal party in November 2018 in the aftermath of the coup against Turnbull. With Andrew Wilkie, the Greens’ Adam Bandt and the Labor party also on board, Phelps succeeded in passing amendments to a government migration bill, the first time a government had lost a vote on its own legislation in almost 80 years. It was also the first positive measure taken in the field of refugee law since the early days of Rudd’s administration. Morrison was apoplectic and the government immediately sought to gain political mileage from the bill’s passage. “Australia is back on the map for people smugglers,” said Peter Dutton on 7.30. As a result of the bill, he said, there are people in detention “that can come to our country from Manus or Nauru. People that have been charged with child sex offences or have allegations around serious offences including murder.” When pressed by host Leigh Sales as to how many people in offshore detention were accused or suspected of such crimes, Dutton refused to answer. The passage of the amendments was a clear demonstration of the impact a committed and cohesive crossbench could have. While they could not form government, they showed that they could influence the national and legislative agenda. They could get things done. The euphoria was short-lived. At the 2019 election, Kerryn Phelps narrowly lost her seat to Dave Sharma, a former ambassador to Israel who had run again after losing to Phelps at the byelection. It was a blow to the independents’ movement. Standing as an independent in Flinders against Greg Hunt, Julia Banks also failed in her bid to return to parliament. On the plus side, McGowan, after serving the two terms to which she’d earlier committed, had retired and been replaced by Helen Haines, marking the first time that a seat had passed from one independent to another. Haines was joined on the crossbench by impressive newcomer Zali Steggall, the Abbott slayer, but the independents no longer held the balance of power. The government repealed the medevac bill on 4 December 2019 after securing the support of independent senator Jacqui Lambie in a secret deal, the terms of which remain unknown to this day beyond the fact that the government has failed to deliver on them. Initially, each of the successful independent candidates elected in this new modern era also had a rallying local issue on which to campaign. Cathy McGowan ran strongly on the idea that Indi had been neglected by a complacent Liberal party. She campaigned on the need for greater investment in infrastructure in the rural Victorian seat, particularly around the lack of rail services and track maintenance, and poor internet connections and mobile phone coverage. The personal unpopularity of Mirabella, who was nominated by Tony Windsor for the “nasty prize” as the person he’d miss least in politics, was also considered a factor in her defeat. Kerryn Phelps’s byelection victory was a protest vote against the deposing of Turnbull, while her loss at the general election reflected the abatement of the electorate’s fury. An articulate barrister and former Olympian, Zali Steggall may have been a candidate from Central Casting, but people in Warringah also voted for her because of who she was not – namely Tony Abbott, considered by many of his constituents to hold embarrassing and unrepresentative antediluvian views, and, as a failed prime minister, to have outstayed his welcome in the seat. Now, as disillusionment with the Morrison government grows in Coalition-held seats across the country, a new generation of independents is emerging. These candidates are typically newcomers to political activism and never anticipated they would be involved in electoral politics. “I had no intention of entering politics until I was approached by Voices,” said Zoe Daniel, former ABC foreign correspondent and independent candidate for the seat of Goldstein, whose declaration and launch event on the weekend of 27 November 2021 was greeted with a wild enthusiasm that sent sitting member Tim Wilson into a blind panic. “It’s time to step up to the table,” said Daniel. Allegra Spender, a businesswoman and daughter of Liberal party scion John Spender and the late fashion icon Carla Zampatti, announced her candidacy in Wentworth on the same weekend. Other candidates who had already declared included businesswoman Kylea Tink in North Sydney, architectural consultant Linda Seymour in Hughes and former teacher Penny Ackery in Hume. I have announced my own candidacy for the South Australian seat of Boothby. Rather than running specifically on local issues, this new set of candidates is running against the system itself, a system that delivered all the dispiriting, defining moments of the pandemic explored earlier. Our failure to grapple with climate change. The lack of integrity in politics. The loss of our moral compass on refugees. Our criminal complacency around gendered violence and inequity. Ackery’s opponent in Hume is the perennially unpopular scandal magnet and fossil fuel enthusiast Angus Taylor, who holds his seat by a margin of 13%. “Can we win?” says Ackery, contemplating the challenge. “We can win because there’s a wonderful growing independents movement that has paved the way, so that we know how to act, and what things need to be done.” So far, the tactics of the so-called moderate Liberals have been to paint these fiercely independent and mostly formerly apolitical women as Labor or Green stooges. Tim Wilson described Daniel as a “puppet whose strings they’re yanking to dance to their Labor and Greens tune”, someone who was “backed by Big Tech climate activists who want to rig laws so they can increase their profits from higher energy costs to businesses and households”. While stating he respected everyone’s right to run, Angus Taylor said the independents’ movement was “just another front for green activists to play dress up as independents”. Dismissing these centrist candidates, many of whom would have sat comfortably in the previously broad church of the Liberal party, as radical activists or stooges seems a risky tactic. Speaking at her campaign launch in Wentworth, where she was introduced by chair of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation and former Reserve Bank director Jillian Broadbent, Allegra Spender noted: “Today’s Liberal party is not the same party as that of my father and grandfather.” She called out the attempts to undermine her independent credentials: “Wentworth is not radical and I am not a radical at all. But there are those who are trying to paint me and this wave of independents as such.” They do so at their peril. This is an edited extract from Jo Dyer’s Burning Down the House: Reconstructing Modern Politics, to be released on Tuesday as part of Monash University Publishing’s In the National Interest series This article was amended on 15 February 2022 to correct the name and profession of architectural consultant Linda SeymourRoughly one in three Australians have confidence in the Morrison government, which is the lowest approval since the 2019-20 summer bushfires, according to a survey. The latest instalment of the Australian National University’s research of wellbeing during the Covid-19 pandemic found that in January satisfaction in Australia’s direction and the federal government both dropped. The longitudinal survey of 3,472 Australians was conducted in the final two weeks of January, as the Omicron wave and eased restrictions resulted in some days with more than 100,000 new Covid cases, and new records for the deadliest days. The ANU’s Centre for Social Research and Methods found 34.5% of adult Australians had confidence or were “very confident” in the federal government, down from a peak of 60.6% in May 2020. The result is only slightly higher than the low of 27.3% recorded during the 2019-20 bushfires. Confidence also declined in the public service, down to 57.6%, and in state and territory governments, down to 52.3%, but these institutions were still rated higher than the federal government. Between October 2021 and January 2022 satisfaction in the direction of the country fell to 63.6%, about the same level as the Delta wave of Covid in mid-2021. In January, just 40% of Australians thought “the worst of the pandemic is behind us”, down from 54.6% in October when lockdowns that successfully suppressed the Delta wave began to be lifted. As infection rates rose, so did Australians’ expectations that they would get Covid in the next six months, up from 40% in October to 80% in January. Almost a quarter of the adult population (22.4%) reported that they could not get tested when they wanted to. Of those, three-quarters (75.6%) blamed being “unable to find a rapid antigen test in my local area”. In early January Scott Morrison’s government promised to make rapid antigen tests free for concession cardholders after Labor promised free tests for all, but the scheme got off to a slow start due to supply issues. In February Morrison started the political year in an appearance at the National Press Club in which he offered an apology, of sorts, for the handling of the pandemic. “We’re all terribly sorry for what this pandemic has done to the world and to this country,” he said. Morrison conceded the government had been “too optimistic” and that “in raising those expectations about the summer, that we heightened the great sense of disappointment that people felt” when the Omicron wave increased cases, hospitalisations and deaths. The ANU study concluded that it was “always going to be necessary to open the country and ease restrictions that have been some of the most draconian in the developed world” and that it was inevitable this would “lead to a large increase in Covid-19 cases”. “But it was not anticipated that the opening would coincide with the new Omicron variant of the virus that while milder in terms of health consequences was far more infectious,” the study said. “It would appear from the data presented in this paper that at least in the short term the positive impacts of the easing of restrictions … have not outweighed the impact of a dramatic increase in infections and a smaller, but still considerable increase in hospitalisation and mortality.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Study co-author Prof Nicholas Biddle said the survey also found a “decline in confidence in hospitals and the health system, the largest we have seen during the pandemic”. “Although people are still quite confident in the health system, clearly the handling of the pandemic and the ongoing wave of Omicron infections is starting to take a real toll on how all major institutions are viewed by Australians,” he said. In January, Guardian’s Essential poll also showed Morrison’s approval reaching its lowest point of the Covid pandemic, although voters’ anger cooled in February after the Omicron wave had peaked.When Claire Simpson turned 50 in early 2020, she received a letter telling her to get a mammogram. Then the pandemic hit, and Victoria went into lockdown. “Like many people, I put it off until we were coming out of that lockdown, but by then it was September and I couldn’t get an appointment until December,” she says. In February 2021 she was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy. Tests showed she was positive for the aggressive HER2 receptor, so she began 12 weeks of chemotherapy as well as a treatment called Herceptin, which she received an IV infusion of every three weeks. Simpson says the delay in screening “really, really delayed diagnosis for me, by a good six months”. “I can’t help but feel that [an earlier screening] could have probably saved me from having to have chemotherapy and this Herceptin infusion therapy that I’m having,” she says. Her last Herceptin treatment was last Wednesday. She has been living in self-imposed lockdown, terrified as the Omicron wave built that she would have to isolate due to Covid and disrupt her treatment. That self-imposed isolation will continue until her final surgery, an elective operation scheduled for mid-year. Navigating a cancer diagnosis in a pandemic requires a particular level of fortitude. Family and friends are not allowed to sit with you for hours in hospital, and two years of staggered lockdowns have interrupted travel and important get-togethers. Activities which may be low-risk for others – like going to the supermarket in a mask or attending a picnic – become high risk. While the Omicron variant is less severe, high rates of infection in the eastern states have had a significant impact on the healthcare workforce, interrupting continuity of care and straining already overloaded systems. Fear of contracting Covid also means many people are avoiding going to their GP or putting off essential screening, as Simpson did. Cancer screening dropped by 10% in Victoria alone in the first year of the pandemic. In 2021, referrals to the Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, a leading treatment and research facility in Melbourne, were down 40%. “That is certainly going to bounce back at some point,” says Prof Sherene Loi, an oncologist and researcher at Peter MacCallum. “It is potentially going to be a real problem in a few years’ time. At the moment we have a lot of very young cancer diagnoses, a lot of breast cancer … we are just flat chat.” Loi has so far avoided having to isolate as a close contact, but her colleagues have been less lucky. “There’s lots of staff shortages, there’s lots of staff being furloughed because of their children coming home and giving them Covid,” she says. “When I came back from holidays, I was pretty much the only one in clinic. It’s very, very busy and crazy from a staff shortage point of view and constantly trying to replace staff. “And the patients are definitely more anxious in this wave because there’s so much more Covid around – they’re anxious about what’s going to happen when they get Covid, and whether they will get the right treatment, and having to reorganise scans and chemo.” Despite the “disorganisation and chaos”, Loi says, surgeries and traditional therapies like chemotherapy have continued. The impact has been on new therapies and clinical trials, particularly for people with terminal cancer. “I don’t think anyone’s care has been compromised,” she says. “But from my point of view, doing research and clinical trials and drug development, a lot of people have probably missed out on that because we haven’t had the resources to do more innovative stuff that could make a difference.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning For most patients, Loi says, the main impact has been having to attend treatment alone. Simpson’s mother also had breast cancer; she celebrated 10 years cancer-free just before Simpson was diagnosed. Not being able to have her support in hospital for the latter half of her chemotherapy, which coincided with the Delta lockdown, was difficult. “It’s quite isolating to go through something like that without being able to have support people with you,” she says. “I also live alone, so I’m going home to an empty house as well.” Another woman, who asked that her name not be used, was diagnosed with breast cancer last May and had to ask a friend to drive her up to three hours for treatment only to walk into the hospital alone. She recalls sitting alongside a teenage girl, also alone, who cried throughout the two-hour chemotherapy session. “It is uncomfortable, it is difficult, but you don’t have to look far to find people who are doing it worse,” she says. The 58-year-old was diagnosed after a routine mammogram, then had three rounds of surgery including a mastectomy, then four rounds of chemotherapy and three weeks of radiotherapy. Her radiotherapy coincided with the Omicron wave, with her last session on 25 January. The weekend before she was due to finish radiotherapy, a member of her household was identified as a close contact. She had spent the week at Inala House, an accommodation service for cancer patients in Tamworth, but usually went home on the weekends. “I didn’t want to go home and risk not being able to finish my treatment,” she says. Inala House was able to provide weekend accommodation at short notice. “It’s just one less thing that you have to worry about, if you know that you have your accommodation,” she says. Philip Lipscombe spent most of the last two years in self-imposed lockdown, and now fears the isolation more than the virus. Christmas 2020 was the hardest. Sydney’s northern beaches, where Lipscombe lives, was locked down just before the holidays, so he had to spend it alone. “I sat at home here and pulled a chicken to bits on my own, and that was Christmas,” he says. “And I mean, there is no point to life unless it’s got a little bit of quality.” The 76-year-old has been living with pancreatic cancer for eight years. He was originally told he would be lucky to live a few months, after surgery to remove most of his pancreas and 18 rounds of chemotherapy. It was a long, hard battle, and left him with two lesions on the bottom of his lungs, a timebomb that will one day go off. So when the pandemic first struck he was very careful. He avoided the shops, relying on meals on wheels and local group Golden Days to deliver essentials, and spent hours in the garden trying to pass the time. “I don’t think there was a weed that was game enough to show its face in that period of time,” he says. “I was very lonely, though, for human contact, because the only contact I really had was by phone.” Lipscombe now goes out two to three days a week with Easylink, a community organisation in the northern beaches which provides social outings and a medical shuttle service. On Wednesday they went for lunch at a football club, on Thursday they had a mystery picnic. He’s made friends on the buses, and the social outing is worth the risk of catching Omicron – all passengers are masked and triple-vaccinated, and most outings are outdoors. “I am a social person – I did 30 years on a post office counter talking to people every day,” he says. “I realised that I probably will get it – hopefully only a mild version probably, but my body, I’m in hopes, will be able to cope with that.” Lipscombe says he feels for those who have received a new diagnosis in the pandemic and are undergoing treatment without a loved one to hold their hand. He advises anyone who has been recently diagnosed to contact the Cancer Council about joining a support group. He has attended fortnightly support group sessions for pancreatic cancer for seven years. Calls to the Cancer Council’s support line increased in January, says Amanda Piper from Cancer Council Victoria. “We’re fortunate that we’ve got vaccinations in place for many people, and that’s an added layer of protection,” she says. “But people are fatigued. Cancer treatment takes a long time – people can sometimes undergo treatment for a year or more. It’s difficult to suggest that it’s that it’s worse now [than during lockdown] but it’s still hard. And people need support during this time.” If you need help, you can phone the Cancer Council support line on 13 11 20 or Lifeline on 13 11 14A proposed new coal-fired power station at Collinsville in north Queensland is now being pitched as a “flexible” firming project – a pivot that neatly aligns with federal government moves to bankroll such plans. The federal government controversially gave Shine Energy $3.3m in 2020 to conduct a feasibility study into the Collinsville plant. In a press release announcing the grant, government backbencher Michelle Landry said the generator would provide “affordable baseload power”. But information flyers distributed by the company in Collinsville appear to show the company has realised baseload coal plants are no longer viable, given the rapid proliferation of solar and other renewables in the energy grid. Shine Energy is now using the term “flexible HELE” (high-efficiency, low-emissions) technology to describe the proposed plant. The Shine Energy flyer said: “The project is being designed to ramp up and down and be placed on standby as directed by the Australian Energy Market Operator.” “[The pre-feasibility study found] the increasing level of renewable generation, and in particular solar generation, has changed the role of coal power plants from baseload to load-following.” Energy analysts said the assessment of the market is essentially correct – that the grid requires some firming capacity to support large-scale renewable generation at times when renewables are not productive. But they said coal is the least flexible technology and the heaviest emitter. “It’s technically possible [for a coal power station to be more flexible], but the ramp rate of a coal plant is a snail’s pace compared to gas peaking, and that’s snail’s pace compared to a battery,” said Tim Buckley, a market analyst and the director of Climate Energy Finance. “They may be able to build in some flexibility, but you’re talking [about] a really expensive piece of kit.” Buckley said that because of the infrequent and inconsistent need for ramping power and the rapid uptake of cheaper renewables, the sort of flexible coal plant described by Shine Energy was “totally unbankable [without] massive ongoing government subsidies and a massive ongoing exemption from carbon pricing”. While analysts say it is extremely unlikely a flexible coal plant would generate private investment, particularly given the shift in global finance away from coal, there remains the prospect that Collinsville could be built with sufficient federal government support. The government has cited the need to provide firming capacity as justification to subsidise otherwise unviable projects, like the $600m decision to build the Kurri Kurri gas project, which only expects to run at 2% of its capacity each year. There are some signs the federal government may also seek to subsidise coal to provide firming capacity. The Shine Energy Collinsville project has already been the subject of questions after it was invited to apply for a $3.3m federal grant for a feasibility study two days after being announced as the recipient. The National Audit Office raised concern about parts of that grant process. Shine Energy’s pitch leans heavily on arguments the coal plant will support the uptake of renewables, given the inflexibility of the national energy market’s existing coal power stations. The company claims its technology would create 25% less emissions than the average coal-fired power station in the NEM fleet. But both Buckley and the director of the climate and energy program at the Australia Institute, Richie Merzian, say that would still result in a relatively dirty power station. “The … Australian coal-fired power fleet is the highest emitting in the world,” Buckley said. “This plant will be about as carbon-intensive as the average plant in Japan. It’s still 100% more carbon intensive [than] any wind or solar project.” The company also makes unfounded claims that coal can be burned with “zero emissions” via future advances in carbon capture, storage and utilisation technology. Such technologies remain largely ineffective and unproven. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Despite $4bn in government commitments for carbon capture and storage in the last 20 years there isn’t a single ‘clean coal’ project in operation in Australia,” Merzian said. “It is not just wrong but dangerous to claim coal power can be ‘zero emissions’. The first step in addressing climate change is to stop growing the problem and coal is hands down the single largest source of greenhouse gas emissions.” Shine Energy chief executive, Ashley Dodd, did not address specific questions. He said: “We are proud Australian Birriah/Widi Traditional Owners committed to economic sovereignty for our people with an energy project that will provide benefit for the nation. “It is a shame the anti-nation-state globalist outlets like the Guardian are constantly attacking an Australian Birriah/Widi Traditional Owner-driven project like this.” The information given to Collinsville locals suggests the proposed plant would not be operational until 2026.Trekking into a walk-in campsite with a tent and provisions for fire-cooked meals on your back can definitely be a romantic experience. But if you’re after intimacy and seclusion that is a little less rugged, accommodation in scenic areas often escalates from under-the-stars to five stars, with not much in the middle. We’ve scoured the country for short stays and experiences that feel special but not extravagant, within a few hours of every capital city. NSW: Bioluminescence and a boutique hotel Where: Blackheath, 1 hour’s drive west of Sydney (2½ hours by train) What: The Kyah – which opened late in 2021 – has used a pastel palette and a restrained eye to transform an old motel into something far more stylish, retaining a twist of 70s nostalgia. In an area known for four-poster beds and lavish lace curtains, it’s sleeker and more affordable than many of the other big hotels around. The on-site restaurant Blaq sources mainly from producers within the region, an approach that extends to the wine and cocktail list. Blackheath also has a handful of excellent cafes and one fancy dinner spot (Ates) in town too. In the evening, go on an adventure to discover glow-worm colonies in the Blue Mountains’ sheltered canyons and gullies. For a few weeks a year, usually in late December, there are even courting fireflies around. Price: From $420 for a two-night stay in a king room at The Kyah plus $14.95 for a downloadable Blue Mountains Glow Worm and Firefly Discovery Guidebook. Tasmania: A Kombi van on a Clydesdale horse farm Where: Huon Valley, just over an hour’s drive south of Hobart What: Ten minutes’ drive from Cygnet and Huonville, a restored 1975 Kombi called Frida offers a taste of van life, without the commitment. Parked beside a pretty creek, the owners will decorate it to a theme of your choosing – all varying shades of hippy – upon request. The farm has several private waterholes for warmer weather (though diving into bodies of freezing water is a Tasmanian tradition), and there’s also a hot outdoor shower. There’s an extensive outdoor set-up including a deck, fire pit, and a kitchen with a potbelly stove, with a cook-it-yourself breakfast also provided. Price: $497 for a two-night stay at Kombi Kamp. South Australia: Bushland and wine, just outside the city Where: Aldgate, half an hour’s drive southeast of Adelaide What: Surrounded by tall trees, Cladich Pavillons’ three glass and corrugated steel rooms strike a balance between big windows and a sense of privacy. They’re right in the middle of an excellent wine region, too. For big estate tastings try Sidewood and Shaw and Smith, while experimental, natural drops from smaller producers can be found at Summertown Aristologist. Meanwhile, Applewood distills craft spirits, and the McLaren Vale is off to the south. If your idea of romance runs more toward chocolate boxes than wine, then the early German settlement of Hahndorf is just 11 minutes down the road. The area has several farmers’ markets too. Price: Approximately $480 for a two-night stay at Cladich Pavilions. Queensland: Sunrise, sunsets and a groovy pink hotel Where: Coolangatta, 1¼ hour’s drive from Brisbane (under 2 hours by public transport) What: Get your kitsch kicks on behind the white sands of Coolangatta Beach at a hotel that looks like a Wes Anderson film on the outside and an episode of the Real World: Miami inside, complete with an Astroturfed rooftop bar. Nearby, Eddie’s Grub House has repeatedly picked up nods for having the Gold Coast’s best burgers despite not technically being on the Gold Coast. Within a short stroll, both Kirra Lookout and Point Danger offer that east coast rarity: sublime sunrise and sunset views over the water. Check out hidden Froggy Beach wedged between Snapper Rocks and Point Danger and take a surf lesson together with a mate at Greenmount Beach. Price: From $268 for a two-night stay in a King Room at the Pink Hotel, which leaves plenty of budget for $55 beginner surf lessons plus burgers and drinks. Northern Territory: Glamp and float through Kakadu Where: Yellow Water Billabong, three hours’ drive west of Darwin What: Kakadu national park may sound like a big-ticket trip, but during the wet season prices drop significantly, making it more feasible for a quick escape. In a couple of days, you can swoon over the birdlife on Kakadu’s Yellow Water billabong cruise and cool off at Maguk, Motor Car or Moline falls. Savour colour-saturated sunset vistas over the flood plains at Nawurlandja lookout and admire the Burrungkuy (Nourlangie) rock art site before sultry nights in your glamping tent (don’t worry, it has ceiling fans and air conditioning) at Cooinda Lodge’s outback retreat. Conditions change quickly during the wet season, so always check park websites and local signage for closures. Price: From $358 for a two-night stay at Cooinda Lodge’s Outback Retreat and $164 for a 1.5-hour Yellow Water cruise for two. Note that prices can more than double during the high season (June through October). ACT: Caves, a thermal pool and an atmospheric lodge Where: Yarrangobilly, 2¾ hours’ drive south-west of Canberra What: Discover the surprisingly romantic stalagmites, stalactites and other delicate decorations of the Yarrangobilly Caves in Northern Kosciuszko national park. The gigantic South Glory Cave is magical, with light streaming through a hole in the top. Dress warmly to explore the caves, but bring swimsuits to soak in the warm-but-not-hot thermal pool. The rugged karst landscape offers great wildlife and bird watching, and the beautifully restored 1917 heritage Yarrangobilly Caves House makes an ideal base. Price: $317 for a two-night stay in a queen room at the self-catering Caves House. Cave tour prices vary from $22-$38 per person. Jersey and Jillabenan Caves are currently closed due to flooding. The free thermal pool is closed until 9 April due to maintenance works on the track. Victoria: A little taste of France Where: Avenel, 1½ hours’ drive from Melbourne (and the same by train) What: The affordable French provincial inn offering food that warms your soul, comfortable beds and big gulps of country air is a rarity in Australia. But the two-storey, slightly bohemian Harvest Home hotel fits the bill, with six character-filled rooms, complimentary breakfast, a pretty garden, a swimming pool and an open fireplace when the weather turns chilly. Enjoy the likes of goat’s cheese tarts, risotto primavera and mouth-watering eye fillet with a thoughtful selection of central Victorian wines on the terrace, veranda or inside. Check out the Ladies Who Shoot their Lunch range of wines at nearby Fowles Wine. Price: Starts at $398 for a two-night stay with full breakfast at Harvest Home. Mains at the restaurant are priced around $30. Western Australia: A secluded cottage near sublime beaches Where: Yallingup, 2¾ hours’ drive south of Perth What: The romantic jackpot: a serene, secluded studio cottage with a large bath, wood-burning stove, and glorious vistas. It’s just five minutes’ drive to the surf at Smith’s Beach and just a little longer to the dreamy aquamarine waters of Bunker Bay, while the entire smörgåsbord of Margaret River wineries is laid out to the south. At the end of the day, watch surfers and dolphin on the famous Yallingup surf break as the sun sets over the Indian Ocean. Price: Approximately $460 for a two-night stay in the Honeybee Cottage at Wildwood Valley Cottages.Crash! Screech! Kaboom! These are some of the sounds of Ozploitation movies: an explosively entertaining category of cinema that offered a very different experience to the more vaunted “Australian new wave” (although some films could be categorised as both). I have limited the scope of the titles below to adult-oriented genre films (the kind that wouldn’t look out of place at a drive cinema) produced in the 70s and 80s. From sexcapades to car movies and a creature feature, here are the very best. 15. Alvin Purple (1973) and The Naked Bunyip (1970) The sexploitation film is a subgenre of Ozploitation, soiling bedsheets and outraging prudes since the early 70s. Graeme Blundell stars in the two all-time greatest – drawing a dead heat in this list. In Alvin Purple, Blundell plays a man who tries to avoid sex but whom all women find irresistible; in The Naked Bunyip he’s hired by an advertising agency to conduct a survey on sex in Australia. The latter became the stuff of legend when the censors banned several scenes; in response, director John B Murray and producer Phillip Adams blacked out the screen and inserted footage of a cartoon bunyip. 14. Mad Dog Morgan (1976) Few things in human history have been as wild as Dennis Hopper after a bottle of spirits. Anecdotes about the making of Philippe Mora’s bushranger action-drama, starring a fake beard-wearing Hopper as the all-guns-blazin’ protagonist, are almost as entertaining as the film itself. Beginning as a penal colony-era prison movie, Mad Dog Morgan morphs into a story of friendship (between Morgan and his partner in crime, played by David Gulpilil) then one of proto-celebrity – or perhaps “notoriety” is a better way to put it. The film’s scratchy, earthy vibes suits its bush settings. 13. Stone (1974) In 1998, to mark Stone’s 25th anniversary, more than 30,000 bikers congregated in Sydney to recreate the film’s iconic funeral scene – speaking to the enduring legacy and intense if niche fandom associated with Sandy Harbutt’s scrappy classic. Biker gang The Gravediggers allow a detective (Ken Shorter) to go undercover with them, in order to investigate the murder of gang members. The plot structure is haphazard and the ride, so to speak, is bumpy. But the film’s energy prevails, and it’s full of small moments of visual innovation. 12. The Return of Captain Invincible (1983) In this fabulously flaky superhero outing Alan Arkin plays the titular character, who, in a proto-Hancock and The Incredibles-esque plotline, fights Nazis and busts up bootleggers until the US government takes him to court for wearing undies in public. The Cap buggers off to Australia and becomes a hopeless alcoholic, but ultimately takes up the fight against Christopher Lee’s nefarious supervillain. The film is a musical (because of course it is) with songs written by The Rocky Horror Picture Show’s Richard O’Brien, including this irresistible rumination on the nature of good and evil: 11. Turkey Shoot (1982) Before Squid Game and The Hunger Games there was this batshit crazy tournament movie, full of splatter and carnage, set in an Orwellian future where the underclass are prey for a sport played by wealthy sadists, determined to chase and kill them before sundown. Nothing was too weird for this deliriously harebrained narrative, which includes a toe-eating werewolf-like monster and one of the most breathtakingly evil prison guards in cinema history – played by shiny-scalped legend Roger Ward. 10. The Man From Hong Kong (1975) Brian Trenchard-Smith’s characteristically energetic martial arts movie plus car movie plus cop movie plus all-round action explodapalooza follows a Chinese special agent (Jimmy Wang Yu) who infiltrates a criminal network led by a gangster played by George Lazenby – aka “the Australian 007.” There are great stunts, a cracking pace and very well staged sequences, including a thrilling eight-and-a-half-minute car chase that would surely have inspired George Miller’s Mad Max movies. 9. Inn of the Damned (1975) Terry Bourke’s meat pie western never achieved all that much street cred, which is a shame because the film is top notch – beginning in jaunty Sergio Leone mode and culminating with a magnificently suspenseful finale. In the titular inn, circa the late 1800s, guests are murdered in their sleep by its maniacal owners (Dame Judith Anderson and Joseph Fürst), making the place a kind of Bates Motel Down Under. Determined to outsmart them, the hero (Alex Cord) must stay awake in a room fitted out with a bed that doubles as an elaborate death machine. 8. The Cars That Ate Paris (1974) In director Peter Weir’s feature debut, a young crash survivor (Terry Camilleri) is stranded in a small town where the economy relies on a steady supply of wrecked vehicles – a premise ripe with satirical and allegorical undertones. There’s intergenerational tension between the town’s lead-footed young hotheads, who drive freaky chunks of twisted metal, and the older folk, as well as a mayor (John Meillon) who declares that nobody is ever allowed to leave. The meaning of the film is cryptic, adding a serious, curious subtext under the bonnet. 7. Razorback (1984) The animatronic pig in Russell Mulcahy’s style-saturated creature feature isn’t great – but, like in Jaws, this forced the director to cut around it and innovate elsewhere, resulting in a film that succeeds magnificently despite its limitations. The plot is thin, involving a grizzled man (Bill Kerr) as dedicated to finding the boar that took his grandson as Captain Ahab was to nailing Moby Dick. But its artery-choking atmosphere is so thick you could cut it with a knife. 6. Patrick (1978) A new nurse (Susan Penhaligon) at a private Melbourne hospital is warned that “the salary’s minimal, the hours abominable”. But nothing could prepare her for Patrick: the titular character who is an intensely … horizontal presence, lying in bed comatose throughout the experience, with the ability to make all kinds of bad things happen due to his psychokinetic powers. Richard Franklin’s unforgettable midnight movie is a great example of creating a lot from a little, and wringing suspense by cutting around a villain. 5. Road Games (1981) Another stroke of genius from Richard Franklin, here in full-blown Hitchcockian mode, delivering a shrewdly calibrated thriller. A truck driver (Stacey Keach) en route from Melbourne to Perth passes the time by imagining the stories of strangers on the road. When he comes to believe another driver might be a killer, is he imagining it, or is he on to something? Quentin Tarantino was on the money when he said: “You could remake Road Games tomorrow and not change a damn word for it and it would scare the hell out of everybody.” 4. Long Weekend (1978) It’s not difficult to introduce a scary villain: just put some dude in a mask and give ’em a chainsaw. The tantalising question at the heart of Colin Eggleston’s sort of horror, sort of relationship drama is whether there even is a villain in the first place. A bickering couple (John Hargreaves and Briony Behets) disrespect the environment on their camping trip, tossing a cigarette butt out the window and killing a dugong. So Mother Nature brings together birds, insects and animals to take them down. Or … is it all just a coincidence? The menace is everywhere and nowhere: in the trees, in the water, in the sand, and HOLY HELL IT’S RIGHT BEHIND YOU! 3. Dead End Drive-in (1986) A dystopian social allegory set in a drive-in cinema doubling as a microcosm of society? Genius! When a young man (Ned Manning) borrows his brother’s vintage car to impress his girlfriend (Natalie McCurry) at said drive-in, they find themselves unable to leave, discovering the drive-in is a society unto itself – with its own economy (even its own currency) and political factions. The protagonist’s determination to bust out leads one of Ozploitation’s most iconic images: a Great Escape-like moment involving bright lights, broken timber and a sensationally airborne vehicle. 2. Mad Max (1979) and Mad Max: The Road Warrior (1981) The first two of George Miller’s face-melting classics have been lumped into one hellzapoppin entry. After the director introduced his road warrior to audiences in 1979, action cinema was never the same. For a long time the original – a wild revenge movie and origin story for Mel Gibson’s angry antihero – was the most profitable feature film made anywhere in the world. The sequel cranked up the production values, with more spectacular BDSM-like outfits and one of the greatest chase scenes of all time. 1. Wake in Fright (1971) Ted Kotcheff’s 1971 masterpiece – for decades considered lost until eventually found in a box marked for destruction – is so damn good, and so damn ’strayan, it both epitomises and transcends the Ozploitation genre, offering the midnight movie crowd something seriously brilliant to chew over. Following an English high school teacher (John Grant) who is driven to madness in a small outback town, Kotcheff builds a dread-inducing atmosphere, clogged full of dust and sweat. You don’t so much watch this film as feel it; pressing “play” is like opening an oven door and getting hit with a blast of hot air.At the back end of last year, stretching into the early part of this, the AFF Suzuki Cup, the biennial showpiece of Southeast Asian football, did what it always does: deliver unscriptable drama, unparalleled entertainment, and shine a spotlight on the emerging talents within southeast Asia. The names of Thailand’s Supachok Sarachat, Indonesia’s Alfeandra Dewangga or Malaysia’s Safawi Rasid might not be familiar to fans here in Australia, but they shone in Singapore and are the sort of talent the Australian Professional Leagues, now in charge of the running of the A-League Men’s competition, will be hoping to attract to Australia with the proposed introduction of the ‘plus one’ rule for the competition. The ‘plus one’ rule has been widely adopted across Asia but stubbornly rejected time after time in Australia, with one former A-League club owner insultingly suggesting it would “ ... compromise the product we provide”. The rule sets aside one foreign place specifically for a player from an AFC member nation to encourage greater movement of players within the continent, with the APL proposing to change to A-League Men’s quota from five foreigners to four plus one. Its implementation across Asia has opened up a whole host of opportunities for Australian players across the continent from Japan to the Gulf and everywhere in between, but to date the open door has not been reciprocated. Quite why it has taken the clubs this long to jump on board, especially after the resounding success of the AFC Asian Cup in 2015, is a question only they can answer. But, better late than never. “One of the unique selling points of our sport is that if you think about the DNA of football, the game in this country has been built on migrant populations coming to the country and assimilating into the community through football,” APL chief Danny Townsend told the Sydney Morning Herald. “That being the case, why aren’t we leveraging our near neighbours who have a significant cohort of migrants in our country and are football first countries?” Why indeed. But there is more to it than just signing players. If the clubs want to unlock the league’s true potential, they engage these communities. Both here and further abroad they must approach that mission in a holistic manner. It cannot be done by just signing any one player. While important, that must be one piece of a much larger puzzle; one which requires a long-term vision and mindset. The J.League has set the blueprint for how to engage with the region. It involves the league and clubs showing a commitment to developing links within the respective countries, not just pillaging their best talent. The J.League has created a dedicated department within its operations that is solely focused on their international outreach. On the back of the success of Thai trio Chanathip Songkrasin, Theerathon Bunmathan (who won the J.League under Ange Postecoglou at Yokohama F.Marinos) and Teerasil Dangda, the league created a Thai-language Facebook page, with content curated specifically for a Thai audience, that has grown to a touch under half a million followers. It is no surprise that Japan is seen as the pinnacle destination in Asian football. In the case of Australia, which has at times had a difficult relationship with our nearest neighbours, showing sincerity and commitment is even more important. It demonstrates a willingness to be a good citizen of the region, and ultimately Australia stands to benefit from an increase in quality. Finding the right player who can not only contribute on the pitch but also aid ambitions off will not be easy. It requires scouting, connections and know-how, all stuff that takes years to curate. We are also competing for talent against the J.League, and now the K League, both of which are more developed and have stronger reputations across Asia. It also requires patience. Despite what some may think, getting players, especially from Southeast Asia, to take the plunge and move abroad is not an easy task. There are strong familial ties and cultural barriers keeping them in their homelands. For example, Vietnam’s Nguyen Quang Hai, who shone against the Socceroos last month, is arguably the best player in southeast Asia and yet, despite reported interest from abroad, including in Japan, no one has yet been able to prize him away from the vice-like grip of his club, Hanoi FC. The club and league who do tempt him away – if anyone can – will benefit enormously, like the J.League has done from the success of Chanathip. To do so that club will need to sell a vision, a pathway for the player to bigger and better things. In the example of Chanathip, after five years establishing himself as one of the league’s better attacking talents, he has this year signed for defending champions Kawasaki Frontale and will be playing in and challenging for the AFC Champions League – the pinnacle of club football in Asia. As Australia tumbles down the AFC club rankings and risks falling out of the AFC Champions League completely – a topic for another day – the question we need to ask ourselves is simple: what is the vision we are selling a player like Nguyen Quang Hai?Unemployment in regional Australia has dropped below the magic 4% but experts say the outcome is “double-edged”, as surging vacancies amid a shallow labour pool looms as the bigger issue. Ballooning vacancies are already beginning to constrain development across whole regions and multiple industries beyond farm labour shortages. The latest Regional Australia Institute’s job vacancy report shows that with an unemployment rate of 3.8%, regional Australia has already hit the national target of below 4% announced by the prime minister at the beginning of the month. However, the report found that while the number of people employed in regional Australia in December 2021 was just 1% more than in December 2020, the number of job ads had “ballooned” by 36%. Dr Kim Houghton, chief economist at the Regional Australia Institute and lead author of the report, said: “The overall driver of these low unemployment numbers and rapid increase in job advertising is because the total size of the employment pool has been so diminished by the closing of international borders.” Houghton said there was a lot of variation across the regions, with some still at 7-8% unemployment and others under 2%. According to Houghton, the lower figures are a positive outcome for regions which have experienced “stubbornly high” unemployment rates, such as many locations in New South Wales and Victoria which have seen higher population growth than job growth. However, he says for many inland locations with rates under 2%, it can prove “chronically low” as employers are left without a pool of people they can readily draw on, meaning there is no room for employees to retire or leave the workforce. James Atkinson, an associate at SGS Economics &amp; Planning, said the shallow labour pool was a major disincentive to the growth in regional areas of new businesses, as well as the operation and expansion of existing businesses. Unable to find employees, Atkinson says regional business owners are having to take on the necessary tasks themselves, often at the cost of their own business’s productivity. “When you see that happening across the region it starts to impact the productivity of the entire region,” Atkinson said. Nick Collett, a manager at Key Employment which operates employment agencies along the north coast of NSW, says unemployment figures have “definitely gone down” while the current vacancy rate is “exceptionally high.” “We are fielding many calls from current and new employers desperately seeking workers, whether it be to fill a shortfall due to Covid, or trying to find someone permanent to fill a roster,” Collett said. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Jo Palmer, the founder and managing director of Pointer Remote Roles, an online platform that facilitates remote work opportunities for people living in regional, rural and remote regions, believes the trend for remote working would “for sure” be contributing to ever-increasing job vacancies. Palmer has had over 1,000 registered job seekers with her company, which she says is “crazy” as she estimates it’s three times as many who registered in January 2021. “To me that indicates, if those employment rates are right, these people are employed but not happy,” Palmer said. She believes people unhappy in their work are moving around for flexibility, or at least indicating by registering with her company that “they’ve got their eyes open to new opportunities that are offering a remote location”. Houghton affirmed consequences for those communities where unemployment does fall too low, “essentially it’s a break on growth” restricting not only the growth of business, but also the availability of services in regional places. “When we look at the jobs vacancies in caring professions, personal and community services, now they’re the glue that hold our communities together,” Houghton said. “There’s quite a lot at stake. It’s not just about export businesses having difficulty with pickers and packers. This is about the fundamental structure and services available in our regional communities,” he said. The report found regional employers are demanding higher-skilled labour, with the highest demand for professionals accounting for one quarter of all vacancies in regional Australia, while technical and trade worker vacancies were the next largest group, accounting for 16% of all vacancies, followed by community and personal care roles at 13% of all vacancies. The report recommended greater investment in the availability of quality post-school training and learning across regional Australia, as outlined in the National Regional, Rural and Remote Tertiary Education Strategy adopted by the Government in 2020. Fiona Nash, who was appointed regional education commissioner in December 2021, says there’s a huge gap between people in the city and the country gaining a university degree. “They’re less than half as likely as a city person by the time they’re 35 to have attained a university degree,” Nash said. A related problem, she says is the brain drain as regional students are less likely to return to the regions and practice if they undertake a component of their studies in the city. Yet conversely, she says “all of the studies point to where we see students studying regionally, and being able to undertake their education regionally, they are more likely to go on and practice their profession in the regions.” Housing supply emerged as the second issue alongside educational opportunities which the report found was constraining labour supply in regional Australia. Nash said while the increasing numbers of people moving to regional areas due to the pandemic has affirmed the value of living and working in regional communities, it has become harder to find a rental property or buy a home. Houghton says the last two years has seen regional Australia benefit from greater investment as a result of the pandemic as well as excellent agricultural seasons, “this bounce back is really starting to show where the constraints are in the system”. “Our regions are busting to grow, but there’s a constraint on bodies and there’s also a constraint on housing,” Houghton said. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityAs Eddie Howe ran out of Newcastle players to embrace and, wreathed in smiles, finally walked off the pitch, he looked up towards the directors’ box and blew his wife a kiss. If she had not already realised it, this was surely the day when Vicki Howe fully understood precisely why her husband wanted to be the manager of one of English football’s doziest sleeping giants. Three consecutive wins have not merely lifted an apparently doomed side four points clear of the relegation zone but breathed new life into a club transformed under their controversial Saudi Arabian-led ownership. Played out against an electric, highly evocative, backdrop of vigorously waved black and white flags and a soundtrack of “Eddie Howe’s black and white army”, this was an afternoon when, despite the chill rain, anything seemed possible. Admittedly Newcastle rode their luck a little in the second half but with the debutant Dan Burn outstanding in central defence and Kieran Trippier around to score the winning goal, midtable beckons. “We’re in a good place at the moment,” said Howe, who smiled broadly when asked whether a top-10 finish was feasible, but he is sweating on the fitness of Trippier, who went off with a foot injury early in the second half. The defender went for an X-ray and returned from a short hospital visit on crutches. “There’s still a heck of a long way to go and things to improve. But it was the sort of tight game which, in weeks gone by, we wouldn’t have won. We defended heroically at times.” Newcastle paid Atlético Madrid £12m for Trippier as much for the England right-back’s crossing and dead-ball acumen as his defensive attributes and when Howe’s team won a free-kick fractionally outside the area there was only one man for the job. That set piece was awarded after a VAR review had overruled Craig Pawson’s decision to point to the penalty spot after Calum Chambers – a less than reassuring, slightly clumsy central defensive presence throughout – sent the accelerating Joe Willock tumbling. Trippier promptly ensured Villa’s reprieve would prove temporary by powering his kick through the wall and, courtesy of a slight deflection off Emiliano Buendía, on past a wrong-footed Emiliano Martínez. Until then Villa had largely succeeded in frustrating Howe’s team. Pressing high and hard, Steven Gerrard’s players refused to allow Jonjo Shelvey and company time on the ball in midfield, and the assiduously marked Allan Saint-Maximin was initially allowed precious little room for manoeuvre, no matter where he wandered . Yet hard as John McGinn hassled and harried and as successful as Villa proved in forcing Newcastle to resort to sending Chris Wood chasing long balls and lost causes, they created very few chances. A big part of that was down to Burn’s positional excellence. The Northumberland-born £13m recruit from Brighton replaced an unwell Jamaal Lascelles and, on this assured evidence, Howe’s captain may struggle to reclaim his place. Indeed with Philippe Coutinho not so much tamed as rendered anonymous by Trippier’s shadowing, Martin Dubravka was rarely called to goalkeeping arms and Villa’s collective attacking talent remained dormant until a potential watershed was reached two minutes into the second half. When, to collective groans, that foot injury forced Trippier off, Coutinho finally sensed opportunity. Emil Krafth had barely stepped off the bench before the former Liverpool and Barcelona creator was dancing, teasingly, away from him. Within seconds Coutinho unleashed a defence-bisecting through-ball and although Ollie Watkins could not quite make the most of it, Howe and his assistant, Jason Tindall, exchanged anxious glances. Such nervousness swiftly looked well founded. Inspired by an apparently reborn Coutinho Gerrard’s attack finally stretched Burn to the limit and when Watkins headed the fallout from Lucas Digne’s low cross and Coutinho’s deflected shot beyond Dubravka it appeared Newcastle’s worst fears had been realised. In the event VAR came to the rescue, its review detecting the most fractional of offsides against Watkins. If there is such a thing as a “toenail decision” this was it. Villa have not won here since April 2005 – the day Newcastle’s Kieron Dyer and Lee Bowyer engaged in an on-pitch fist fight – and their improvement in a second half briefly interrupted by a medical emergency high in the Gallowgate End was never sufficient to change that narrative. “I’ve got no complaints with the result,” said a downbeat Gerrard, declining invitations to complain about Watkins’s disallowed header. “I believe you make your own luck and I expect more from this team, collectively and individually. Newcastle didn’t have to play incredibly well to win. I feel frustrated and disappointed.”The film that everyone is talking about this year in Berlin is the dazzlingly accomplished and confident debut feature from the 42-year-old Mexican-Bolivian film-maker Natalia López Gallardo; as a former editor, she has worked with Lisandro Alonso and Carlos Reygadas, whose various influences are detectable in the movie’s mixture of languour and shock. The title appears to refer to a Buddhist parable about the man who lives in poverty, not knowing that a wealthy friend has securely but invisibly sewn a precious gem into his robe so that he would not have to live like this: the allusion is one of the many opaque and difficult things about this film. It is a disturbing and unsettling piece of work, a psycho-pathological moodboard of a film, in which guilt, horror and shame poison the atmosphere. Exactly what is going on has to be inferred through the indirect hints and cloudy indications; these are never finally and definitively revealed, and I can’t be absolutely sure that this obscurity is not a first-time film-maker’s flaw. But Gallardo certainly has a fluent cinematic language at her command. This is a story of crime, class and corruption in modern Mexico. Isabel (Nailea Norvind) is a wealthy woman with two children, Benja (Balam Toledo) and Vale (Sherlyn Zavala Diaz). Her marriage is evidently unravelling, and she is taking the kids to move into the derelict modernist villa once owned by her late mother, an imperious woman we see in flashback. The maid there, Maria (Antonia Olivares) is haunted by the disappearance of her sister, a grimly commonplace situation since kidnappings and murders are the staple of Mexico’s criminal classes – along of course with drugs. Police searches show us that this woman’s body may actually be buried in the grounds. Maria has another secret: rising young mobster Adan (Juan Daniel García Treviño) has some sort of hold over her, and indeed over his own police officer mother Torta (Aida Roa), who is disgusted both with her son’s involvement with crime and her own complicity in cartel operations, blandly expected of her by her own superior officers. And at the centre of it all, Isabel is apparently convulsed with a need to solve the mystery of Maria’s sister, but also to be hurt and punished. Is her self-hate and self-harm a symptom of a poison in the spiritual water supply? Or her hatred of her mother? Her possibly abusive husband? Closeups on Norvind’s face show someone pulsing with suppressed rage and despair. It is a film whose procedural wooziness deliberately renders the audience more vulnerable to its moments of high-impact, zero-trigger-warning shock; these are managed with great skill and brilliant cinematography by Adrian Durazo. But, like the work of Reygadas, I have an uneasy feeling that the brilliance of these flourishes, particularly the climactic and dreamlike slo-mo sequence, might show a certain creative immaturity – impressive and effective though they are. Yet there is also a fierce, high seriousness to the way that Gallardo is addressing the buried, denied crimes of the Mexican state and the Mexican ruling classes. It has the dimensions of tragedy. • Robe of Gems screened at the Berlin film festival.It always seemed likely to be a close-run thing whether Antonio Conte would break Tottenham or Tottenham would break Conte, but at the moment it is the Spursiness that is on top. Conte’s five league titles may have come in a perpetual frenzy of touchline fury, but he was reduced in the second half to wandering disconsolately around his technical area, giving the occasional bark of disappointment. After a nine-game unbeaten run in the league after his appointment, three straight league defeats, the first time that has happened to Conte in 12 years, mean the honeymoon is definitively over. With familiarity, ingrained habits are beginning to grate. Why can they not put their trousers on the hanger? Why can’t they ever take the rubbish out? Why will they not do the absolute basics of defending? “There is a long path in front of us,” Conte said. “Supporters mustn’t be scared to face this but for sure there are many aspect to improve.” Bruno Lage’s Wolves can have a pleasantly soporific quality, like tropical fish in a tank. You start watching the patterns and before you know it five or six minutes have gone by and nothing much has happened. But that still doesn’t quite explain the collective switch-off that led to Tottenham going behind in the sixth minute. Raúl Jiménez’s goal was a case study of everything that’s been going wrong with Spurs this season. Unable to handle the Wolves press just as they had been unable to handle Southampton last Wednesday, Spurs conceded a cheap free-kick. Harry Kane’s headed clearance was probably a little more central than would have been ideal, but it would not have been a major problem had anybody followed it out. As it was, Rúben Neves was given time to measure a shot – that’s Rúben Neves who has scored 14 times from outside the box in his four-and-half years at Wolves; why would you bother closing him down? Hugo Lloris shovelled the ball out to Leander Dendoncker and although the goalkeeper was able to recover to palm out the mis-hit shot, Jiménez rammed in the rebound. And all the while Tottenham defenders, rabbits trapped in a pinball machine, looked on in uneasy bemusement. “A winning mentality means that when you play I am willing to kill you to live,” Conte said. “In every situation and second ball, with chances to score and set pieces you must show greater desire than your opponent.” Spurs played a much more active role in Wolves’s second. Lloris, almost passing the ball out for a corner, put Ben Davies under pressure, squandering possession as Wolves closed him down. Daniel Podence’s shot hit Davinson Sánchez, ricocheted on to Rodrigo Bentancur, cannoned against the post and fell for Dendoncker to knock in. And to think there had been doubts as to whether the Uruguayan would be able to adapt to the new environment. Conte had accused his side of being too emotional in last Wednesday’s defeat; here they looked apathetic, bordering on the comatose. His reaction was to take off Ryan Sessegnon for Dejan Kulusevski after 28 minutes and switch from the back three to a 4-2-3-1 with Kulusevski occupying Neves. But, frankly, if players stand and watch the ball bounce around them, the formation is a secondary concern. And the issue is even deeper than that. Bentancur, perhaps, will bring the requisite quality on the ball at the back of midfield, but for a couple of seasons, certainly since the departures of Mousa Dembélé and Christian Eriksen, Spurs have had nobody who can hold the ball under pressure. Tanguy Ndombele and Giovani Lo Celso were sidelined quickly by Conte and loaned out in January. Pierre-Emile Højbjerg, whose form has dipped since the Italian arrived, was left out – the first time that has happened at Spurs when he has been available. Tottenham were better in the second half and perhaps a comeback might have been sparked had Harry Winks’s drive been deflected in rather than against the outside of the post, but Wolves defended well and had chances themselves. “We controlled the game,” said Lage. “What is most important is we played the way I wanted us to play.” But for Spurs the point is no side with Champions League aspirations can just be giving two goals away, especially not against an immediate rival. Conte has been in charge for 19 games and kept five clean sheets. Whether that is a matter of structure or mentality, if Tottenham are to finish in the top four, that is nowhere near good enough.In a year when Jürgen Klopp has spent £50m on a forward, Liverpool seem to have gained a prolific scorer. Not Luis Díaz – or not yet, anyway – but Fabinho. Klopp’s title hopes may be faint but they could have been extinguished without his newly potent holding midfielder. Fabinho’s fifth goal of 2022 reduced the gap to Manchester City to nine points; had it not been scored by the man who shields the back four, the temptation would have been to call it a poacher’s strike, scrambled in from half a yard and showing a predatory instinct associated more with strikers. The importance of a clinical touch was underlined as Burnley lacked one. Their last 851 minutes of top-flight football have yielded them a mere three goals, just as they have a solitary league win here in more than a year. One unwanted statistic ought to have changed and another could have done courtesy of a first half when they had the superior chances. And yet, thanks to Fabinho, Burnley went in with a deficit. Unlike against Manchester United last Tuesday, there was no comeback. Seven points from safety, their local derbies next season are likelier to involve Wigan and Blackpool than Liverpool and United. For Liverpool, however, it was the definition of a hard-fought win. Troubled initially, and unconvincing before the interval, they played with greater authority after Fabinho struck. Virgil van Dijk eventually looked unruffled in the Burnley gales. Others dug in. “We made our shirts dirty,” Klopp grinned. He could be grateful his plans required a rethink. The initial intention was for Sadio Mané to be a substitute. Promoted to start because of Diogo Jota’s dead leg, he proved Liverpool’s brightest attacker, taking the momentum he gained in the Africa Cup of Nations to a different continent and a very different climate as Díaz was spared a baptism of wind, rain and cold. Even by Burnley’s standards, it was inclement weather. “Everything was set up to be a banana skin for us,” said Klopp. “The wind was ridiculous. It came from all directions.” If the stereotype suggested it was scarcely a day for Brazilians, Fabinho proved otherwise. What looked the most prosaic of goals, it was the product of planning. Liverpool are the division’s set-piece specialists and, when they were otherwise uncreative, they forged two clear openings from Trent Alexander-Arnold’s dead-ball delivery and Mané’s elusiveness. Each brought saves from Nick Pope, but with a different sequel. When Mané met the right-back’s free-kick with a half-volley, it thudded into the goalkeeper’s chest and bounced to safety. Then Mané arrived in space Liverpool had pinpointed but he had to improvise a low header from Alexander-Arnold’s corner, Fabinho stole in behind James Tarkowski to shoot. Pope saved, but the midfielder bundled in the rebound. “He scores a counter-pressing goal in the six-yard box,” beamed Klopp. After four goals in 142 games, this was Fabinho’s fifth in seven. Klopp shouldered the blame for his previous barren spell. “He probably would have scored much more goals for Liverpool if I had put him in the box in offensive set pieces,” he said. “Only recently we did and he scores.” Pope, apart from a Naby Keïta shot he clawed away, was relatively untroubled. Along with a scuffed effort from the substitute Jota, Liverpool’s greatest threat in open play was when Ben Mee almost turned Alexander-Arnold’s cross into his own net. The visiting defence was subjected to a stiffer examination against awkward, attritional opponents. “We dealt with it pretty well,” Klopp said, but only after fraught moments. There were points where it appeared to be the quintessential Burnley performance, save for the most important element: the finish. “Frustrated,” said their manager, Sean Dyche. “We have created some golden chances and we have to keep on doing that and we have got to take them.” In particular, Wout Weghorst, the January signing from Wolfsburg, has to. “You can see his cleverness and work ethic,” said Dyche and if Weghorst’s touches suggested the giant Dutchman may be an upgrade on the departed Chris Wood, definitive judgments may be formed on the basis of their respective goal tallies. Weghorst’s wait to open his Burnley account goes on after a display of profligacy. When Liverpool were caught on the counterattack, Ashley Westwood led it, Jay Rodriguez slid his strike partner in on goal and Weghorst’s dinked shot over Alisson was going wide even before Alexander-Arnold hacked it away. Weghorst was off target again later, drilling a half-volley past the post, after Connor Roberts’ ball over the top. “He will score goals,” said Dyche. “I am absolutely convinced of that.” Rodriguez, meanwhile, got a first league goal in 11 months against Manchester United but was wasteful when his touch was poor and Alisson saved, just as the goalkeeper had earlier denied Josh Brownhill. He was not the only Brazilian to prevail in Burnley.Boris Johnson should act immediately on Sue Gray’s recommendation to help whistleblowers raise concerns about wrongdoing, the Liberal Democrats have said, arguing the prime minister is “picking and choosing” which parts of her report to implement. Ed Davey, the party’s leader, has written to Johnson calling for action over what he called “staggering failures” in helping officials to challenge misconduct, and seeking details on how often staff had expressed worries about lockdown gatherings. The interim report by Gray, a senior civil servant, into alleged breaches of Covid rules inside Downing Street and elsewhere in government withheld most details due to a continuing police investigation into potential lawbreaking. However, it condemned “failures of leadership and judgment”, and also warned that some staff had “wanted to raise concerns about behaviours they witnessed at work but at times felt unable to do so”. Gray recommended: “There should be easier ways for staff to raise such concerns informally, outside of the line management chain.” While Johnson has apologised for the failings, and has since significantly shaken up his senior No 10 team, Davey said there was as yet no evidence of action being taken to help would-be whistleblowers. “Boris Johnson stood up in parliament and committed to accepting Sue Gray’s findings in full,” Davey said. “But since then he has been picking and choosing what to implement, focusing on strengthening his position instead of preventing future law-breaking in No 10.” Using a parliamentary question, the party asked the Cabinet Office, which works closely alongside Downing Street, and which was connected to some claims of social gatherings, what whistleblowing guidance it had in place. The response said that “if individuals suspect wrongdoing, they have a responsibility to speak up”, stressing that this included potentially illegal actions. In his letter to Johnson, Davey said: “Reading this guidance, it is quite clear that there have been staggering failures in regards to the whistleblowing policy at the top of government. Either staff simply felt unable to raise concerns about continued social gatherings in Downing Street and the Cabinet Office, or their concerns were ignored by senior management.” Davey said that despite the reorganisation there had been no information on how to assist staff in raising worries: “It is extremely concerning that your response to this highly critical interim report has been to make changes which benefit you, rather than make it easier for your staff to report potentially criminal activity in future.” He asked Johnson to outline how many concerns about the social gatherings were raised, whether there were any consequences for whistleblowers, and to instruct Samantha Jones, the newly appointed permanent secretary of the new Office of the Prime Minister, to update the whistleblowing policy in Downing Street and the Cabinet Office “as a matter of priority”. “For the good of the country and for the sake of our national security, we need a culture in No 10 and the Cabinet Office which welcomes staff who blow the whistle – not one in which staff feel unable to speak up,” Davey wrote. “As prime minister, it is incumbent on you to understand the gravity of these concerns and urgently resolve the real problems which Sue Gray has outlined.” A Downing Street spokesperson said: “We are making immediate changes to No 10 to address the issues identified in the Sue Gray report. “This week we appointed a permanent secretary to lead the new Office for the Prime Minister. She will be reviewing the structures and operations in place to improve No 10 and ensure the team are supported to deliver on the prime minister’s agenda.”Two rounds into the 2022 Six Nations championship and still it is hard to know what to make of Eddie Jones’s “new England”. Despite this comfortable-looking scoreline they remain a distinct work in progress and their remaining opponents will not, on this evidence, be overly intimidated. Rather than lighting up the Eternal City as their coach had invited them to do, this was more of a flickering Roman candle. On the plus side a bonus point win ensures they can prepare for their meeting with Wales on Saturday week with much still to play for and their fly-half Marcus Smith continues to show why he has to be the heart of England’s future. But against an Italy side whose limitations against the game’s major nations remain obvious, there was a bloodless feel to the home side’s 34th successive Six Nations defeat and little in the way of gladiatorial satisfaction. Was it asking too much to expect the same throbbing intensity and quality as the France v Ireland game on Saturday night? Of course but having led 26-0 with 35 minutes to play England should be disappointed that they did not finish the Italian job with the ruthlessness that tends to distinguish the top sides. Instead, after the departure of the quicksilver Harry Randall, the game died a slow, lingering death save for a late score for the visitors’ replacement prop Kyle Sinckler. Five tries, including two for the industrious Jamie George, was pretty much the minimum England would have wanted to score to put their Scottish disappointment behind them, particularly as Italy’s defensive organisation out wide left a lot to be desired. At least they had Smith on hand to weave a little creative magic but 20 turnovers conceded against spirited but outgunned opponents snuffed out any real rhythm. At least Ben Youngs, who came on to win his 114th cap and equal Jason Leonard’s England men’s appearance record, will remember this occasion with some affection but the yawning gaps in the stands, with local Covid regulations limiting the maximum attendance, and the frequent ho-hum nature of much of the contest made it comfortably the least compelling occasion of an otherwise cracking Six Nations weekend. Thank heavens, then, for the weather, as gorgeous as much of the so-called contest was monochrome. It could have been a parallel universe compared to the previous week’s Murrayfield experience, with the rain and the wind replaced by a benign sunny Sunday afternoon ideal for a leisurely game of tennis at the Foro Italico next door. There were, in short, no excuses for England not to zip the ball around and play a little bit. They did exactly that but the early exchanges were so loose the game barely resembled a top-level Test. It needed someone, metaphorically speaking, to put their foot on the ball and Smith swiftly emerged as the best man to do so. Holding the ball in two hands he expertly manipulated some defensive uncertainty down the Italian left and Max Malins slipped nicely around the outside before offloading back to his supporting fly-half. All those with bets on England’s starting wingers to lead a subsequent try-scoring barrage, however, were to be confounded. England’s second and third tries went instead to George, the hooker showing good strength and persistence to barge his way over for the first, and then popping up wide on the right for a galloping score shortly before the interval initially sparked by a horribly loose pass by Italy’s scrum-half Stephen Varney and, subsequently, a lovely long floated pass by Ellis Genge off his left hand. Genge’s contribution was exactly the kind of moment that brightens the mood of all involved but, once again, that did not include the unfortunate Jack Nowell. The winger’s first England start for three years lasted 16 minutes, a failed HIA prematurely ending his afternoon after the Australian referee Damon Murphy and the medics had initially not seemed inclined to heed the ‘if in doubt sit them out’ protocol that is so vital for the protection of all players. The substitution of Will Stuart at half-time for Sinckler also gave Italy’s pack a slightly different challenge to address, forcing the hosts to work hard for the scrum parity they had previously achieved. The Azzurri, though, were also having to battle a spiralling penalty count and a failure to capitalise on the chances they did create, with even a rash of visiting fumbles and knock-ons doing little to level up the contest on the scoreboard. Italy also had little answer to Smith’s slick attacking execution, a beautiful flat miss pass allowing Elliot Daly to canter over down Italy’s exposed left flank once again. Sadly, apart from Sinckler’s little scoring cameo and Henry Slade’s narrow failure to add a sixth try in the closing seconds, that was pretty much the height of England’s second half performance. If it was good to see Leicester’s Ollie Chessum sprinting on for his senior debut, at no stage did England appear a side poised to cut loose and unleash hell. The imminent return of Manu Tuilagi will clearly help in that regard and the 8-9-10 combo of Alex Dombrandt, Randall and Smith also showed some genuine promise. Overall, though, it was a curious day all round, the most bizarre fact being that both starting scrum-halves were fluent Welsh speakers. The Italian wing Monty Ioane is also planning to have a large gondola tattooed on his back next week but, from England’s perspective, the defining images of this Six Nations campaign still await.It shouldn’t be remarkable, but it is. The prime minister’s suggestion that Keir Starmer, in his former role as director of public prosecutions, was responsible for the failure to prosecute the paedophile Jimmy Savile may soon be lost to the slipstream of political memory – but for a while, for more than a brief moment, it was met by a sustained chorus of anger and criticism across the country. The BBC made clear that there was “no evidence” for the claim; other broadcasters unequivocally referred to it as a “slur” in their headlines; the former Tory chief whip and House of Commons Speaker both publicly rebuked Johnson; even one of his most loyal aides, Munira Mirza, hitched her resignation to it. Behind the incredulous responses you could detect a sense of relief that “we are not there yet” – the “there” being a sort of post-Trump US, where QAnon conspiracy theories regularly make the headlines. But this is no moment for complacency. We are somewhere else, somewhere also troubling: a place where people are in denial about how Johnson’s Savile slur was the product of a political culture saturated with falsehoods, so often aimed at the political left and minorities. The wrongness of the Savile claim “cut through” because of the specific climate and manner in which it took place. The contempt for the man who made it, and his political position at the time – desperately lashing out to divert attention from his sinking premiership and sunken morals – made it seem lower and dirtier than if it had been made in any normal course of political business. The timing also amplified the claim, made as it was in a televised Commons session when the stakes were high, immediately after the release of Sue Gray’s damning “update”. Then there was the position of Starmer himself in this unique scenario, a protagonist sanctified in his role as representative of an angry and wounded nation. It was poor timing and optics on Johnson’s part. But, other than that, you can’t blame him for thinking that he would get away with it scot-free. All he was doing was taking part in a long, successful Conservative tradition that now involves shady extremists on social media, but has historically relied on a zealous rightwing press that brought us such smash hits as Ed Miliband, the son of the man who “hated Britain”. Let’s not forget that two Conservative prime ministers had either directly accused Jeremy Corbyn of being a “terrorist sympathiser”, or boosted claims that he had been a Soviet asset. In 2015, David Cameron called Corbyn a “security-threatening, terrorist-sympathising, Britain-hating” ideologue, using out-of-context quotes suggesting that the Labour leader was distressed by Osama bin Laden’s assassination, rather than the lack of any attempt to bring him to trial. When, in 2018, the Sun published an exposé asserting that Corbyn was a “paid collaborator” who had been “recruited” by cold war Czechoslovakian spies, Gavin Williamson, then defence secretary, ran with it. “That he met foreign spies is a betrayal of this country,” Williamson said. The Conservative MP Ben Bradley – in a since-deleted post, for which he later apologised, paying a “substantial sum” to charity – said that Corbyn had “sold British secrets to Communist spies”. When asked about the allegation, Theresa May said that Corbyn should be “open and transparent” and “account” for past actions. “The story lived on,’’ wrote the Washington Post, “provided oxygen by none other than Prime Minister Theresa May.” Cameron, whose political record in general has been buried under his colossal Brexit folly (better to be remembered as a fool than a knave), also enthusiastically embraced and promoted specious theories to support Zac Goldsmith’s London mayoral campaign against Sadiq Khan. He once said in prime minister’s questions that he was “concerned about Labour’s candidate as mayor of London” because he had “shared a platform” with a “radical imam”. Not only was that wrong: that very imam then told LBC radio that he was a Tory supporter, and felt rather bruised that he had been used to discredit Khan. Little of this is clever, studied stuff. It is more a strategy of throwing mud and hoping some sticks. If things get out of hand, then politicians soberly condemn the consequences with straight faces, as Johnson did when Starmer was harassed by anti-lockdown protesters who repeated, among other things, the Savile slur. When political rhetoric spills over into the real world, as it inevitably does, it’s attributed to an extreme minority of cranks – anti-vaxxers, lockdown sceptics, racists, loners and weirdos. But these people pick up their views from a larger cloud in which two fronts of misinformation constantly swirl – the demonisation of migrants, Muslims and other minorities, and the smearing of Labour politicians and leftwing movements as anti-British. Driving these winds is a poorly regulated press prone to having ideological motivations at worst, or being straight-up gullible at best. The Sun can publish a far-right conspiracy about a “hard-left extremist network” at the heart of the Labour party, and then delete it before the day is out, with no explanation or, more crucially, much outrage. The same goes for discredited front-page stories about Muslims fostering Christian children, and faked “plots” to take over British schools. It’s hard to look at the past decade and conclude that Johnson’s Savile slur came out of a clear blue sky. It’s a good thing that many were appalled by it, but that’s of no use if we are going to continue to be selective about which falsities we let slide in the future. It will happen again. Even Starmer’s amnesty is fading. Despite the force of the pushback to Johnson’s lie, the machine is already mobilising to defend and launder it. Before long, it will probably pass into the realm of vexatious and plausible tropes tarring the Labour party. That’s not Johnson’s or the far right’s doing alone. The truth is that, deep down, too many people who aren’t radicalised or conspiracist think targets of smears are somehow fair game, perhaps not guilty of this or that particularly outlandish offence, but generally flawed enough for lies to capture a wider truth about them. The natural outcome of this is the entrenchment of a political culture in which dangerous untruths are rife and rarely challenged. Either every one matters, or none of them do. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistGusts of up to 90mph have been forecast to cause disruption across northern regions of the UK, with windy and “disturbed” weather expected across the country this week. The Met Office has issued a yellow alert for wind on Wednesday and Thursday for parts of Northern Ireland, most of Scotland and the north of England. Road, rail, air and ferry services may be affected, with longer journey times and cancellations possible, the Met Office said. Power cuts could occur, with the potential to affect other services, such as mobile phone coverage, the forecaster added. The storm does not yet have a name, but the Met Office has not ruled out giving it one, if and when meteorologists believe it has the potential to cause an amber or red warning, meaning they judge the storm could be dangerous or cause widespread disruption. Tom Morgan, a Met Office meteorologist, said: “This whole week is going to see quite a disturbed weather pattern developing across the UK.” The worst of the wind looks likely to hit midweek, with a 24-hour weather warning coming into force from 6pm on Wednesday, stretching down from Orkney to parts of Yorkshire and Lancashire. Morgan said: “That’s likely to bring some severe gales and possibly storm force winds to parts of this region. Western parts of Scotland look like bearing the brunt of the strongest winds, where we could see gusts of 80mph to 90mph on Wednesday night and Thursday morning. “That’s strong enough to bring some quite widespread disruption, and it’s an area of the country that’s seen several named storms this winter season already.” As part of the yellow wind warning, the forecaster said there was the potential for inland gusts of up to between 60mph and 70mph, with exposed coasts and hills getting wind speeds of up to 90mph. “It’s not just going to be strong winds this week,” said Morgan, who warned there could be snow in Scotland, Northern Ireland and northern England, adding there were likely to be snow and ice warnings issued over the next few days. The bad wintery weather is not just going to affect northern parts of the UK. Morgan said: “The southern parts of England and Wales will see their turn. It looks very, very windy in the south at this stage for Friday. There could be some quite widespread travel disruption in parts of the UK through this week.”That’s it from me, thanks for your company and chat. Bye Here’s the full match report for your consideration. Harry Randall is chatting “It’s awesome to play in the Six Nations and pleasing to keep them to zero. Few frustrations, but overall a good performance. Credit to the team around me, there was lots of experience helping me out. The breakdown let us down a bit at times and that’s an area we can improve on.” Man Of The Match, Marcus Smith, is talking to ITV. “We put a big emphasis on this game and we put ourselves back in the competition this week. We were a bit scrappy in parts, credit to Italy, but scoring that many points is good. I loved paying with Harry Randall, we came through age ranks together so we have a connection. We’ll enjoy tonight, but onto the next game after that.” A very poor second half. If this game tells us anything it’s that France and Ireland are significantly better than what was on display here from England. PEEEEEEEEP! That’s brings us to a close with another comfortable England victory. 80 mins. England are into the Italy half with Steward set free by Smith to take it into the 22. Simonds has a drive then Slade picks and goes from the ruck to ground it on the line while stretching, but it looks like he lost control of it under pressure. No try. 79 mins. In a outcome as depressing as this game has become, Pettinelli knocks on at the base of the scrum. England fling it wide from deep and are up to halfway. 77 mins. Italy claim a lineout in the England 22. Faiva secures it at the back of the ruck which allows the ball to be flung to Marin who angles a kick towards Ioannes wing, but there’s too much on it and it rolls into touch. But a penalty advantage was being played and Italy take the scrum on the English five metre line. 75 mins. George Ford is on for Joe Marchant. He will play 12 while Smith stays at stand-off. Well, that’s certainly novel, I’ll give Jones that. 74 mins. Fusco spills a high ball on his 22 that immediately puts England back on the attack. Malins hit the line on the angle then feeds Sickler the ball who scores. Smith converts. 72 mins. Another Italy attack in the 22 leads to another penalty against England, this time Sinckler handling in the ruck. In Italy’s latest attempt to not be on nil, Faiva overthrows the lineout and England clear their lines. 70 mins. Some phases around halfway from England come to an end after Smith is caught isolated in the breakdown. Italy will have a lineout just outside the England 22. 67 mins. Italy have some drives off the lineout to suck the English defence in, but Cowan-Dickie clamps on to win a penalty. Italy’s search for points goes on. 65 mins. England subs. Ollie Chessum is on for his debut, replacing Tom Curry Joe Marler replaces Ellis Genge 64 mins. Tom Curry gives away a penalty for off-feet following some consistent phased attack from Italy. Garbisi sends it to the corner. Italy have never been nilled in a competitive match against England and they will want to prevent it happening here. 61 mins. A couple of England attacks end in errors; the first a knock-on from the Smith and the second a stray pass from Malins into touch. Italy secure possession from the lineout and kick it into the England 22 before Marchant runs it out and then slices it horribly out on the full. 58 mins. Italy go for a trick lineout with the ball pinballed short and back to Faiva. He gets the space to charge towards the line but he’s tackled by Malins and is in touch. Some tactical kicking ensues which Garbisi concludes by chipping a kick he wanted his winger to chase out on the full. I’m also not sure he let his winger know that’s what he was going to do either. 57 mins. Ben Youngs’s first contribution is to knock on at the base of the ruck and from the scrum Italy win a penalty for Sinckler collapsing. Luke Cowan-Dickie replaces Jamie George. 55 mins. Italy subs. Fecerico Mori is replaced by Leonardo Marin. Giovanni Pettinelli is on for Sebastian Negri who is stretchered off looking in a bad way. 55 mins. England subs. Ben Youngs replaces Randall, winning his 114th cap draing him level in appearances with Jason Leonard. Sam Simmons replaces Isiekwe. That should see Itoje move to lock and Simmons into the back row. 54 mins. Italy are having their best period of the game in attack. They are in the Engand 22 again and the ball comes left to Ioanne to dash for the line, but he’s well shepherded by the England scramble defence. On the next attack it’s yet another handling error that ruins a decent position for them. 51 mins. Hooker Gianmarco Lucchesi is replaced by Epalahame Faiva for Italy 50 mins. Some solid possession is finally secures by Italy in the England 22, the maul for a bit then work some phases. England are offside again so Garbisi attempts and chip into the in-goal, but it runs dead. Italy have another lineout, but on the resulting possession Dombrandt clamps on the ball to win a turnover penalty. The home side may feel a little aggrieved as in the previous possession Curry was hugely off his feet over the ball, 48 mins. England are close to running rampant now, this time Slade throws a long pass out to Malins on the right wing who is up to the Italy 22. The home defence scramble and some hard work forces a knock on that makes it’s way to Ioanne who runs forty metres back into the England half. The white defence is offside and Italy will attack from a lineout. 45 mins. Italy decide to perform sub surgery on the scrum with Cherif Traore replacing Fischetti 44 mins. From the next scrum, Randall finds Smith who fires a miss-pass to Daly running at full pelt up the left touchline who scores in the corner. Smith pushes a difficult conversion wide. 41 mins. Fischetti is penalised for collapsing the scrum and from the resulting England lineout they are fizzing with a pacy run from Randall again that breaches the Italian 22. Two phases later a handling errors brings the attack to a stop. Italy have a tricky scrum to navigate deep in their own territory and they are pushed backwards like buttered sled loaded with soiled nappies. England ask for another scrum. 40 mins. Marcus Smith’s kick-off doesn’t go ten metres. Can’t wait to see how the Second Coming of Jesus (but in Rugby) narrative-mongers spin that one.. England half time sub: Kyle Sinckler is on for Will Stuart Half time musings. Italy would not have zero points if they had just a little bit more composure and precision. Much of the errors that led to lost possession were unforced, and while Coach Crowley can’t control the opposition he will be fuming that what his side can control is a mess. The try before half-time was a killer and again it was down to an daft error. If the home side can cut some of that out they could get some points on the board, but England are never far away from scoring at all times as their pace of attack and physicality are causing Italy to infringe all over the shop. England man, Gus Hornsby, offers his take on the first half. PEEEP-PEEEEEP! That’s your lot for now. 40 mins. Monty Ioane does a great job of slapping back and Randall bomb, it pops to Varney who for some reason instead of holding it shovels a load of crap forward back to England. Three phases later, the front row union shows the backs how it’s done as Genge in the 13 channel floats a lovely pass to George on the right wing to power over. Smith converts to end the half. 38 mins. Toa Halafihi needs an HIA and so is replaced temporarily by Sebastian Negri. 37 mins. In a move that surprises no-one, England send it to Isiekwe and set up the maul from the middle of the lineout. The Italian pack do a decent job of stopping it and Randall sends it to the runners to start carrying into the Italy defensive line. The Azzuri are throwing everything at tackles on their line and force Genge to knock on over the line. Impressive defensive set from the home side. 35 mins. Harry Randall, who has looked busy and assured so far, puts up a lovely box kick that give his chaser Elliot Daly a chance to compete and regather possession via a slap-back. Two phases later Ruzza is offside on the tackle line. That’s eight penalties and formal warning from the ref. Smith sends it to the corner. 33 mins. Italy have already conceded seven penalties as they attempt to match England’s physicality in the ruck. The latest is sent to the corner for a lineout that the England forwards secure and suck the Italian defence in for Itoje to dot it down from a few metres out. But wait! TMO Brian McNiece has spotted that Isiekwe was in front of the maul from a detached position. Hence offside and so no try! 30 mins. Garbisi takes the time of a prog-rock album track to execute a clearing kick and Tom Curry is up to him off the scrum to charge it down. Luckily for Italy, Curry took the ball so hard it knocked him out of his stride meaning he couldn’t beat Garbisi to regain the possession. 28 mins. Jack Nowell has failed an Head Injury Assessment and is replaced by Elliot Daly. England once again don’t have an actual winger on the field. 27 mins. Italy are in the England half with the ball in hand. Garbisi flashes it right and Mori takes Smith on around the outside, but the stand-off does enough to hold on and put the winger into touch on the England 22. 25 mins. A solid scrum from Italy in their own 22 means Varney can clear. England come back with the ball in hand, but Slade is isolated which allows Italy to grab a turnover in the ruck. 21 mins. Italy will be very frustrated at their inability to treat possession with the care it needs as they lost promising positions to inaccuracy. However, even if they had managed to get some points on the board, England looks likely every time they have have the ball. 20 mins. Isiekwe takes a the ball at the tail of the lineout and Randall carries into the Italy 5m. The forwards get in on the carrying act and the final drive comes from George to score from short range. Smith adds two. 18 mins The Italian forwards compound their misery by naulsing their lineout up and England have the ball back once again and carry into the Italy half. The Azzuri do enough to contain it and clear. 16 mins. Garbisi chips over the England defence for Zanon to gather, and some quick offloading sets Steyn free and into the England 22. But it comes to a frustrating end as the white defence snaffle the ball to end the attack. 15 mins. Varney is inattentive at the base of the ruck which allows the ball to wriggle free and Jack Nowell to dive on it, recycle it and Randall boots it clear. 13 mins. Italy are deliberately not competing at the ruck, which means England are getting the ball away quickly but have a well-staffed solid tackle line to break. Smith knocks on and Italy are on the attack from a scrum in the England half. 10 mins. Ellis Genge has a big carry in midfield on halfway and the ball is worked left through hands to set Nowell free up the touchline. The Italy defence scrambles but England continue to work the ball across the pitch and back again. As it’s again moved left, Malins pops up on his opposite wing and pops the ball inside to the supporting Smith to score. The Harlequins man then dusts himself off and converts his own try. 7 mins. England catch and drive a lineout in the Italian 22 that the Azzuri pack hold still and force Randall to release it to the backs. Malins is off his wing on the angled run but he fumbles the pop-pass form Smith and Garbisi boots it deap and clear. 3 mins. Italy have the early possession, some phases end by forcing an England drop out from under their own posts. 1 min. We’re underway. The teams are out, there is a smattering of fans due to ongoing Covid restrictions, and the band is playing. We’ll soon have the anthems then the small matter of the game. “One thing I was looking forward to for England for today was seeing Radwan bring electric pace to the wing and just gas it,” Robin Hazlehurst offers, “but I guess Eddie’s model is for players who can play multiple positions across the backline and out-and-out pace on the wing is not what he wants. I get that, but it’s a shame though.” There’s a lot to be said for pure chaos pace on the wing, especially in a game like this, but Jones clearly loves Malins. Eddie Jones is on the tellybox chatting about creating A New England. In doing this it’s vital he bears in mind that it’s wrong to wish on space hardware. Pre-match reading department.. Does anyone give Italy any hope today? Or perhaps you’d like to tell me what you’re looking forward to from this freshened up England? You can send all this and more to me via Email or by tweeting @bloodandmud Kieran Crowley changes three after the defeat in France. Federico Mori starts on the wing in place of last week’s teenage try scorer, Tommaso Menoncello. Odd selection this, given the young lad’s try and that Mori is a centre and has never started a Test on the wing. Braam Steyn is for Sebastian Negri in the back row, and Pietro Ceccarelli gets nod in the front row ahead of Tiziano Pasquali. Those waiting for Sergio Parrisse’s farewell nostalgia tour appearance must wait a little longer. Eddie Jones has rolled the dice, changing half the team, some through injury and some through choice. Maro Itoje moves to blind-side while the coach awaits Courtney Lawes’s return to fitness. Charlie Ewels takes the vacant lock berth and Alex Dombrandt is in at No. 8. In the front row, there are starts for Jamie George and Will Stuart. Jack Nowell returns to the wing as Joe Marchant moves to outside centre and creates the 10-12-13 with Smith and Slade that looked very promising in the Autumn. Feeding the ball to them will be Harry Randall who has taken the scrum-half shirt from Ben Youngs for this match at least. ITALY Edoardo Padovani; Federico Mori, Juan Ignacio Brex, Marco Zanon, Montanna Ioane; Paolo Garbisi, Stephen Varney; Danilo Fischetti, Gianmarco Lucchesi, Pietro Ceccarelli, Niccolò Cannone, Federico Ruzza, Abraham Steyn, Michele Lamaro (capt), Toa Halafihi. Replacements: 16 Epalahame Faiva, 17 Cherif Traoré, 18 Tiziano Pasquali, 19 David Sisi, 20 Sebastian Negri, 21 Giovanni Pettinelli, 21 Alessandro Fusco, 23 Leonardo Marin. ENGLAND Freddie Steward; Max Malins, Joe Marchant, Henry Slade, Jack Nowell; Marcus Smith, Harry Randall; Ellis Genge, Jamie George, Will Stuart, Charlie Ewels, Nick Isiekwe, Maro Itoje, Tom Curry (capt), Alex Dombrandt. Replacements: 16 Luke Cowan-Dickie, 17 Joe Marler, 18 Kyle Sinckler, 19 Ollie Chessum, 20 Sam Simmonds, 21 Ben Youngs, 22 George Ford, 23 Elliot Daly. Hello everyone and welcome to our live coverage of Italy vs England in Round 2 of the Six Nations 2022. The track record in this match makes for some very grim reading for Italy. Focusing solely on games played in Rome since the Azzuri joined the tournament in 2000, England have outscored them 48 tries to 9. Yes, you read that correctly, Italy have only scored 9 (nine) tries against England at home in ten games over some twenty years. England remain the only side not to suffer a loss against Italy in the Six Nations and they usually win pretty handily. Even in Rome, England’s average winning margin is 25 points, and dragging that average down are some outlying closer matches during the nadir of Brian Ashton’s and Martin Johnson’s regimes. All that aside, Italy under new coach Kieran Crowley looked better last week in defeat vs France than they have for a while. There were points in the game where the forwards took it to the French powerhouses via the likes of Danilo Fischetti, Toa Halafihi, Federico Ruzza and captain, Michele Lamaro. They look like they could be building something to compare with the relative golden age around a decade ago. The problem is, even in that mini purple patch, England still tonked them. Can’t see much else happening today, but can you imagine?That’s it from me. Thanks for your company, correspondence and puns on Cash and Burn. The action continues at the King Power Stadium, where Leicester entertain West Ham and Kurt Zouma has just pulled out, possibly feeling as sick as a cat. Do join John Brewin for live coverage of that game. “Perfect,” says Dan Burn, the man of the match. “A clean sheet is important and this run has changed the whole feel. The intensity we’re playing with at the moment, the crowd feed off it.” That is surely a two-way street, but you can’t argue with the results. It’s the first time for more than three years that Newcastle have won three league games in a row. No goals after half-time anywhere in the Premier League, so Liverpool win 1-0 at Burnley and Wolves win 2-0 at Spurs. That takes Wolves up to seventh and sends Spurs down to eighth, one point behind them with a game in hand. At the bottom, Newcastle are now four points clear of the bottom three, all of whom have lost this weekend. So Kieran Trippier’s free kick settled it, blasting through the Villa wall. Newcastle were not very good in the second half, but they were just good enough. Villa faded again after a bright half-hour, and Eddie Howe shuffled his pack after losing both his full-backs, including Trippier, who is already his most important player. That’s it! And Newcastle have a third win on the trot. 97 min: We haven’t had a yellow card for a full two minutes, so Jacob Ramsey commits a silly foul and joins umpteen others in the book. 95 min: Saint-Maximin is doing his thing, jinking and jiving and getting a shot away, straight at Martinez. 95 min: The next booking is for Leon Bailey, who bundles Saint-Maximin over as Newcastle launch a counter. 94 min: A cross from Cash on the right: too rushed and too easy for Dubravka to swallow. 93 min: Sky’s man of the match is Dan Burn. He’s been good, but not as good or as influential as Trippier. 92 min: Eddie Howe has somehow kept a sub up his sleeve. He takes Willock off and gives Bruno Guimaraes a second appearance. 91 min: There will be seven more minutes. 90 min: A shot from Willock is blocked. It may even have been on target, a first for Newcastle in this half. 89 min: Douglas Luiz goes into the book now for grabbing someone who’d just impeded him and got away with it. 87 min: Gary Neville is praising Dan Burn and his composure. Newcastle do seem to be spending their new-found wealth well. 85 min: Ramsey goes for a mazy run but ends up merely taking the ball out. That proper contest I mentioned has rather evaporated since VAR intervened. 83 min: A final substitution from Steven Gerrard, who takes off John McGinn and sends on Carney Chukwuemeka. In the other games, it’s still 1-0 to Liverpool and 2-0 to Wolves. 81 min: A booking for Jonjo Shelvey as he brings Ramsey down with a late lunge. 80 min: Newcastle manage to get up the other end, but not for long. Villa counter and Dubravka has to come out with a flying header, which he pulls off with some aplomb. 77 min: A corner for Villa, followed by another, though nothing comes of them. They’re now clearly the better side with nowt to show for it. “Both of these teams are capable of creating quality moments that take the game to exciting heights,” says Peter Oh, “but occasionally they do Cash and Burn.” Ha. 76 min: We’ve had yet another delay, because of something on the pitch I think. Digne finally takes the free kick and slams it into the wall, with less success than Trippier had earlier. 73 min: Bailey wins a free kick on the right wing after a foul by Joelinton. He needs to be careful too. 71 min: Two changes for Villa as Watkins gives way to Danny Ings and Buendia to Leon Bailey. 70 min: Villa have a free kick, looped in and soon seen off, but they win a corner and keep up the pressure until yet another cross, from Digne, goes right across goal and out for a throw. Burn and Mings get into a fracas that ends with Mings’ shirt in shreds. That’s reckless from Burn, who is already on a yellow. 69 min: Dubravka is OK to continue. And he’s needed, because Villa have now had six attempts on goal in this half. 67 min: Yet another man down for Newcastle. This time it’s the goalie, Martin Dubravka, holding the toes of his right foot. Eddie Howe takes the opportunity to tell his team to go to 4-5-1. 66 min: Dan Burn goes into the book on his Newcastle debut after crashing into the back of Watkins. 65 min: Another chance for Villa as another cross comes in and Buendia’s header loops past the far post. Newcastle have lost both their full-backs, which is making all the difference at the moment. A vast roar as Watkins’ toe turns out to be offside. A simple header for Watkins at the far post after ricochet from a fine cross by Digne on the left – in the space Trippier left behind. But it could be offside... 59 min: Saint-Maximin has a shot from the edge of the box and it’s a powerful one, drilled past the far post. There’s a corner and Burn has a header, straight at the keeper. We have a proper contest at last. 58 min: Newcastle come to life as Saint-Maximin finds his feet and charges down the middle. Mings puts in an excellent tackle. 56 min: Villa win a free kick 25 yards out, in the middle. Luiz does better than he did with his first two set pieces, which isn’t saying a great deal, but they’ve already had more shots in this half (four) than the first (three). 54 min: With no Trippier to curtail him, Coutinho is beginning to enjoy himself, drifting into the middle to spray passes. 51 min: Matty Cash drills a shot across goal. He was unmarked on the right because Saint-Maximin was unable to track back. Is that another Newcastle injury? 50 min: Villa get forward as Coutinho plays his first through ball of the match, down the left. Ollie Watkins gets a shot away but can’t keep it down. 47 min: Trippier goes down injured and instantly hands the armband to Shelvey. Emil Krafth comes on, so Eddie Howe now has only one more sub. 46 min: Villa kick off. They’ve surely spent the past 15 minutes getting a rocket from Steven Gerrard. If you had to pick the man of the match now, it wouldn’t take long. Kieran Trippier, captain for the day, has won all his duels in the air and five out of six on the floor. He has scored the only goal and had the only shot on target, and the man he’s marking, Philippe Coutinho, has been invisible. “Couldn’t help but notice Joelinton not being given three yellows for three fouls in one passage of play,” says Norrie Hernon. “Where are all the f*cking literalists now?!?” A good question from Zach Neeley. “If Spursiness is more powerful than Conte-ness, does that make it inContenence?” Half-time scores from elsewhere in the Premier League. One of them more surprising than the other. Burnley 0-1 Liverpool Spurs 0-2 Wolves The interval finally arrives. Newcastle, with the crowd acting as an extra man, have been worth their lead, showing intent and carrying on where they left off against Everton. Villa have been disappointing – all possession and no end product. 45+5 min: Mings comes close to an own goal, heading over his goalie, who had come out to join him. The ball spares his blushes by going past the post. 45+4 min: Mings wins the header at the back post but can’t bring it down. Time for the first sub: Manquillo goes off to nurse that ankle and Paul Dummett comes on. 45+3 min: It’s another corner, and another delay as there’s a tedious amount of shoving going on. 45+2 min: Villa string some more passes together and win a corner. It falls to McGinn, who shoots from the D – on target, but carried wide by a deflection. 45 min: We will have five added minutes. It could have been even more. 43 min: Chris Wood takes a break from heading the ball to have a go from distance. It’s high, wide and ugly. Liverpool have gone into the lead at Burnley, through Fabinho. The only surprise is that it took them so long. 41 min: Villa suddenly remember that they can attack too and get into the Newcastle box twice without threatening. McGinn is the next name to go into the book, rather harshly as he got the ball in the process of tackling Saint-Maximin. 39 min: The crowd are making so much noise and inspiring Newcastle. They surge into the box again, but Saint-Maximin puts in so many twists and turns that he ends up confusing himself. Joelinton tries so hard to win the ball back that he commits three fouls, according to Gary Neville, and collects a yellow card. 38 min: Yet another delay as Manquillo gets treatment on a sore ankle. 37 min: It was too close to go up and down, so Trippier, who clearly grew up reading We’re Going On A Bear Hunt, just went through. He got lucky with a deflection, bobbling up off Buendia’s knee, but it was a case of fortune favouring the bold. Blasted straight through the wall! So, a free kick to Newcastle. Trippier lines it up and McGinn plays the draught excluder. Yes, it was outside the area – just in the D. Good play by Willock though, powering into the box. Willock goes down, it’s definitely a foul by Calum Chambers, but is it in the area...? 30 min: Another shot for Willock as Newcastle’s pressing pins Villa in their own half. 29 min: Wood, a caption tells us, has already won six aerial duels. Nobody else on either side has won more than two. 27 min: A free kick near the corner flag for Villa, who do a bit better as Digne manages not to overhit it, but again nothing comes of it. Newcastle bustle up the other end, where Wood has a header that goes wide. As in the first five minutes, Newcastle look the sharper of the two sides. 25 min: The crowd’s hopes rise at Saint-Maximin pounces on a loose ball and steams into the box, but his dinked cross is easily headed away. 23 min: Before it became all about Schar again, there was an actual shot! But not a very good one – Joe Willock blasted the ball into Row Z. 21 min: Schar’s wound is bleeding, so he gets more attention from the physio. He’s now sporting a Terry Butcher headband, though, as Gary Neville points out, the cut seems to be below the eye, not above it. Meanwhile, Spurs are 2-0 down to Wolves! Who hardly ever score more than one. The scorer is Dendoncker. 17 min: It’s all gone a bit scrappy. Schar again shows some intent, racing onto the right wing, but Villa get plenty of bodies around him. 16 min: ... and Luiz puts too much on it again. How hard can it be to take a corner? 15 min: Newcastle were the better side until the interruption, but it’s been mostly Villa since. They win a corner as a neat sequence of passes ends with Ramsey bursting into the box. 13 min: More good work from Schar, who intercepts and then sends a through ball down the right. Fraser, in acres, gets a cross in that Wood can’t reach. 10 min: Digne sends a fine ball for Watkins to chase. Schar, showing no ill effects, is alert enough to shunt it out. 9 min: Schar is able to continue, thankfully. Villa have a free kick in a dangerous area but Douglas Luiz overhits it. An early goal elsewhere: Wolves take the lead at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium through Raul Jimenez, who followed up a shot from Ruben Neves that was well saved by Hugo Lloris. 5 min: A worry for Newcastle as Fabian Schar stays on the floor after a collision in mid-air with his captain, Kieran Trippier. It looks as if he’s being treated for a black eye. 3 min: Villa’s turn to make their way into the box, only for Digne and Ramsey to get in each other’s way. 2 min: An early free kick for Newcastle as Manquillo is brought down on the left, but they can’t do anything with it. 1 min: Newcastle kick off and they’re in the box already. The players are on the field, and Hey Jude is ringing out around the ground. Sport these days, eh: it’s basically Paul McCartney v Neil Diamond. Villa haven’t won at St James’ Park since 2005. That was an occasion to remember: Villa won 3-0, and by the end Newcastle were down to eight men. It may have been a case of a team coming to resemble its manager – Graeme Souness. Steven Gerrard can’t play Ezri Konsa, who picked up a red card late on against Leeds, so he brings in Calum Chambers to partner Tyrone Mings. Otherwise Villa are unchanged, with Danny Ings still stuck on the bench. Aston Villa: Martinez; Cash, Chambers, Mings, Digne; McGinn, Douglas Luiz, Ramsey; Buendia, Watkins, Coutinho. Subs: Olsen, Hause, Young, Iroegbunam, Sanson, Chrisene, Chukwuemeka, Bailey, Ings. Eddie Howe opts not to change a winning front six, so Guimarães has to wait his turn. At the back Dan Burn comes in for Jamaal Lascelles and Javier Manquillo for Matt Targett, who can’t play against his parent club. Kieran Trippier, whose fitness was in doubt, is not only playing – he’s also the captain. Newcastle United: Dubravka; Trippier, Burn, Schar, Manquillo; Willock, Shelvey, Joelinton; Fraser, Wood, Saint-Maximin. Subs: Darlow, Krafth, Dummett, De Bolle, Longstaff, Guimarães, Almiron, Murphy, Gayle. Three months ago today, two grand old football clubs appointed new managers. Newcastle rescued Eddie Howe from gardening leave, while Aston Villa poached Steven Gerrard from Rangers. Both have instilled belief and made some shrewd signings, and look at them now: neither side has lost in the league since 2 January (don’t mention the Cup). Who knew that if you made a progressive appointment, you’d make progress? Newcastle have gone from no-hopers, nailed on for relegation, to collecting eight points from four games. The last MBM they appeared in, when they came from behind to beat Everton on Wednesday, contained a sentence you don’t see very often: “Newcastle were superb tonight.” Today they may well change a winning team by giving a start to their newest recruit, the Brazilian holding midfielder Bruno Guimaraes. He will find himself trying to thwart the Brazilian attacking midfielder Philippe Coutinho, who was instrumental in all three Villa goals against Leeds in midweek - first a pinpoint finish, then two artful assists for Jacob Ramsey, a gifted young player who has been even better since Coutinho arrived. Kick-off is at 2pm GMT, and I’ll be back soon with the teams.Even in a year outrageously overloaded with some of the most celebrated albums in rock history – the Who’s Tommy, Blind Faith, the Stones’ Let It Bleed, the Beatles’ Abbey Road, Led Zeppelin II and many more – In the Court of the Crimson King was hailed as a phenomenon. Released on Island Records in October 1969, King Crimson’s debut album was a boldly panoramic mix of hard rock, epic balladry, mystical acoustic atmospherics and squealing free jazz. As the prog-rock historian Paul Stump postulated: “If progressive rock as a discrete genre can be said to have had a starting point, In the Court of the Crimson King is probably it.” The guitarist Robert Fripp became the band’s best-known member, but the multi-instrumentalist Ian McDonald, who has died from cancer aged 75, was a galvanising force in the group’s potent mix. He was co-writer on all the album’s tracks, and his fiery saxophone soloing was a highlight of the album’s opening track, 21st Century Schizoid Man. The song’s rampaging middle section was essentially a piece called Three Score and Four, which he had composed for the army band he had played with during his military service. “That whole section is mine that I lifted from that score that I had written,” he said. It was also at McDonald’s urging that King Crimson acquired a Mellotron sampling keyboard, able to play different sounds assigned to its various keys. This became integral to King Crimson’s sound, not least on the album’s 10-minute title track (it originally had a country and western-style tune written by Pete Sinfield, but McDonald replaced it with his own awesome melodic creation). Despite the group’s dark and heavy image, McDonald insisted: “It was fun! It was done with a tremendous amount of humour.” Crimson’s dramatic debut had been preceded by their support slot at the Rolling Stones’ Hyde Park concert in July 1969 in front of a 500,000-strong crowd, where McDonald’s saxophone solo in 21st Century Schizoid Man earned him a standing ovation, and when they toured the US later in the year they rode in on a wave of critical approbation. However, McDonald and the drummer Michael Giles felt unhappy with the group’s increasingly experimental leanings, and left in December 1969. The pair released the album McDonald and Giles (1970), then subsequently split up. McDonald played on a variety of sessions, most notably adding baritone sax to T Rex’s UK chart-topper Get It On (1971). He also did some production work with Darryl Way’s Wolf and played sax on a couple of tracks on King Crimson’s album Red (1974). In 1975 he produced Modern Masquerades by the Irish progressivists Fruupp as well as Fireballet’s Night On Bald Mountain. Then the big time came knocking again. McDonald had moved to New York, and in 1976 he was recruited by another British expat, Mick Jones, to join his new band Foreigner. Their debut album appeared the following year, sold five million copies in the US alone, and generated a trio of big hit singles, Feels Like the First Time, Cold as Ice and Long, Long Way from Home, McDonald being co-writer on the last of these. The band rapidly ballooned into one of the biggest acts of the era, hurtling to No 3 on the US chart with their second album, Double Vision (1978), another multi-million seller which produced big hits with Hot Blooded and its title track. In June 1978, McDonald found himself on a bill with the Stones again when Foreigner opened for them at Philadelphia’s JFK Stadium. Head Games (1979), like its two predecessors co-produced by McDonald, went to US No 5, and scored Top 20 hits with the title song and Dirty White Boy. However, Jones now decided that the band needed to overhaul its musical direction and sacked McDonald and another original member, Al Greenwood. “Mick wanted to pare the group down to a four-piece, so that’s what happened,” McDonald observed. “I didn’t make the cut.” He was born in Osterley, Middlesex, into a musical family which encouraged his interest in a range of styles, from classical to jazz and rock’n’roll. He taught himself the guitar, then later moved on to woodwind instruments including the flute and saxophone. He spent five years in the British Army, where he played the clarinet in a military band. As he said in a 2019 interview with the online Paste magazine: “I just loved well-written, well-played and intelligent music, and hopefully a little bit rubbed off.” He added that he made a point of listening to a Steely Dan album every day. After leaving the army he moved to London, and one of his early musical partners was the vocalist Judy Dyble, later of Fairport Convention. He then joined forces with Fripp, Michael Giles and Giles’s bass-playing brother Peter, who were calling themselves Giles, Giles and Fripp, though disagreement over their musical direction prompted them to split in mid-1968. With the addition of Sinfield and the bassist/vocalist Greg Lake, and the subtraction of Peter Giles, the original King Crimson was formed later that year. In 1996 McDonald played on the former Genesis guitarist Steve Hackett’s Genesis Revisited album and also toured with him, in concerts which included a version of In the Court of the Crimson King. In the same year, McDonald played the flute on Nothing Is Easy, from the Jethro Tull tribute album To Cry You a Song – A Collection of Tull Tales. In 2002 he joined various King Crimson veterans in 21st Century Schizoid Band, who played material from Crimson’s early albums, and in 2009 McDonald and Fripp both appeared on Dyble’s album Talking With Strangers. He released the solo albums Drivers Eyes (1999) and Take Five Steps (2019). With the band Honey West, featuring McDonald alongside the musician and actor Ted Zurkowski and with his son Maxwell McDonald on bass, he recorded Bad Old World (2017). He appeared with Foreigner for several 40th anniversary shows in 2017. He features in Toby Amies’s new documentary In the Court of the Crimson King, which traces the history of King Crimson and will premier at the SXSW film festival in March 2022. • Ian McDonald, musician, composer and producer, born 25 June 1946; died 9 February 2022Could the UK’s most powerful police officer be brought in from outside the force? Or might Priti Patel look even farther afield – to Australia, or even the United States – instead of recruiting from within Scotland Yard? Reports this weekend claimed that the unexpected resignation of Cressida Dick, the head of the Metropolitan police, has driven the home secretary to look for an outsider to transform the force. Usually, the commissioner is drawn from the ranks of serving senior officers in the UK, but Home Office officials believe they could look abroad to fill the post. The Mail on Sunday claimed Patel is minded to recruit an Australian officer, such as Queensland police commissioner Katarina Carroll, who successfully overhauled the force’s troubled fire and emergency services. Patel wants an outsider who can reform the force’s culture instead of senior officers “inheriting” the job, according to the Sun on Sunday. This could include a high-flying officer from one of the UK’s smaller forces such as Simon Byrne, the chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI). Sources close to Patel confirmed that there is a loophole that will allow recruitment from abroad. It is “an option”, a source said, but added: “Realistically, it is going to be someone from the UK.” Former senior officers believe that a list of strong candidates has become increasingly difficult to identify because the job has become more politicised, the nature of crime has changed and London has become more diverse. Tarique Ghaffur, a former assistant commissioner in the Met who has spent the last five years advising police in the US and the Middle East on recruitment, said choosing a new leader will have to address an “expectation gap” between the politicians, the public and police officers themselves. “You need a leader who is thoughtful, who can lead a process of change, and who is going to have the political acumen and the gravitas to command support from across the political spectrum, London’s diverse communities and police officers. They will also have to understand the complex changing nature of safety, security and harm across the city. That is a tall order,” he said. Ghaffur, who was the UK’s highest ranking Muslim police officer until he left the force in 2008, said that the new commissioner will also have to have enough experience to command the respect of the Met’s 33,000 police officers while arguing for a clearout of racist, sexist and homophobic colleagues. “Once they create the values of what is acceptable and not, the new commissioner will have to be absolutely ruthless in finding and sacking those people who are guilty,” he said. While Patel holds the power over the appointment of Dame Cressida’s successor, she must take the views of Sadiq Khan, the Labour mayor, into account. Their advisers are in touch and are due to speak next week, it is understood. Khan has already made it plain that he expects to see drawn-up proposals for reforming longstanding “cultural problems”. Last week, the police watchdog found “disgraceful” examples of bullying and sexual harassment at Charing Cross police station in central London. Sources close to the mayor say he is “open-minded” about who the next commissioner might be and looks forward to a strong field of candidates.The UK’s reliance on gas to heat homes, generate electricity and fuel heavy industry has come at a steep cost, which is expected to keep on rising. In recent weeks the financial hit to household incomes has reignited calls for the UK to move more urgently to break its dependence on fossil fuels in favour of homegrown low-carbon energy sources. If UK homes were better insulated, warmed by low-carbon alternatives and powered by renewables then bill payers would be better off, according to experts. The cost of supporting the UK’s green policies is falling fast too. Green levies, including support for social schemes, renewable subsidies and energy efficiency, tumbled from £186 on the average annual energy bill under the energy regulator’s summer 2021 cap on standard energy tariffs to £173 over the winter, according to analysis by industry journal Carbon Brief. Under the next energy price cap, which is set to surge to an average of almost £2,000 a year from April, policy costs will fall to £155, according to the analysis. So can going green help keep a lid on home energy bills as well as carbon emissions? Here are the top ways the UK can guard homes against future gas market shocks while tackling the climate crisis too. Renewable electricity Generating more electricity from renewable energy is a guaranteed way to avoid firing up gas power plants and protecting electricity bills from gas market shocks. Under the government’s scheme to support renewable energy projects, windfarms and solar panels receive payments from household energy bills to top up the earnings from the energy market to an agreed level, or “strike price”. But in return they are expected to pay cash back to consumers when market prices surge above this set subsidy level. Over this winter, renewables covered by the scheme are expected to generate enough electricity to pay back £770m, which would save an average of £27 from the annual home energy bill. The UK’s existing pipeline of renewable energy projects, which are expected to be under construction until 2023, could save households up to £3.9bn in the future, according to analysis by energy company SSE, or enough to shave £140 off the average bill. The savings could be even higher if the growth of renewable energy sources meant the UK could significantly cut the volume of gas required by the electricity system, and reduce Britain’s exposure to the whims of the global energy markets. Home insulation Better insulation means cheaper energy bills and lower carbon emissions. But the government’s faltering commitment to upgrading Britain’s draughty homes – considered the least efficient in Europe – has left millions of homes exposed to unnecessarily high heating bills. Research undertaken by the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit has found that homes with energy efficiency band D typically use 13,200 kWh of gas a year, which costs £630 under the regulator’s current price cap, or £100 more than homes insulated to band C level, which is the level targeted by government. The saving is expected to widen from April as the energy price cap rises, reaching £170 while the costs for homes insulated to band D climb to £340. The least energy efficient homes in the UK – in which many households are living in fuel poverty – typically pay £240 more a year to heat than band C homes. Those living in homes rated F are expected to pay £400 a year more on their heating bills from April than bill payers in a C grade home, which could be transformed into savings if energy efficiency improved. The findings have renewed calls for the government to use public money to help make home insulation affordable, which would help cut home heating bills and move the UK towards its legally binding climate targets. Low carbon heating About 85% of British households rely on gas heating to stay warm. But in the future homes that are well insulated and connected to an electricity system rich with renewable energy could enjoy energy bill savings by switching to an electric heat pump. Electricity bills are not rising as fast as gas bills because gas power plants make up about half of the UK’s generation mix while renewable and nuclear energy generation helps to cushion the rising cost of electricity. Under the regulator’s energy price cap a default electricity-only tariff is poised to climb by 42% from April while gas bills will rise by 69%. By the end of the decade paying for power could be even cheaper because the green levies that are currently collected through electricity bills – and stand at £153 a year – may be moved to gas bills under new proposals from the regulator. The catch? The cost of buying and installing a heat pump has fallen, but remains a hefty investment for most families particularly as a cost of living crisis looms. Heat pumps also rely on good home insulation and skilled installation to run effectively. The government’s climate agenda would need to help households find affordable options to help accelerate the rollout of heat pumps – including good training options for new installers – if bill payers are to reap the benefit. Smart energy systems The energy industry has struggled for years to make the case for installing a smart meter, but soon the rollout of a new generation of energy tariffs and digitally enabled appliances could convince the doubters that it is savvy to go smart. By opting for a so-called “time-of-use” tariff households could save money on their energy bills by running a load of laundry or the dishwasher during periods when energy is cheap, and avoiding times when energy is most expensive. Smart home appliances, electric vehicles and batteries could automatically pick the best time to charge up overnight, which would make saving money even easier. Octopus Energy, a leader in time-of-use tariffs, has found that the average customer using its Agile tariff would save £188 a year by avoiding energy use during peak “surge pricing” periods compared with using a standard variable tariff. But the even bigger benefits for households take place well beyond the front door. By using less electricity during peak demand hours, and making better use of renewable energy during low demand hours, the energy system could avoid investing billions in new power plants and grid connections, which are ultimately paid for through home energy bills. A study by Imperial College London and the Carbon Trust found that the UK could save up to £8bn a year by 2030 by using a more flexible electricity system. The study found that shifting how we use electricity, using more energy storage and trading electricity with neighbouring countries via giant subsea cables could save up to £40bn by 2050 – even after taking into account the cost of these investments.Beryl Vertue, who has died aged 90, played an important role in the history of British television comedy. She began as an agent for writers such as Spike Milligan and Eric Sykes, as well as the performers Tony Hancock and Frankie Howerd, before pioneering the sale of hit UK TV formats to American television. When she turned to producing, her first big sitcom success was Men Behaving Badly (1992-98), which ushered in an era of laddish humour. She read the 1989 novel by Simon Nye, who was working as a translator for Credit Suisse, saw its potential and set him off on a TV career. Martin Clunes starred as Gary, sharing a flat with Dermot (Harry Enfield) – replaced by Neil Morrissey as the womanising Tony after the first series – and Caroline Quentin played Gary’s girlfriend, Dorothy, with Leslie Ash as Deborah, Gary’s neighbour, who is attracted to Tony but put off by his immaturity. Vertue used her persuasive powers with ITV to keep the show going when Enfield left. Then, at the end of the second run, the channel dropped the programme because Thames Television, which commissioned it from Vertue’s independent production company, Hartswood Films, lost its franchise. She simply phoned the BBC, which ran it for a further four series. Another audience-pleaser from Hartswood was Coupling (2000-04), about the sexual adventures of a group of six friends. Jack Davenport, Sarah Alexander and Ben Miles were among the stars in a sitcom written by Steven Moffat and based on the evolution of his own relationship with his wife, Sue (Vertue’s daughter), who produced the programme while her mother oversaw it as executive producer. As with Men Behaving Badly, Vertue sold the format to American television. The Moffat-Vertues partnership had further success with two drama series transposing Victorian literary figures to the present day. Jekyll (2007) starred James Nesbitt as Robert Louis Stevenson’s doctor with a split personality, while Sherlock (2010-17) was an irreverent take on Arthur Conan Doyle’s detective, co-created by Moffat and Mark Gatiss, with Benedict Cumberbatch as Holmes and Martin Freeman as Dr Watson. Cumberbatch dubbed Vertue “Sherlock’s godmother”. She was born in Croydon, Surrey, to Elsie (nee Francis) and Frank Johnson. On leaving Mitcham county school, Beryl started her working life as a secretary in a shipping firm. When, in 1954, she was in hospital recovering from tuberculosis, a schoolfriend, Alan Simpson, and his Hancock’s Half Hour writing partner, Ray Galton, visited her and said they wanted a secretary at Associated London Scripts, the cooperative they had just formed with Sykes and Milligan. She joined them the following year. From typing scripts for The Goon Show (1951-60) and other radio and TV sitcoms, Vertue went on to be the company’s business manager – later managing director – and negotiated deals with broadcasters. This made her an agent for some of the most respected writers in the country, who also included Barry Took, Dick Vosburgh, Marty Feldman, John Junkin and Johnny Speight. Outside comedy circles, Vertue sealed a deal for Terry Nation that gave him partial copyright on the Daleks when he introduced them in Doctor Who’s second story shortly after the sci-fi series began in 1963. She also blazed a trail by persuading the BBC to venture into programme-related merchandise, resulting in Daleks memorabilia, a Hancock’s Half Hour board game and Steptoe and Son jigsaws. When the impresario Robert Stigwood – manager of the bands Cream and the Bee Gees – bought out Sykes’s and Milligan’s controlling interest in the writers’ agency in 1967, he formed a production arm, Associated London Films, and Vertue added “executive producer” to her CV. The first release to bear fruit was the slapstick wordless short film The Plank (1967, later remade for television), with Sykes starring, writing and directing. However, cinema versions of TV sitcoms became the production company’s forte, from Till Death Us Do Part (1968) to Up Pompeii (1971) and Steptoe &amp; Son (1972). Alongside film production, she negotiated the sale of British sitcom remake rights to American and European channels. In the US, Till Death Us Do Part became All in the Family (1971-79) and Steptoe and Son was retitled Sanford and Son (1972-77). Associated London Films closed after eight years, but she continued with the Robert Stigwood Organisation as executive vice-president and produced programmes for American TV. These included Beacon Hill (1975), a version of Upstairs Downstairs, and The Entertainer (1975), starring Jack Lemmon as Archie Rice in the John Osborne play. She was also executive producer of Tommy (1975), the film of the Who’s rock opera, and – a year after becoming co-deputy chair of Stigwood’s company – The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie (1978), an ITV series based on Muriel Spark’s novel, a collaboration with Scottish Television for which she also handled foreign sales. As Stigwood started winding down his TV operation, Vertue set up Hartswood Films in 1979 and spent much of the next decade looking for a winning formula. Codename: Kyril (1988), a four-part cold war spy drama starring Edward Woodward and Ian Charleson, was the only one until Men Behaving Badly came along. Although Vertue made other dramas, such as A Woman’s Guide to Adultery (1993), The English Wife (1995) and Wonderful You (1999), she continued producing sitcoms, including My Good Friend (1995-96), written by Bob Larbey and starring George Cole, and Is It Legal? (1995-98), Nye’s solicitors’ office saga. In the new millennium, she took an executive producer role to encourage new talent at Hartswood on comedies ranging from The Savages (2001) and Carrie &amp; Barry (2004-05), both from the pen of Nye, to Supernova (2005-06) and Me and Mrs Jones (2012), as well as the comedy-drama series Border Cafe (2000) and Lady Chatterley’s Lover (2015). Vertue was made an OBE in 2000 and a CBE in 2016, and presented with the Royal Television Society’s lifetime achievement award in 2012. Her 1951 marriage to Clements Vertue ended in divorce. She is survived by their two daughters, Debbie, director of operations at Hartswood Films, and Sue. • Beryl Vertue (Beryl Frances Johnson), producer, born 8 April 1931; died 12 February 2022The creation of the NHS Race and Health Observatory, which has compiled a devastating review of inequalities suffered by people of colour within the health system, came after it emerged that people from different minority ethnic groups were at higher risk of dying from Covid. According to an Office for National Statistics analysis, black people were four times as likely as white people to die from coronavirus early in the pandemic. Many explanations were put forward for the disparities, while people of colour were over-represented among Covid patients in intensive care units. These included them being more likely to be key workers in face-to-face roles – the fact that the first 12 doctors to die of coronavirus were people of colour was an early alarm bell signalling unequal risks. Another theory was that some minority ethnic groups are more likely to live in multigenerational households. But another contributing factor was health inequality. While Covid – and the Black Lives Matter movement – may have shone a light on them, they were by no means previously unknown. The fact that the observatory pored over 178 studies, dating back a decade, illustrates that health inequalities were no secret among those charged with maintaining the nation’s health. Long before Covid, it was known that there was a higher prevalence of heart disease, diabetes and kidney disease among certain minority ethnic groups. The race disparity audit published in 2017 under Theresa May’s government showed that most Asian groups expressed lower levels of satisfaction and less positive experiences of NHS services than other minority ethnic groups. Additionally, black women were the most likely to have experienced a common mental disorder such as anxiety or depression in the previous week, and black men were the most likely to have experienced a psychotic disorder in the past year. However, white Britons were more likely to be receiving treatment for a mental or emotional problem than adults in other groups. However, rather than taking up the baton of change presented by his predecessor, Boris Johnson’s government disbanded the race disparity audit advisory unit and set up its own commission to come up with new findings on racial inequalities. In its report, published in March last year, the Sewell commission was accused of glossing over health inequalities and the reasons for them while downplaying structural racism generally. NHS Providers was among those who challenged the commission’s findings, saying “to pretend that discrimination does not exist is damaging as is denying the link between structural racism and wider health inequalities”. The observatory not only identifies inequalities in every area of healthcare it reviewed but says that these have long been known about – yet there has been a failure to act. Many of their findings will come as no surprise to healthcare workers, particularly those of colour, who have long complained of racism within the NHS, suffered by patients as well as staff. Workforce inequalities are also covered within the observatory’s review. Having provided an incisive analysis of the nature and scale of health inequalities within the NHS, the next challenge is for the review to prompt sure and substantive action. Otherwise it will be just another addition to the litany of papers that have identified health inequalities, albeit one of unparalleled depth and expertise. Health inequalities are not only unjust but also cost the NHS and economy money. As under-resourced and overstretched as the organisation is, having backed the creation of the observatory it is in everyone’s interests – including those of the government – for it to act on the independent body’s recommendations.Radical action is needed urgently to tackle “overwhelming” minority ethnic health inequalities in the NHS, leading experts have said, after a damning study found the “vast” and “widespread” inequity in every aspect of healthcare it reviewed was harming the health of millions of patients. Racism, racial discrimination, barriers to accessing healthcare and woeful ethnicity data collection have “negatively impacted” the health of black, Asian and minority ethnic people in England for years, according to the review, commissioned by the NHS Race and Health Observatory, which reveals the true scale of health inequalities faced by ethnic minorities for the first time. “Ethnic inequalities in health outcomes are evident at every stage throughout the life course, from birth to death,” says the review, the largest of its kind. Yet despite “clear”, “convincing” and “persistent” evidence that ethnic minorities are being failed, and repeated pledges of action, no “significant change” has yet been made in the NHS, it adds. The 166-page report, seen by the Guardian, is due to be published in full this week. From mental health to maternity care, the sweeping review led by the University of Manchester paints a devastating picture of a healthcare system still failing minority ethnic patients despite concerns previously raised about the harm being caused. “By drawing together the evidence, and plugging the gaps where we find them, we have made a clear and overwhelming case for radical action on race inequity in our healthcare system,” said Habib Naqvi, the director of the NHS Race and Health Observatory, an independent body established by the NHS in 2020 to investigate health inequalities in England. The Covid pandemic has taken a disproportionate toll on ethnic minorities, prompting fresh questions about inequalities that permeate the practice of medicine. The observatory ordered the review last year to synthesise the evidence, translate it into “actionable policy” and “challenge leaders to act”. “This report is the first of its kind to analyse the overwhelming evidence of ethnic health inequality through the lens of racism,” said Naqvi. Its findings are shocking. The review concludes that inequalities in access to, experiences of, and outcomes of healthcare in the NHS “are rooted in experiences of structural, institutional and interpersonal racism”. For “too many years”, it adds, the health of minority ethnic people in England has been “negatively impacted” by a lack of appropriate treatment, poor quality or discriminatory treatment by NHS staff, missing ethnicity data from NHS systems, and delays in seeking help for health issues “due to fear of racist treatment from NHS healthcare professionals”. The year-long review, which examined 13,000 papers and interviewed policy experts, NHS staff and patients, was led by Dharmi Kapadia, an investigator at the Centre on the Dynamics of Ethnicity, the UK’s leading research centre into minority ethnic, racial and religious inequalities. Kapadia, a sociology lecturer at the University of Manchester, said she and her co-authors had uncovered “crucial” evidence of persistent health inequalities that were harming the health of patients on a daily basis. “The evidence on the poor healthcare outcomes for many ethnic minority groups across a range of services is overwhelming, and convincing,” she said. The report is littered with striking examples and evidence of inequity in the NHS. In mental healthcare, for example, the review found minority ethnic patients faced “clear inequalities” in regard to Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT), a flagship NHS programme set up in 2008 to transform the treatment of anxiety and depression in England. Minority ethnic groups were less likely to be referred to IAPT by GPs than white people, the report said. Minority ethnic patients who do get a referral are less likely than white British patients to receive an assessment. Minority ethnic people with psychosis are also less likely to be referred for cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). The review found “strong evidence” of “clear, very large and persisting ethnic inequalities” in compulsory admission to psychiatric wards, particularly affecting black people. It uncovered evidence of harsher treatment for black patients, who were “more likely to be restrained in the prone position or put into seclusion”. Minority ethnic parents reported their children faced the same barriers to accessing health services as they did. Black children are 10 times more likely to be referred to children and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) via social services – rather than through their GP – compared with white children, the report says. Maternity services were also found lacking. The review found evidence of negative interactions, stereotyping, disrespect, discrimination and cultural insensitivity, leading to some minority ethnic women feeling “othered”, unwelcome, and poorly cared for. Some women whose first language was not English were denied access to quality interpreting services, the report adds. “Our review shows the role of structural barriers – including racism and experiences of racial discrimination – in patterning stark ethnic inequalities in healthcare,” said its co-author Laia Bécares, a senior lecturer in applied social science at the University of Sussex. The review found a lack of research in specific areas. Despite screening 10 years’ of research, the review team found only one study that examined health inequalities in the care of newborn babies. It showed Asian babies are over-represented in admissions to neonatal units from home for jaundice. Visual estimation of jaundice in babies “may be particularly unreliable” for babies with darker skin tones, the review said, raising the possibility that “routine postnatal care practices may systematically disadvantage non-white babies by delaying access to care”. The researchers also said any efforts to improve health outcomes among minority ethnic patients were being thwarted by the shambolic collection of health information by NHS staff and organisations. Racism within the NHS workforce persisted, they said, and the report found evidence of an pay gap affecting black, Asian, mixed and other groups. The review also uncovered minority ethnic health inequalities in areas as diverse as digital access to healthcare, genetic testing and genomic medicine. “Persistent inequalities in the healthcare and health outcomes between ethnic groups remain, despite past commitments to address the issue,” said its co-author Sarah Salway, a professor of public health at the University of Sheffield. “As a nation we are proud of our NHS. It is one of the few healthcare services worldwide that enjoys a reputation for quality care that is free at the point of access, so it can be difficult to discuss how things may be failing. This report, however, gives us the opportunity to identify how we can do things better, for a healthier and fairer society.” An NHS spokesperson said: “The pandemic has shone a stark light on health inequalities across the country and the NHS is already taking action to improve the experiences of patients and access to services. “The NHS has set out what local health services should be focusing on over the next year so they can make these improvements in their local communities and is already working closely with the Race and Health Observatory to drive forward the recommendations set out in this report.” The NHS spokesperson did not say what action the NHS was “already taking” on health inequalities, or explain which recommendations in the report it would “drive forward” or when it would do so.Olaf Scholz will use his trip to Moscow on Tuesday to press home the economic cost of a Russian invasion of Ukraine, German government sources have said in what some European leaders fear could be a last opportunity to defuse the “extremely dangerous” situation on the border between the two eastern countries. The German chancellor, who has faced criticism at home for cutting a low-key profile in the diplomatic effort around the military buildup on the Ukrainian border until now, first arrives in Kyiv on Monday as US intelligence over the weekend claimed that Russia had accelerated plans for an invasion and could move troops across the border as soon as Wednesday, before the end of the Winter Olympics on 20 February. Joe Biden spoke to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Sunday morning, after ordering a near-total evacuation of the US embassy in Kyiv. A White House statement said Biden made clear the US would “respond swiftly and decisively to any further Russian aggression” and the two leaders agreed on the need to continue pursuing diplomacy and deterrence. “We have seen over the course of the past 10 days, dramatic acceleration in the buildup of Russian forces and the disposition of those forces in such a way that they could launch a military action essentially at any time,” Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, told the CBS News programme Face the Nation. “But of course, it still awaits the go order. And so therefore, we cannot predict the precise date or time that they make any action.” During the call Zelenskiy invited Biden to visit Kyiv. Reflecting the West’s concerns, Dutch airline KLM has canceled flights to Ukraine until further notice, the company said. The Ukrainian charter airline SkyUp said Sunday its flight from Madeira, Portugal, to Kyiv was diverted to the Moldovan capital. And Ukraine’s air traffic safety agency Ukraerorukh issued a statement declaring the airspace over the Black Sea to be a “zone of potential danger” and recommended that planes avoid flying over the sea on 14 to 19 February. Russia denies it plans to invade Ukraine, but there were reports on Sunday of attack and troop-carrying helicopters, being moved close to the Ukrainian border. Moscow failed to reply to a formal request from Ukraine to clarify the purpose of its military manoeuvres in Belarus by the 48-hour deadline set by the Vienna document, an international agreement intended to provide transparency and reduce the risk of war. The Belarus government responded to a similar request for Baltic nations, but said that some of the Russian units on its territory were there to guard its southern border, suggesting they would not be leaving on 20 February, when the military exercises are supposed to end. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said the “next step” was requesting a meeting within the next 48 hours for “transparency” about Russia’s plans. A submarine armed with cruise missiles from Russia’s Baltic fleet also sailed through the Bosphorus towards the Black Sea. Meanwhile, Lithuania announced a delivery of Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to Ukraine while the US embassy said a 17th planeload of US military hardware had arrived in Kyiv, including shoulder-fired grenades. German government circles on Sunday talked of a “very worrying overall picture” on the Ukrainian border but rejected the suggestion that Scholz’s trip represented a “last attempt” at averting a war. German government sources said Scholz would press home the “unity of the EU, the US and Great Britain” when it came to economic sanctions in response to an invasion. Biden has said a Russian invasion would spell the end of the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, something Scholz has been more reluctant to spell out. Russian diplomats have shown themselves unimpressed with threats of western sanctions, however. The Kremlin’s ambassador to Sweden told a Swedish newspaper his country “doesn’t give a shit” about economic repercussions. “Excuse my language, but we don’t give a shit about all their sanctions”, Viktor Tatarintsev told the Aftonbladet newspaper in an interview posted on its website on Saturday evening. “We have already had so many sanctions and in that sense they’ve had a positive effect on our economy and agriculture,” said the veteran diplomat. “We are more self-sufficient and have been able to increase our exports. We have no Italian or Swiss cheeses, but we’ve learned to make just as good Russian cheeses using Italian and Swiss recipes,” he said. “New sanctions are nothing positive but not as bad as the west makes it sound”, he added. Scholz’s options during his trip to Moscow are limited. The Russian president is demanding “security guarantees” from the west, which would effectively undermine the sovereignty of independent states in east-central Europe and the Baltics. German government sources said on Sunday Scholz would offer Putin a dialogue and seek to find out more what Russia’s grievances entailed. The broadsheet Die Welt said he could stress Ukraine joining Nato is not a realistic prospect in the near future, adding that a compromise whereby Russia would be assured that Ukraine would not join Nato “in the next 10 years” had been discussed in Scholz’s circles as a “thought experiment”, though not as a concrete plan. Ukraine has expressed an interest in joining since 2002 but it would require the unanimous approval of existing members, based on factors such as a functioning democracy and an absence of “unresolved external territorial disputes”. Any symbolic concession would however face criticism from the Ukrainian side, whose ambassador in Berlin on Sunday accused the German government of “hypocrisy” over sticking to its restrictive stance on exporting lethal weapons, while continuing to supply Russia with dual-use goods that can be used for arms production. As recently as 2020, Germany exported such goods worth €366m (£306m) to Russia. Germany’s vice-chancellor and economy minister said on Sunday that “we could be on the verge of a war in Europe”. “It is absolutely oppressive and threatening”, the Green politician Robert Habeck told broadcaster NTV. He said Scholz’s trip was an important sign: “We won’t leave Ukraine alone.” Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, told German tabloid Bild am Sonntag an invasion of Ukraine would be only the start of a campaign of Russian aggression that would also threaten states in the Baltics. “If Olaf Scholz and other leaders of state speak to Vladimir Putin now, they should make clear to him: our entire country will defend itself against an attack and it will have serious consequences”, said the former boxer Klitschko, who spent a large part of his professional career in Germany. During his trip to Kyiv, Scholz will talk to the Ukrainian president about ways in which Germany could help stabilise Ukraine’s economy after fears of an imminent war have taken a toll on the country’s currency. Such measures would provide more immediate help to the Ukrainian side than any arms exports, German government circles said on Sunday. Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK Vadym Prystaiko had earlier complained that the alarms being sounded by the West risked playing into Putin’s hands. “It’s not the best time for us to offend our partners in the world, reminding them of this act which actually not bought peace but the opposite, it bought war,” the diplomat told the BBC.Britain believes that Russia’s powerful FSB spy agency has been given the task of trying to engineer coups in Ukraine’s major cities in the immediate aftermath of any invasion launched by the Kremlin. The assessment is that an attack would see Russia strike first against military targets, then encircle the capital, Kyiv, and possibly other major cities, with FSB saboteurs then expected to try to install pro-Russian leaderships within. No specific evidence has been put forward to justify the two-step plan, but it is nevertheless considered by the UK to be a central invasion scenario, aimed at “regime change” in Ukraine, in which Russia would seek to avoid bloody and high-risk urban warfare after an attack on its neighbour. Britain and the US both believe Russia has now assembled a force capable of invading Ukraine after massing more than 135,000 troops around its borders. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said over the weekend he believed an attack was now “highly likely” and cut short a family holiday. Both western countries have made a string of intelligence-led warnings about Russia’s intentions towards Ukraine in recent weeks, including that the Kremlin is planning “false flag” operations as a pretext for invasion, and that a group of five mostly former Ukrainian politicians have been recruited to participate in a coup. Some have been received critically in Kyiv and elsewhere. Four of the five politicians are now based in Moscow, making their Russian ties a matter of public record, while the fifth, the former Ukrainian MP Yevhen Murayev, said he was banned from Russia and there was “no public evidence” he was involved. Russia denies it has any plans to attack its southern neighbour and has called western warnings “hysteria”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has also sought to play down the likelihood of an invasion, saying on Saturday: “Right now, the people’s biggest enemy is panic.” There is also scepticism in Ukraine that it would be possible to install any pro-Russian leadership in Kyiv and its other major cities, even in the context of a military incursion, given the broad public hostility to Moscow in the country. But western sources fear that Vladimir Putin has not appreciated the depth of popular opinion in Ukraine. “A lot of over-optimistic assessments are being fed all the way to the top of the Kremlin,” one official said. A similar multi-step plan was highlighted by Germany’s Bild tabloid earlier this month, based, it said, on a foreign secret service source. The newspaper went on to say Russia would then seek to appoint a pro-Kremlin parliament and round up Ukrainian activists and opposition leaders. In response,the Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova said Bild had “crossed all possible lines of human, genuine morality and ethics”. Ukraine’s SBU intelligence agency and others have repeatedly exposed evidence of FSB interference in the country since the start of the war with Russia in 2014. Late last year, the SBU said it had discovered a plot to smuggle explosives into the country from Russian-occupied Crimea. Zelenskiy said at the end of November that a coup plot had been discovered, which officials added was being planned by an FSB officer and defectors of Ukraine’s interior ministry who had moved to Crimea. Responsibility for Ukraine within the FSB lies with its fifth service, responsible for intelligence operations in former Soviet states. Its leader is Sergei Beseda, who was placed on US, EU and UK sanctions lists in 2014. Beseda was wanted by Ukraine for questioning in the aftermath of the anti-Russian Maidan revolution in February 2014, believing he was part of a failed attempt to take control of violent efforts to suppress the popular protests. Moscow said he was present to help ensure the protection of the Russian embassy during a time of uncertainty.Even those who might not immediately have recognised the name of John Williams, who turned 90 this week, will know his work – and many of these won’t just know it, but respond viscerally to it, as we do to childhood smells, or the pop songs of our teenage years. Over a 64-year career he has composed orchestral music for, among many other things, the Star Wars films, Superman, the first three Harry Potter films, Home Alone and 28 of Steven Spielberg’s movies, including Jaws, Jurassic Park and ET. Given the global and generational reach of these movies, Williams has a fair claim to have been heard by – and moved – many millions of people on this planet. The use of orchestral scores harks back to the 1930s and has, despite the vast range of what is aurally possible in 2022, never gone away. Some people look down on such compositions – perhaps because the work can be so emotion-on-sleeve; so partial to a recognisable tune; so unpreciously productive; and so extremely successful. But Williams’s music, for instance, earns serious respect from the musicians who play it, who understand both the virtuosity it demands, and the difficulty of creating seemingly simple but unforgettable leitmotifs. Music written for the movies, such as William Walton’s score for Laurence Olivier’s Henry V, or Vaughan Williams’s for Scott of the Antarctic (which became his Symphony No 7, Sinfonia Antartica), or Philip Glass’s for Koyaanisqatsi, is played in concert for its own sake. There is a strong argument, too, that the movie industry has been an important patron of both orchestras and original orchestral music over the last century. And yet perhaps there is still a difference. The film critic David Thomson has made the case that movie music “is not what we call real music”: the difference is, he argues, between something like Mahler’s Fifth, which “is sadness”, and the overture for Gone With the Wind, which says “get ready for a mighty story of sadness and glory”. There is probably a sense of mischief and provocation in this – it would be hard to argue that Miles Davis’s score for Louis Malle’s Lift to the Scaffold, for example, wasn’t real music – but it does make the point that this music is meant to go with something. The best movie music works on three levels – as the immediately obvious surface tune; then, underneath that, as a kind of counterpoint working either deliberately against or with a scene, maybe even telling a different story altogether; and finally, in a way so deep even the most sophisticated moviegoer can’t necessarily work out what’s going on. Emotional coercion has limited value; most successful is music that, in the words of Hans Zimmer (The Lion King, 12 Years A Slave, Thelma &amp; Louise) “opens the door that you can walk through”. “Used properly,” as the Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky put it, “music does more than intensify the impression of the visual image … it opens up the possibility of a new, transfigured impression of the same material; something different in kind.” A film score is like an instrument in a greater orchestra that includes not only what is happening on screen but also the audience, each element listening and responding to and enhancing each other, whether they know it or not.Almost seven years after the spectacular collapse of Kids Company, the truth about what happened then is not widely enough known. A report from the Charity Commission released last week ought to have cleared things up. But by emphasising a technical finding of “mismanagement”, while downplaying the comprehensive vindication of the charity’s trustees in the high court, the commission has pulled its punches – perhaps for fear of offending the government, which spent £9.5m in a failed attempt to get Kids Company’s trustees and CEO, Camila Batmanghelidjh, disqualified as company directors. The problems at Kids Company identified by the Charity Commission and others must be treated seriously. The charity expanded rapidly, with expenditure rising from £2.4m in 2004 to £23m in 2013, and arguably did not pay enough attention to the risks such growth entailed. Had it built up larger reserves, it might have been better able to withstand the storm that broke when allegations that it had mishandled reports of sexual abuse were made (police found “no evidence of criminality”). There was a lack of psychotherapy and youth work expertise on the board, meaning trustees may have been limited in the forms of challenge offered to their charismatic chief executive and main fundraiser. But compared with the charge sheet laid before the public (via the media), the courts, parliament and the Charity Commission, these are minor failings. The claim made in 2015 and never properly dispelled, despite a high court judgment in the charity’s favour, was that Kids Company was dysfunctional if not rotten, and needed to be stopped from doing the social welfare work with which it was entrusted, by ministers as well as civil society (the charity won £42m in government grants over a 15-year period). When a committee of MPs looked into what had happened in 2016, their report largely stuck by this version of events, blaming the “unaccountable and dominant” Ms Batmanghelidjh for the charity’s woes. Several years on, it should be obvious that Keeping Kids Company – the charity’s full name – never deserved to become a byword for poor governance and shoddy practice. Its trustees were praised by Mrs Justice Falk, who also noted Ms Batmanghelidjh’s “enormous dedication”. The charity’s unconventional methods, including cash payments to some of those it supported, were not a panacea. The organisation was too reliant on one personality, and its geographical expansion to Bristol and Liverpool was arguably overambitious. But this was an ambition egged on by a government firmly committed to increasing the role of the voluntary sector, while shrinking that of the state. Ms Batmanghelidjh was a social entrepreneur. And her treatment can be viewed as a kind of punishment. At a time when demand was rising due to cuts, she inadvertently and inconveniently exposed the weakness of social services outsourcing. There are important lessons here, not least about the vulnerability of charities to unproven claims. Kids Company bears some responsibility for accounting mistakes, and the way in which its sudden collapse left vulnerable people in the lurch. But the danger arising from the commission’s reluctance to be clear about the extent to which Kids Company was vilified wrongly is that the sector overall ends up weaker – with its appetite for innovation and supply of willing trustees reduced. At a time when council-funded social welfare provision – including vital mental health services – is dangerously limited and hard to access, this is a grave risk to take.Mikhaël Hers has made a likably unassuming and easygoing movie set in 1980s Paris; a world of LPs and stonewashed denim, with TV news archive footage interspersed in the drama. We start with the celebrations that marked Mitterrand’s presidential victory in 1981 and end towards the end of the decade with the younger characters preparing to cast their first vote. This is a film that doesn’t set out to push your emotional buttons all that hard, or even at all. But it covers a surprising amount of narrative ground and there is always something engaging and tender to it. The director appears to be aiming at the unshowy drama of Éric Rohmer. Three of his teen characters are shown sneaking into a cinema via the exit doors without paying, intending to see Joe Dante’s Gremlins but instead blundering into a screen showing Rohmer’s Full Moon in Paris and being unexpectedly entranced by it. Later they are shocked to hear about its star, Pascale Ogier, dying at the age of 25. Charlotte Gainsbourg plays Elisabeth, a woman recovering from breast cancer and divorce, living with her teenage son and daughter in a large, somewhat chaotic flat with a beautiful view across the city. Her husband, who is now renting somewhere else with his new girlfriend, will however eventually want to sell the flat and divide the cash as part of their divorce, something to add to Elisabeth’s uneasy new sense of rootlessness. (Husband and new girlfriend are never seen, and Hers’s unwillingness to absorb their existence into the film’s fabric is, I think, a flaw.) Trying to get a job, she somehow lucks into a rather desirable position behind the scenes on an all-night phone-in radio show, putting callers through to the hardbitten presenter, in which role Emmanuelle Béart gives her most assured performance for a while. Elisabeth, after a while, even gets to fill on the mic when the star is on holiday, but there is no great importance attached to this: she doesn’t get to be a star and she is later shown getting a humble second job in a library to supplement her modest income. The plot is set in motion when Elisabeth takes an interest in the show’s special guest one evening: Talulah (Noée Abita) is a teen runaway, crashing on people’s floors, at risk of drug abuse. Elisabeth realises that no one on the show is interested in what happens to Talulah after the interview is over, so she invites her back to her flat. Talulah is to come and go in their lives for the next decade and toy with Elisabeth’s son’s heart. Like Hers’s previous film Amanda, this is a calm, sympathetic drama about family in which the dramatic wattage level is set relatively low. Even when extravagantly tense things are happening – Elisabeth’s son falls into the Seine and Talulah jumps in to save him – things are determinedly kept under control. The point, as with Amanda, is healing: things coming together and working out and pain being smoothed away. Elisabeth realises how sad she is at her “empty nest” situation as the kids move out, especially as she has to sell her nest and move to a smaller one. But group hugs help salve the pain and there is something sweet-natured in the film’s positive attitude to life. • The Passengers of the Night is at the Berlin film festival.Alain Guiraudie is emerging as a distinctive, perplexing, even exasperating film-maker. In a 20-year career in French cinema, he has long had a soft spot for the playful, the anarchic and the fantastical. Yet maybe we outside France were misled by his outlier hit in 2013, Stranger By the Lake. This was the film with which Guiraudie made his sensational international breakthrough: a gripping homoerotic cruising thriller. This was my own introduction to his work and perhaps it was the atypically serious tone of that which caused me to be disconcerted by the directionless silliness of his follow-up Rester Vertical, or Staying Vertical, in 2016. Now here is a semi-comic social satire or whimsy; or a jeu d’esprit whose esprit is difficult to locate. It has various themes and ideas which Guiraudie seems unable to take seriously and be successfully funny about. It is a weird caper which comports itself as realist drama, while also laboriously tipping us the wink about its obvious absurdity. The setting is Clermont-Ferrand in central France, where Médéric (Jean-Charles Clichet) is a software designer, a tubby, schlubby guy in his mid-30s who lives alone. We see him one afternoon looking entranced at a total stranger in the street with whom he has evidently fallen in love: Isadora (Noémie Lvovsky) a woman in her 50s who sells sex. He brazenly approaches her, declaring that he wants to make love to her without paying, because that is beneath him. Mystifyingly finding him sufficiently attractive to waive the fee, Isadora agrees to meet him in a scuzzy local hotel and is transported by his sexual prowess. There are some droll parts here for Yves-Robert Viala as the hotel’s elderly proprietor M Renard, and Miveck Packa as Charlène, a teenager interested in hotel management who is doing a highly unsuitable after-school job as a receptionist. Just as Médéric is reaching his climax, the whole city is blasted by a terrorist bomb, and Isadora’s hatchet-faced husband Gérard (Renaud Rutten) shows up in the hotel room and drags her away. In the new citywide paranoid mood, Médéric becomes convinced that the homeless north African kid Selim (Ilies Kadri) who is hanging around his apartment block is a terrorist. Selim becomes involved in a bizarre farcical imbroglio involving all these people, including Médéric’s colleague Florence (Doria Tillier) who also finds him very attractive. At one level, Guiraudie is signalling to us that this is all a big joke: he even has Gérard tell Médéric that he is flattered that a “hunk” like him finds his wife attractive. But what really is Nobody’s Hero about? It’s a romp, but a very flavourless romp. There are moments in which the waywardness of the movie has something Buñuelian about it, but that is more a matter of Médéric’s dreams, from which our hero must awaken in a cold sweat. Islamophobia and far-right neurosis have something to do with it, but the movie is not so much satirising these as shrugging at them. The film stands or falls by its claims to deadpan comedy – but this is heavy-handed and unsatisfying. • Nobody’s Hero screens at the Berlin film festival.There is a simple rule of thumb for distinguishing between charlatans like the Net Zero Scrutiny Group (Report, 8 February), the European Research Group and anti-vaxxers on the one hand, and the science community on the other: charlatans only look for evidence that they are right; scientists are only interested in evidence that they are wrong. Charles Baily Bedford • Marina Hyde (11 February) quotes an unnamed ally of Boris Johnson asking: “Do you want the Metropolitan police deciding who the prime minister is?” Recent experience suggests that they could hardly do a worse job of it than Tory party members. David Walker Sheffield • It is some time since we had news of San Serriffe. Is there enough time between now and 1 April for your journalists to visit and set our minds at rest regarding the effects of the rise in sea level? Has Covid arrived there? So many questions! Margaret Peacock Milngavie, Glasgow • A huge thank you to Stuart Heritage for his article listing the best CBeebies programmes (8 February). I had never heard of Hey Duggee, which was No 1 in his list, but I have watched it every day since. How it has brightened up my life. It is the best programme I’ve seen on television for ages. Catherine Waterson (age 79) Bishopbriggs, East Dunbartonshire • Thanks to Judith Abbs for her praise of the recorder (Letters, 11 February). I shall now try to forget that the recorder is an ill wind that nobody blows good. Brian Griffiths Honley, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As a woman of a certain age who regularly finds sleep elusive, I am always alert to research reports linking insomnia with Alzheimer’s disease. I seek reassurance, usually in vain, but your report did seem promising at first glance (Study finds link between Alzheimer’s and circadian clock, 10 February). Wishing to know more, I looked up the original research paper, which was long and mostly beyond my comprehension. However, way down in the results section the authors disclosed that the research subjects were mice. It might have been useful for your readers to know this, before hopes were raised prematurely. Perhaps I’ll give up counting sheep for now, and try mice instead. Rose Gollop Medstead, Hampshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Prof Rachel Jenkins’ letter (9 February) advocates for the expansion of medical school places in the UK, and this should indeed be a priority to preserve the medical workforce of the future. But since 2010, medical student numbers have increased by 31% – with only a 0.4% increase in positions for the clinical academics who train them. Besides university staff and infrastructure, medical students require the support of junior doctors in their workplace-based placements. But this is impossible to provide, with increasing numbers of students on the wards coupled with the pressure on service provision. As a doctor in her first year of practice, I am dismayed to have to turn students away, but I am aware that they often do not have the support on the ward to achieve their curriculum outcomes. We do medical students, junior doctors, medical academics and ultimately patients a disservice when we use medical student places, and the funding for them, as the only measure of the quantity of high-quality medical education that is able to be delivered in the UK. Dr Anna Harvey North Cumbria integrated care NHS trust • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your review of Hamlet at Guildford’s Holy Trinity Church (9 February) says “Shakespeare gives a variety of … reasons for young Hamlet’s inability to avenge” his father’s murder. No he doesn’t. Hamlet is not unable to stab Claudius. He wants to make sure the ghost’s story is true (hence the performance of The Mousetrap), and he doesn’t want Claudius to die while praying (and in a state of grace). Thereafter, his fatal flaw, like that of other Shakespearean protagonists, is rashness (stabbing the wrong man in his haste). As to the “usual complication” of whether Hamlet is really mad, or is pretending to be, he is neither. Who says that Hamlet is mad? Polonius, who, too stupid and pompous to understand his witty remarks, thinks they don’t make sense, and Claudius, who clearly doesn’t want anyone to take Hamlet seriously. Hamlet really isn’t the mysterious and complicated play that it is made out to be. But in the past century or so, these and other notions (such as Hamlet’s Oedipal attraction to his mother) have unfortunately been taken as fact by readers, playgoers, directors, teachers, critics and actors. The late American critic Bernard Grebanier dealt with the myths around the play in his definitive book The Heart of Hamlet. I have not known anyone to read it and disagree. Rhoda Koenig London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.John Harris’s article about Sheffield and the impact of the closure of Debenhams and John Lewis (The death of the department store, 10 February) raised many questions, not least “What are city centres for?” Historically, they were the most accessible locations in a large urban area. The advent of the private car, and free use of roads, has made almost anywhere easy to get to. The cost, however, of sprawl, pollution and energy usage will become limiting as we move towards a zero-carbon economy. As the architect Adam Park said in Harris’s article: “We shouldn’t be demolishing buildings any more.” The out-of-town Meadowhall shopping centre was approved by the city council to replace a brownfield former steelworks site. Surprisingly, no mention was made of Sheffield’s tram network; prior to the pandemic, this had provided a counter to Meadowhall by carrying passengers parked there into the city centre. There are three other lines, making the centre nearly as well-connected as Manchester through Metrolink. As an acceptable alternative to car travel, this offers a sustainable way to get people into the centre and, learning from the Strong Towns movement, is a good starting point for the reinvention of Sheffield. Prof Lewis Lesley Liverpool • It was obvious from the outset the huge out-of-town shopping centres such as Meadowhall that were promoted in the Thatcher era – often on the sites of old heavy industry – would kill historic town centres. Yet not until the damage had been done did John Major’s government reverse the preference, with hundreds more developments lining up for permission before the axe was due to fall. A sweetener for Meadowhall was to have been a major artwork, The Ride of Life. Several brilliant and witty automaton makers were to produce a ride-on entertainment, possibly to placate those who saw only raw neoliberalism at work in the mall. Inevitably the developer reneged and the artworks were dispersed. Some resurfaced in Kinetica, a short-lived display in Spitalfields Market, before that too fell to redevelopment. John Harris says he was struck by the number of places in the centre of Sheffield where people can just sit and pass the time. In places like Meadowhall the pressure is to consume, and much of what appears to be public space is in fact privately owned and controlled. Sheffield needs to pay greater attention to the two local experts who oppose demolition and “residential towers” for the John Lewis site than to the inevitable external consultants who are the instant resort of any local authority with a few million pounds for “consultation”. Local people are more likely to know what makes the old steel city tick. Judith Martin Winchester, Hampshire • In John Harris’s sensitive and informed article, he mentions the richness of the music that began to emerge in Sheffield in the 70s and 80s, which gave vibrancy to the city. Many of us would add how that cultural richness also included the long residence of The Lindsays, a world-class string quartet who chose to live and play in Sheffield from the early 70s until they retired in 2005. Their legacy has since flourished with Music in the Round, whose home continues to be at the city’s Crucible theatre. Their contribution to classical music playing among the young in their schools is now going from strength to strength. Jane and Simon Clements Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The announcement of a plan to expand Covid vaccinations to all children aged five to 11 has been delayed amid an apparent impasse between the government and its vaccinations watchdog. While the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) made its decision more than a week ago, Downing Street is reviewing the verdict. A decision is now expected to be announced on 21 February, when Boris Johnson unveils the government’s long-term Covid plan. The JCVI’s recommendation has not yet been made public. It is understood it will expand vaccinations to all younger children but via a “non-urgent” offer to parents, given the relatively small health risks to the age group. Clinically vulnerable five- to 11-year-olds were offered vaccines from December, but moves to expand the programme to all younger children were held up to allow the JCVI to hear a broad range of evidence on the issue. Officials scheduled a briefing to announce the advice on Friday of last week, and then for this Monday, but it has been again delayed, prompting some bafflement within the JCVI. Ministers are deciding whether to accept the recommendation, with a decision coming in just over a week when Boris Johnson is due to outline his long-term strategy for Covid. It is set to include an end to all domestic restrictions in England. A government spokesperson said: “No decisions have been made by ministers on the universal offer of a Covid-19 vaccine to all five- to 11-year-olds. We are committed to reviewing the JCVI’s advice as part of wider decision-making ahead of the publication of our long-term strategy for living with Covid-19.” The move appears especially unusual given that, while JCVI recommendations are seen by ministers before being announced, this is usually just a brief process to consider legal and logistical issues. This is ordinarily done by the health department, not No 10. Ministers have previously expressed frustration at the JCVI’s caution in extending vaccines to children, an area where the UK lags behind several EU nations and the US. The vaccines watchdog, which is completely independent, has a remit that means its decisions are meant to be based largely on the health impact on the particular cohort being considered, and less on wider benefits such as lower Covid transmission and the impact on education. In September, the JCVI declined to recommend vaccination for healthy 12- to 15-year-olds, saying the margin of benefit was “considered too small”. But in an unprecedented suggestion it said ministers could consider seeking separate advice on areas outside its remit, such as disruption to schools, and make a different decision – which they did. With Covid vaccinations the JCVI makes recommendations that health departments in the four UK nations decide whether to accept. The confusion around JCVI advice comes as the government faced further criticism for suggestions that access to free lateral flow tests could be reduced or removed all together. According to sources speaking to the Guardian last week the Treasury is looking at a number of options to cut spending, with the provision of free lateral flow tests to people without symptoms expected to end. While a government spokesperson said there were no plans to stop free tests when regulations are due to end on 24 February, following Johnson’s announcement Dr Stephen Griffin, a virologist at the University of Leeds, said the alleged idea was concerning. “I remain astonished at the prospect of dismantling our testing system and, more specifically at the withdrawal of free tests,” he said. “Even if we come to a point where asymptomatic testing en masse feels no longer viable, the opportunity to test prior to engaging with at risk activities, or more importantly with at risk people, should remain. It certainly shouldn’t be restricted to those wealthy enough to afford it.” Prof Lawrence Young, a virologist and molecular oncologist at the University of Warwick, said ending free tests “reinforces the misplaced view that the pandemic is over and that we can all go back to a pre-pandemic world where Covid doesn’t exist”. He added: “This move will encourage people not to bother about getting tested, leaving those who are actively infectious to spread the virus. Those who recognise the value of testing and are concerned about spreading the virus to elderly relatives and the clinically vulnerable will be tempted to stock up on lateral flow tests while they remain free – and who can blame them?” A further 41,270 positive Covid cases in the UK were reported on Sunday, together with a further 52 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. While the trend in daily reported cases – which reflects infections picked up by testing – continues to show a marked decline, data from the Office for National Statistics, based on swabs collected from randomly selected households, suggests infection levels nonetheless remain high. While trends in the ONS data typically lag a couple of weeks behind case data – in part because the former can include people who test positive for some time after acquiring their infection – the latest figures suggest about one in 19 people in England had the virus in the week ending 5 February.Dozens of western diplomats in Kyiv were packing their bags and preparing to leave the city on Sunday evening, as many countries issued a clear warning to all citizens still inside Ukraine: get out now. Six months after western decision-makers were taken by surprise by the speed with which Kabul fell to the Taliban, politicians in many countries are taking extra precautions over a potential Russian assault that has not yet begun. Governments of 39 countries have warned against travel to Ukraine, according to a count by the Ukrainian news site Novoe Vremya. Many have also warned that if people do not leave now, they may find it impossible to escape later, amid rumours that Ukrainian airspace could be closed in the coming days. The US, which has briefed that a full-blown Russian assault on Ukraine could be imminent, has said it is evacuating all but a small group of diplomats from Ukraine, and has reiterated warnings to US citizens that they should leave as soon as possible. “It isn’t just time to leave Ukraine, it is past time to leave Ukraine,” a senior US administration official said on Saturday. Britain and Germany have also advised their citizens to leave the country immediately. One of the most significant steps is the decision of Britain, Canada and the US to withdraw its staff from a monitoring mission in the eastern Ukraine conflict zone, run by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), at a time when western intelligence claims Russia may be preparing a “false flag” incident in the region. The US and Canadian embassies have sent non-essential staff and family members home and are evacuating others to the western Ukrainian city of Lviv. American, Canadian and British military trainers in the country have also been withdrawn. Office space and hotel rooms in Lviv are at a premium as diplomats and businesses temporarily relocate there. Britain’s ambassador, Melinda Simmons, will stay in Kyiv and work with a core team, while other British diplomats have been sent home. US citizens in Ukraine said they have received calls from the state department warning them to leave as soon as possible. “It wasn’t an order but it was very strong advice,” said Joseph Davis, a US citizen based in Odessa. He said he had decided to stay for now, as he believed the war scare was overhyped and he had family, friends and colleagues in the city. For a number of weeks, the messaging of western capitals, particularly Washington and London, has been sharply at odds with the tone taken by the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. This has led to mutual irritation, with many foreign officials feeling Zelenskiy, a former comedian, is out of his depth and refusing to take an evident threat seriously. Zelenskiy’s circle, meanwhile, say the constant warnings of imminent invasion coming from Washington are helping to sow panic in the country and are causing economic chaos. David Stulík, a former EU diplomat in Kyiv, said the evacuations could be part of “strategic messaging” to the Russians to show that the west is taking the situation seriously. But many Ukrainians expressed frustration with the withdrawals, saying that with the potential shutting down of airspace in the coming days, it felt like Ukraine, not Russia, was being sanctioned. “Western citizens are ordered to leave, but we don’t have anywhere to go. How should that be perceived by average Ukrainians?” said Daria Kaleniuk, the executive director of Ukraine’s Anti-Corruption Action Centre. She said western nations should move immediately to put a stop to the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline and impose personal sanctions on Kremlin-linked oligarchs, rather than reserve these measures for after a Russian attack. “If you have intelligence that is really strong enough to evacuate your citizens, then you have strong reasons to act tough on Russia right now,” said Kaleniuk. Some diplomats in Kyiv say the images of the chaotic withdrawal and evacuation efforts from Afghanistan last year are playing heavily on the minds of decision-makers in western capitals. In Britain, the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, explicitly made the comparison. “Following the chaos of the evacuation from Afghanistan, we ask the government for reassurance that the right lessons have been learned,” he said. Others wonder whether the fall of Kabul to the Taliban is a helpful comparison for a country that has land borders with several EU member states in the west. “Russians, if they entered Ukraine or even Kyiv, would not be chasing local staff of western embassies, and all embassies would continue their work,” said Stulík. However, he said the evacuations were a sensible temporary precaution against the worst-case scenario. Russia’s foreign ministry has also said it will “optimise” staff at its embassy and three consulates in Ukraine. Spokesperson Maria Zakharova said this was due to “possible provocations from the Kyiv regime or third countries”. It was not immediately clear how severely the withdrawal of US, UK and Canadian monitors will affect the OSCE mission in eastern Ukraine. The mission had 680 international monitors, according to a January report, of whom 57 were from the US, 40 from the UK and 28 from Canada. Helga Maria Schmid, the OSCE secretary general, wrote on Twitter that the monitoring mission and other OSCE projects in Ukraine “will continue to fulfil their mandates without interruption”. It is unclear whether other countries will also pull their staff in coming days. “If I had been given a choice, I would have stayed, but there was definitely no choice about it,” said one American member of the mission, who was in the process of being evacuated for a minimum of 30 days, after which there would be a “security review”. “There is a bit of head-scratching here about why people are being pulled from an active conflict area for safety reasons, because of a potential conflict that hasn’t manifested yet,” said the US citizen.Saudi Arabia has transferred shares worth $80bn to its sovereign wealth fund as the oil-rich nation hopes to rival Norway and Singapore’s state-managed funds and invest in green projects. Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, Saudi Arabia’s de facto ruler, said 4% of shares in Saudi Aramco, the world’s biggest oil exporter, would be transferred to the kingdom’s sovereign wealth fund as part of efforts to recalibrate the oil-dominated economy. The transfer is the latest sign that Saudi Arabia wants to open up the oil giant and “crown jewel” of the Saudi economy, the Arab world’s largest. The crown prince, who was blamed by the US for sanctioning the murder of the Washington Post journalist Jamal Khashoggi, was quoted as saying the “transfer of 4% of Aramco shares to the Public Investment Fund (PIF) … is part of the kingdom’s long-term strategy to support the restructuring of its economy”. He said the kingdom wants the investment fund to have $1tn in assets by the end of 2025. The fund, the centrepiece of official moves to end economic reliance on oil, had less than half that amount before this deal. Norway’s sovereign wealth fund, the world’s largest, said last month it earned a return of 14% on its $1.3tn of investments, much of it from the sale of state-owned oil supplies. Singapore’s Temasek investment fund is worth more than $300bn. Crown Prince Mohammed stressed that the Saudi state would remain the dominant Aramco shareholder with a 94% stake. He is also head of the sovereign PIF. Aramco shares finished down by 0.6% in Sunday trading after the announcement. But experts said the share switch would strengthen the sovereign fund. The oil giant raised $6bn in Islamic bonds in June last year so that it could pay dividends to the new shareholders. But Aramco announced $30.4bn in profits for the third quarter of 2021, a massive rise from $18.8bn for the same quarter the previous year, as oil prices took off again.Craig Dawson took advantage of Leicester’s habitual inability to defend set-pieces by claiming the stoppage-time equaliser that enabled West Ham United to capitalise on their rivals’ slips and move a point ahead in the contest to qualify for the Champions League. With Manchester United and Tottenham Hotspur faltering again, West Ham consolidated fourth place in the Premier League with what was a welcome point considering Leicester had battled back from going behind to Jarrod Bowen’s goal to lead 2-1. Youri Tieleman’s penalty just before half-time and Ricardo’s Pereira’s first goal in more than two years – the last had also come against West Ham – appeared to have helped Leicester to a much-needed morale-booster before they gave up a winning position for the third time in successive home league games this year. Five of the last seven goals they have conceded in the Premier League have come in the final 10 minutes of matches. Leicester have conceded from 14 set-pieces (excluding penalties) in the Premier League, the worst record in the division, and despite a much-improved performance, Brendan Rodgers remains a manager whose future – or at least whose team – looks uncertain. Bowen swung over the corner from which Dawson rose to nudge in the equaliser, albeit off an upper arm that invited a VAR check. The introduction of Saïd Benrahma, as a 79th-minute substitute, made a difference as the winger’s proactive attitude earned him three shots at goal, the last one deflecting for the all-important corner. “The manager made a couple of changes, which helped us out and the lads put a shift in until the end,” Dawson said. “I was slightly worried [about VAR] but it counted so that’s all that matters. It was a fair point for us today.” West Ham have been less impressive on the road recently, having lost four of their previous seven Premier League away games, but this will go down as a point gained. Kurt Zouma withdrew shortly before the game – with illness cited – but quite how such a straightforward clipped pass from Issa Diop, Zouma’s replacement, could bypass all of Leicester’s defence in the 10th minute and allow Bowen a clear run down the inside-left channel beggars belief. West Ham’s go-to man showed no hesitation as he shot across Kasper Schmeichel into the far bottom corner for his seventh goal in as many games. Bowen, the matchwinner against Watford on Tuesday, has been involved in 15 goals in his 25 Premier League games this season and his movement from the centre circle to the inside-left channel was enough to beguile Leicester. The home team at this stage were diffident, unsurprisingly after a run of six defeats in the previous 12 games, especially the previous Sunday’s FA Cup humbling by Nottingham Forest. That had led Rodgers to castigate his players for their lack of hunger and to drop some of his bigger names such as Tielemans, Harvey Barnes and Caglar Soyuncu for Thursday’s 2-0 defeat at Liverpool. Here they were all recalled but Leicester’s winter of discontent, with Jamie Vardy, Wes Fofana and Jonny Evans still among those injured, took another icy blow when James Justin, who has been so impressive since returning from 11 months out with a serious knee injury, went off with a hamstring injury. James Maddison, playing in a more advanced wide role as Rodgers endeavoured to stiffen up his midfield, put in a couple of meaty challenges as he attempted to help Leicester battle their way back into the game and, with the crowd raising their game in response, Leicester equalised from a penalty. Maddison’s corner struck Aaron Cresswell’s outstretched elbow and Tielemans slammed in the ensuing penalty to his usual side, the goalkeeper’s right. The atmosphere cranked up as the rain teemed down and when Barnes went slaloming past Vladimir Coufal and crossed low to the far post, Patson Daka came sliding in to miss the converting contact by inches. Finally the Foxes had their tails up again and they took the lead 12 minutes into the second half. Tielemans switched play from the right to Barnes on the far side of the penalty area and the winger’s cross invited Pereira, on his first league start for three months after a gradual rehabilitation from a broken leg, to climb above Cresswell and head in to the top corner. But, just as West Ham never know when they are done, as Kidderminster Harriers would testify, so Leicester can never be sure that they have won. “We have had a few of them lately, [and it is] deflating for the players,” Rodgers admitted. “Second half was like watching us of old, [with the] speed of the game and chances.Unfortunately the last few games we have conceded late here. I was much happier with the mentality and intensity of the team, especially in the second half.”Here’s Peter Lansley’s report from the King Power. David Moyes spoke to Sky Sports. You have to remember [Leicester were] winning the FA Cup and league title not so long away. They have some really good players here, we are trying to stick at it, we have had some difficulties and still pulling out wins and results. In the first half I felt annoyed after going into a good lead and gave them a leg up. It says lots for the players, we have come quickly and made massive strides in the last couple of years. I will squeeze everything out of them and I want us to challenge the top teams.” [Zouma] was ill before the game, wanted to play, we wanted him to play as well. He was sick during the night, he stayed away from the players and did not eat much. Once he got out he did not think it was possible. We told Issa Diop to be ready. It is a stomach bug, probably something he has eaten. Brendan Rodgers spoke to Sky Sports. We have had a few of them lately, deflating for the players. Second half we were outstanding and first half West Ham were better. Second half was like watching us of old, speed of the game and chances. That is seven points dropped in our last three games from good positions, it is disappointing. There was anxiety there but possession is a mantra, you have to take the ball and be brave. Naturally, when you are inconsistent the crowd will be edgy. Second half we got up the pitch. Firstly [Youri Tielemans] has not declined [a new contract]. I have seen stories but the position is exactly the same. He is a fantastic player and there has been no movement. He has worked well and until his last days here, he will always give his best. He is a top professional and you saw his commitment today. West Ham stayed in fourth but may rue only getting a point. Leicester’s indifferent run continues, even if they were signs of improvement. Declan Rice and Craig Dawson speak to Sky Sports. DR: “Disappointment really, first half we was excellent, we could have used our chances better. It was a good point in the end. In the first half we were so compact, Dewsbury-Hall picked up little pockets and Harvey Barnes was flying up the left. We need to still keep believing. We are a great bunch of lads and we go on to Newcastle.” CD: “We was working hard to get the goal and luckily enough it went in. I was slightly worried, but it counted and that’s what mattered. The manager made a couple oo chanced and we put the effort until the end. A point was a fair result in the end.” This seems a telling stat. Leicester cannot defend corner, that much we know. The ball came off the sleeve of Craig Dawson to equalise late on, just as the ball came off the hand of Aaron Cresswell for the first Leicester goal. Tielemans and Ricardo’s goals followed Jarrod Bowen’s opener, and then came that late equaliser. Leicester knew what was coming if they didn’t score a third. 90+3 min: Ndidi has a dig from distance, to jeers. Brendan Rodgers a sickened man on the sidelines. That’s it, he offers a handshake to what looks a downcast David Moyes. 90+2 min: Can West Ham do what Tottenham and Stephen Bergwijn did? Surely not. Leicester’s glass jaw exposed again. Benrahama has yet another sighter, and his shot deflects behind for a corner. That spells danger for Leicester. And Dawson manages to knock the ball in. Oh Leicester, oh no. Not another late goal. VAR offers no respite. The goal stands, even if it did come off the top of Dawson’s arm. 89 min: Late sub, off goes Tielemans to applause, and on comes Vestergaard to add power at the back for Leicester. 88 min: An Antonio throw is not actually that long and is cleared. West Ham struggling to create much and Declan Rice has not had the best day in midfield. 86 min: Barnes speeds away again, Fredericks struggling with him almost as much as Coufal. Then Barnes asks to be teed up, only for Lookman to get greedy and shoot. 84 min: Off go West Ham in search of an equaliser they need. They could do with a winner beyond that, as they had a chance to open up gaps on Manchester United and Tottenham. 82 min: Benrahama suddenly has space to shoot, and it looks dangerous for a split second, only to fly wide. West Ham pushing on here. Leicester falling back. And that spells danger. 81 min: West Ham corner, and a worry for Leicester, but this one is cleared only for West Ham to win it back and force another as Ndidi slides in. 79 min: Double change for the Hammers, Vlasic and Benrahma on, off goes Fornals and Lanzini, both of whom have been disappointing. 78 min: More Barnes brillance as he scoops up the ball and Tielemans just fails to get on the end of the ball. 76 min: More Rick Harris: “I wonder did the King Power pre-game DJ have the wit to play the Squeeze song ‘Cool for Cats’ over the tannoy while Zouma was warming up? There’s a Davy Crockett reference and the immortal line She doesn’t mind the language, it’s the beatin’ she don’t need.” They probably played some Kasabian. Though thinking about it, perhaps not. Some Showaddywaddy, maybe. Can’t go wrong with that. 75 min: Leicester are passing the ball around, trying to kill off the game. Of all the teams in the Premier League, they seem among the least equipped to get such a job done. It’s always interesting when Brendan is the manager. 73 min: Leicester change: Lookman on, and Maddison, who has been quiet and missed a good chance, goes off. 72 min: Antonio finds Fornals who whacks the ball out of play when attempting to cross. 70 min: Schmeichel rushes out and smashes the ball into the sky to clear danger as Fornals scampers towards him. 68 min: Dewsbury-Hall, another player fizzing with confidence all of a sudden, whips in a shot that’s wide. Leicester need another goal, and are chasing it down with extreme prejudice. 67 min: That’s enough from Coufal as he is replaced by the rather speedier Ryan Fredericks at West Ham’s full-back position. Fresher legs needed against Barnes. 66 min: Fornals falls in the Leicester box but no dice from the referee, Michael Oliver, and Barnes again almost forces something again. Then, he gets another chance to roast Coufal, cutting the ball back for Dewsbury-Hall to fire over. 64 min: Barnes has had Coufal on toast in this game, and West Ham are doing very little to protect their right back. This time, the danger is cleared but Barnes is really enjoying himself. 63 min: Antonio, who has not seen much of the ball in this half, looks annoyed as he chases the ball as it runs out. 62 min: Declan Rice joins the booked club, and was not happy with that, having looked to have slipped as he went through the back of Daka. 60 min: Cresswell, who has had a tough afternoon, has been booked for a foul on Ricardo, who has had a good afternoon. 58 min: So good to see Harvey Barnes and Ricardo involved; both have had troubled seasons, and Barnes looks to be overflowing with confidence. More wizardry from Barnes off the left, great control and whips the ball in, and Ricardo speeds in, climbs highest and heads home. A fine goal. West Ham statuesque. 56 min: Barnes takes a swing as as Dewsbury-Hall free-kick bounces out but can only hit the wall. And then Leicester go so close. Barnes shows off his skill, and his cross to the back post really should be knocked in by Daka. And yet it isn’t. 54 min: Soyuncu launches the ball up front, and Barnes tries to get on the end of it, only for Bowen to make a fine tackle, and then get to his feet and carry it. A player brimming with confidence. 52 min: Leicester chase down Diop, and Fabianski is forced to get it launched. Neither team is exactly blessed with touch and verve though Barnes tries a reverse pass that Thomas fails to make the most of. 50 min: West Ham free-kick, taken by Coufal from the right and cleared. But West Ham keep the ball, and almost carve a chance for Bowen, only for his shot to be blocked. 49 min: West Ham queue for a cross, and Fornals eventually has his blocked. They are dominating possession. 48 min: Confusion between Amartey and Schmeichel sees Bowen almost steal in as West Ham are allowed to build up their own head of steam. 46 min: Back away we go at the King Power as Leicester seek to build on their improvements of the second half of the first half. Maddison, who was quiet in the first 45, has a quick chance after Diop heads away and he is too quick with it, smashing the ball into the stand. Leicester lacked in confidence, and were caught out by that Jarrod Bowen goal but made West Ham work and though fortunate to be handed the penalty by Aaron Cresswell, their efforts were rewarded. This could go either way. 45+2 min: Chance for West Ham. Antonio holds up the ball, and stands it up for Fornals who commits a foul in chasing it down. 45+1 min: Three minutes are added on to a half where Leicester have grown into the game and now have their reward, a gift in fact from Cresswell. Tielemans drills the penalty, right in the bottom left, and beyond Fabianski had guessed right. Great penalty. And Tielemans celebrates by miming a heart. 43 min: Ricardo crosses again and Rice head the ball away. Soucek’s challenge on Dewsbury-Hall forces a corner. Tielemans takes, and that’s a plum handball from Cresswell. It was in an unnatural position. 41 min: Ricardo has two attempts to get a cross into the West Ham box, both fail and West Ham go up the other end. Then it goes back up to the West Ham end where Harvey Barnes fires over the bar, and wide. He curses a bobble. 39 min: Tielemans tries to get Leicester going, and fires well wide. He tries to get the home fans reared up, and they respond even if some may doubt if he is going to be at the club next season. 37 min: Not much football being played. Antonio is down after getting whack to what looks like the funny bone, and Schmeichel tried to play on, only to be pulled back. Lots of boos as Antonio returns...Leicester fans not seeing the funny side. 35 min: Tielemans has not done much beyond that long pass for Daka, and there’s talk he wants to leave the club. At his best, he’s a midfield general. 33 min: West Ham’s turn to have a corner, an area Leicester have struggled with. They clear this one. But concede a free kick when Maddison clatters Fornals. This one is cleared, too, though with a modicum of panic. 31 min: The corner is cleared as Fornals goes back to clear up. 30 min: Another Leicester corner, taken by Dewsbury-Hall, but it will be delayed as James Justin is down, it looks like a muscle injury after so long out with a cruciate knee ligament problem. A shame, and on comes Luke Thomas. 27 min: Blocks aplenty in the Leicester box as Bowen and Fornals have shots and crosses cleared. Then Ricardo goes down, and there’s a break in play. It’s high tempo but by no means high quality, besides that goal. 25 min: Leicester force a corner, and are coming back into this. Dewsbury-Hall takes, Fabianski flaps, and then West Ham knock behind again. The corner’s taken short, a waste, as they almost always are. Get it in the mixer, lads. 23 min: Cheers from Leicester fans as Daka is set away by a Tieleman’s quarterback pass, and though Fabianski comes out, that’s better from them. It couldn’t have been much worse. Barnes involved too, he seems key today. 21 min: Leicester are slow slow slow. West Ham are given plenty of time to get back and defend. Barnes, peripheral all game, cuts in from the left, but can’t find a teammate. Individual inspiration seems Leicester’s best route; the team’s not working right. 19 min: Cresswell is OK, and crosses the ball with his trusty left. It’s blocked but Leicester have done very little but sit back. They’re unrecognisable from the last two seasons and seem nervous, too. 18 min: The latest player down on a slippery surface is Aaron Cresswell, who manages to get up after what looked a blow to his right ankle. 17 min: West Ham fans are very loud indeed, a right old Cockney knees-up in the corner of the King Power. Their team is bossing this, too. 15 min: West Ham are pressing high up, forcing Leicester back and there’s some booing from the home fans. Not much zip from Leicester, but then again there’s no Jamie Vardy. 13 min: Leicester look shapeless and vulnerable and the West Ham fans are singing lustily of bubbles and Bowen. This is not going well for the home team at all. 11 min: Too easy for West Ham, too bad from Leicester but Bowen is a player of real class and a reminder that good players are available down the league. Hull have produced him, Andy Robertson and, well, Harry Maguire in recent years. The first real attack of the game, and a long ball from Diop is taken down, the offside trap sprung and his finish is excellent. A player very much in form takes apart a defence very much out of form. 7 min: Soyuncu’s turn to be down, after a heavy fall, and he’s got blood on his shorts so makes his way down to the tunnel to get changed. Rick Harris gets in touch: “Interesting times. A few months ago Manchester United were being ridiculed for not appointing Antonio Conte as Solskjaer’s replacement and Brendan Rodgers was being touted as another ‘brilliant’ manager who was ‘just right’ for the Old Trafford gig. “My money is on Ralph Hassenhutl and yesterday was a pretty good job interview. Makes the appointment of his mentor Rangnick make sense and would give United their very own Klopp / Tuchel variant.” 6 min: Brendan Rodgers is already making notes. He’s a better man than I if he is picking up any pattern whatsoever from this game. OK, he is a better man than I. 4 min: Jarrod Bowen, the scorer of the winner - via a deflection - in midweek is down, and there’s a considerable delay in play even if he looks OK to continue. There’s something of a limp and that furrows David Moyes even more than normal, which is pretty furrowed when you think of it. 2 min: Leicester begin with an attack, with Harvey Barnes to the fore, and zipping in a cross from the wing. At the other end, Soucek lopes forward and the danger is eventually cleared. 1 min: And away we go, as the players take the knee, and West Ham kick off. There’s big stakes at hand for them, and with their top-four peers all struggling. Ok, no Zouma but football to come and a highly squeaky piece of bugling greets the players on the field at the King Power Stadium. The noise is deafening from the PA system. You might want to catch Graeme Souness’ view of the l’affaire Zouma on Sky just there. It made for incredible TV. Sample quote: “that cat hadn’t done anything wrong.” Zouma felt unwell in the warmup, and in comes Issa Diop, as probably should have happened against Watford on Tuesday. Zouma’s name was booed by Foxes fans in the warmup and now it looks like he might not be playing. Brendan Rodgers spoke to Sky ahead of this game after being fiercely critical of his players after the loss to Liverpool as part of a winless run of four matches. It’s probably the first time I’ve had to be as harsh as that in all honesty. Sometimes you have to be harsh to be clear. The reality is that this season we’ve conceded too many goals. The pressing elements of our game haven’t been at the levels we’d want them to be. As a team, we haven’t defended well enough. I’ve always been honest with the players and I said that to them from the beginning. I’m not going to tell them something in six months’ time that I could tell them now. From Paul Doyle’s mini-preview of this game for Ten Things. When these sides met earlier in the season, Michael Antonio scored twice and celebrated by holding up a cardboard cutout of himself. West Ham could probably have done with a real-life imitator of Antonio in recent matches, since the striker has been out of form. But that is partly because of the way that opponents have tended to start playing against West Ham, sitting deep and leaving Antonio no room to run into. Brendan Rodgers’ side are unlikely to play like that at the King Power, not least because they do not have a reliable defence. So Antonio and West Ham’s nifty attacking midfielders could have yet more fun at the expense of Leicester, against whom West Ham have scored 10 times in their last three encounters. Four changes to the Leicester team that lost to Liverpool in midweek. Youri Tielemans, Caglar Soyuncu, Harvey Barnes and Ricardo Pereira are in, Luke Thomas, Mark Albrighton and Ademola Lookman are benched. Just one West Ham change from the team that beat Watford on Tuesday. Z***a starts as widely expected, Manuel Lanzini comes in for Said Benrahma Leicester: Schmeichel, Pereira, Soyuncu, Amartey, Justin, Ndidi, Tielemans, Dewsbury-Hall, Maddison, Barnes, Daka. Subs: Ward, Albrighton, Iheanacho, Perez, Choudhury, Vestergaard, Mendy, Thomas, Lookman West Ham: Fabianski, Coufal, Zouma, Dawson, Cresswell, Rice, Soucek, Lanzini, Fornals, Bown, Antonio. Subs: Areola, Yarmolenko, Vlasic, Noble, Benrahma, Diop, Fredericks, Johnson, Kral It’s a match that continues to be overshadowed by the Kurt Zouma affair that came to light on Monday and continues to rage on, David Moyes unable to take the sting out of the situation. West Ham have a chance to continue their top-four push with those around them struggling for form and results. Talking of which, there’s Leicester, who would have begun the season looking to be in the top-four situation but begin the day in 13th, and despite having a few games in hand on their rivals. Brendan Rodgers is a manager under pressure, though ought to have plenty of residual credits. His team’s defending has been poor all season and West Ham will seek to exploit that. Kick-off 4.30pm. Join me.The rightwing French presidential candidate Valérie Pécresse vowed to crack down on immigration as she held her first big rally on Sunday amid competition from the growing far right and defections from her party to the centrist leader Emmanuel Macron. “There is no sovereignty without borders,” Pécresse said on stage in Paris as more than 6,000 people waved French flags in support of the first female presidential candidate for Les Républicains, the traditional rightwing party of Jacques Chirac and Nicolas Sarkozy. Pécresse, who on a recent trip to Greek migrant camps said she was not against “barbed wire” to keep migrants out of Europe, told the rally that she would support the building of barriers and “even walls” on the edge of Europe if the countries on the frontline wanted it. It was a clear reference to her rival, the controversial, far-right TV pundit Éric Zemmour, who this week suggested building a Donald Trump-style anti-immigration “wall” around the edges of the EU. A former budget minister under Sarkozy, Pécresse, 54, wants to be seen as the only feasible rival to Macron ahead of the April election. But she faces the serious challenge of whether she can make it to the second round runoff. The far right has risen in force to represent about 30% of the vote in current polls, and is split between two candidates, Marine Le Pen, running for the third time, and the newcomer Zemmour. Both are hovering around the same score as Pécresse in the polls. At the rally, Pécresse cited her heroes, Britain’s Margaret Thatcher and Germany’s Angela Merkel, as “women who always defended their people”, saying she wanted to create a “New France” of law and order, with tight controls on immigration and quotas for migrants. She said she would also oppose what she termed woke movements, which she said threatened to “demolish French identity”, tellling the rally that as leader of the Île-de-France region, which includes Paris and its surrounding area, she had banned “burkinis” or full-body swimsuits, from pools. To cheers from the hall, she said: “For me, the headscarf is not a piece of clothing like any other. It’s not a religious prescription. It’s a sign of the submission of a woman.” She criticised Macron’s government for refusing to ban the Muslim headscarf from competitive sports. Pécresse repeated her promise that “the salaries of French people will increase by 10% during my presidency”, and said she would decentralise France, attacking Macron for a top-down leadership style and high public spending, which she said had tipped France into dangerous debt. A fluent Russian-speaker, Pécresse delved into international affairs, saying that under Macron, France had been “humiliated” on the international scene, including over the Aukus defence agreement between Australia, the US and the UK. While Macron is at 24% in the first round, according to the latest Cevipof poll for Le Monde, Pécresse is at 15.5%, with Le Pen at 15% and Zemmour at 14.5%. Without naming Zemmour or Le Pen, Pécresse told the crowd: “The extremists are lying to you. Refuse the venom of their nostalgia. Don’t let anger and fear win.” Pécresse is under pressure from her party to pull ahead of her far-right rivals in the polls just as president Macron is expected to declare his re-election bid this month. But she suffered a blow this week on immigration when Natacha Bouchart, the rightwing mayor of Calais, broke ranks and announced she would support Macron for the presidential race. Bouchart is an outspoken critic of the situation of migrants wanting to reach Britain from the northern French coast on small boats. Bouchart said Macron had “listened attentively” to the problems of Calais and increased government involvement. She said she was supporting Macron “in the general interest of Calais”. Pécresse has failed to dominate the political debate with her policy ideas, in part because she is seen as attempting to cover all ideological bases in a divided party. She is seen as hailing from the moderate, centrist wing of the right, which Macron himself has won over by appointing two rightwing prime ministers. But Pécresse is also veering very hard right to win over the increasingly anti-immigration line on French national identity in her own party. Pollsters say her messaging to voters is not always clear. Chloé Morin, a political analyst who interviewed Pécresse on her communication style for a new book, We Get The Politicians We Deserve, said the rightwing candidate had been accused of appearing too studious and lacking spontaneity on screen. But Pécresse has criticised those who “act” in front of the cameras. Morin added: “Today, part of Pécresse’s space is occupied by Emmanuel Macron, who has the advantage of being the president in office … he has stifled her ground on the economy. And on the other side, she’s facing serious competition from Éric Zemmour and Marine Le Pen, who have the advantage of being in a more populist register of one-upmanship and can make themselves more audible in a media world that values clashes and buzz. They are more audible than Pécresse, who has to be more measured.” Meanwhile, Le Pen and Zemmour continued their own vicious battle to win far-right voters, with another defection from Le Pen’s National Rally party. Stéphane Ravier, Le Pen’s only senator, jumped ship to Zemmour saying he was best able to “unite” the far right.Bipartisan figures on the congressional committee investigating Donald Trump’s attempts to overturn his 2020 election defeat said on Sunday they expected the former president’s close ally, Rudolph Giuliani, would comply with a subpoena to give testimony. Giuliani is among a number of Trump sphere insiders who have so far refused to cooperate with the bipartisan House panel looking into Trump’s subversion efforts and the January 6 Capitol insurrection the then president incited that claimed five lives. Giuliani was scheduled to testify last Tuesday, after the committee issued a subpoena last month, but did not appear. Elaine Luria, a Virginia Democratic congresswoman and member of the select committee, said Giuliani had already been in touch, seeming to confirm the substance of a New York Times report that Giuliani was in talks about options including an in-person interview or submitting a deposition. “He has been in contact with the committee,” she told MSNBC of Giuliani. “He had an appearance that has been rescheduled but he remains under subpoena and we expect him to cooperate fully with the investigation.” And Adam Kinzinger, an Illinois Republican and committee member, indicated in an appearance on CBS that he was of the understanding, also, that Giuliani would comply. “He’s been subpoenaed [and] our expectation is he was going to cooperate, because that’s the law, same as someone subpoenaed to court,” Kinzinger told CBS’s Face the Nation. He added: “There may be some changes in dates and moments here, as you know, lawyers do their back and forth, but we fully expect that in accordance with the law, we’ll hear from Rudy. “But regardless of when we hear from Rudy, or how long that interview is, we’re getting a lot of information and we’re looking forward to wrapping this up at some point.” Giuliani was prominent in Trump’s failed plotting to hold on to power and prevent Joe Biden taking office, and is reported to have been at the center of an unprecedented plan to order the Department of Homeland Security to seize voting machines in contested states. The Times report notes that Giuliani has not yet agreed to cooperate, but the specter of his evidence about maneuverings inside the White House during the final weeks and days of the Trump administration is another milestone moment in an already turbulent week for the former Republican president. The Washington Post reported on Thursday that Trump took boxes of records, including top secret documents, to Mar-a-Lago, his Florida retreat, when he left office, in possible violation of government record-keeping laws. And an upcoming book from New York Times journalist Maggie Haberman claims that Trump periodically clogged White House toilets by attempting to flush away printed papers. Trump has denied the allegations. In recent days, meanwhile, several senior Republicans have criticized the party’s censure of Kinzinger and Wyoming congresswoman Liz Cheney for serving on the committee, and the Republican National Committee’s controversial characterization of the riot as “legitimate political discourse”. Mike Pence, Trump’s vice-president, called Trump’s efforts to overturn the election “un-American” at a conservative conference in Florida, while on Friday the Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell added his voice to the growing Republican backlash against Trump’s big lie that the November 2020 election was stolen from him by the Democrats. “It was a violent insurrection for the purpose of trying to prevent the peaceful transfer of power after a legitimately certified election, from one administration to the next,” McConnell said of the January 6 riot, adding that it was “not the job” of the Republican party to single out members “who may have different views from the majority.” Larry Hogan, the Republican governor of Maryland and a frequent Trump critic, also slammed the RNC’s position over the insurrection. “To say it’s legitimate political discourse to attack the seat of our capital, and smash windows and attack police officers, and threaten to hang the vice-president and threaten to overthrow the election, it’s insanity,” he told CNN’s State of the Union show on Sunday. “The Republican party I want to get back to is the one that believes in freedom and truth and not one that attacks people who don’t swear 100% fealty to the ‘Dear Leader’ [Trump].” Giuliani, if he testifies, could impart invaluable first-hand knowledge of Trump’s plotting, although the Times notes that negotiations could yet fall apart. Its report cites three anonymous sources stating that Giuliani has had talks with the committee about the format and content of his possible testimony, including how much of his interaction with Trump he would yet look to shield under attorney-client privilege. The article suggests Giuliani could be seeking to avoid a costly legal fight and trying to evade a criminal referral for contempt of congress, by dangling a promise of testimony. In November, Steve Bannon, a former Trump adviser, pleaded not guilty to criminal contempt of Congress for his refusal to comply with a committee subpoena, while the House of Representatives has recommended charges for former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows. Kinzinger, who will not seek re-election in this year’s midterm elections, also believes senior party figures such as Pence and McConnell speaking out could help provide “political cover” for anti-Trump Republican candidates. “I don’t care if you’re running for city council, Congress, Senate, etc, every Republican has to be clear and forceful on the record, do they think January 6 was legitimate political discourse?” he asked.Jenny Morrison says she was a little bit disappointed with the behaviour of the former Australian of the Year Grace Tame during a function at the Lodge in January, and hopes her own daughters will be “fierce” but also show “manners and respect”. The prime minister’s spouse told the Nine Network on Sunday night the focus during the reception on 25 January should have been “on all the incredible people coming in” so Tame’s unwillingness to smile at her hosts or for the cameras was “a little bit disappointing, because we’ll welcome you in our home”. The prime minister has repeatedly declined to criticise Tame in the controversy that followed the reception on the eve of Australia Day. Tame, a survivor advocate, won last year’s Australian of the Year prize after her advocacy was instrumental in overturning a Tasmanian law preventing survivors from speaking publicly about their assault. During the function for the 2022 Australian of the Year finalists in Canberra, Tame – who had roundly criticised Morrison’s suboptimal response to federal parliament’s #MeToo reckoning during the previous 12 months – declined to engage in conventional niceties. Last week, during an appearance at the National Press Club, Tame said last August she had received a “threatening” phone call from a senior member of a government-funded organisation warning her not to criticise the prime minister on the eve of last month’s Australian of the Year awards because there was “an election coming soon”. In response to the allegation, the prime minister said he had not and would not authorise any such actions. The National Australia Day Council has denied having threatening conversations with Tame. The Morrison family participated in an extended interview with the Nine Network’s 60 Minutes program on Sunday night. Jenny Morrison is rarely interviewed, but she was a significant focus of the program, characterised as the prime minister’s “secret weapon” in the looming federal election campaign. Jenny Morrison addressed several controversies that have eroded her husband’s standing with voters during the program – including the family’s now infamous holiday in Hawaii during the catastrophic summer bushfires in 2019-20. Morrison has said previously he followed through with the holiday because he had made a promise to his wife and daughters. Jenny Morrison said she was “more than sorry if we disappointed” in the decision to leave the country during the bushfire emergency. “I thought I was making the right decision for my kids. I obviously was wrong.” She said she wished the holiday had never happened “but I can’t change it”. While apologising for the misjudgment, she also editorialised about the subsequent public backlash. She made the point that expectations of contemporary prime ministers were different than the expectations that surrounded earlier prime minister, like Bob Hawke. “I think then it was OK to have a holiday and things like that and, and it doesn’t seem that way now. “Like, people want you to be seen to be doing something, um, all the time.” When the former Liberal party staffer, Brittany Higgins, alleged last year she’d been sexually assaulted in Parliament House, Morrison at one point told journalists it had taken a conversation with his wife to prompt him to display more empathy. Morrison was widely criticised for his perceived mishandling of the aftermath of Higgins’ allegation which triggered a broader #MeToo reckoning in the Australian parliament and led to public rallies. Morrison’s standing with female voters took a significant hit during the furore. The prime minister attempted to recover from the damage by introducing more workplace support for political staff and by reshuffling his cabinet to amplify a female “perspective” within the government. Asked by the interviewer Karl Stefanovic on Sunday night whether it had taken a conversation with her for the prime minister to really comprehend the seriousness of Higgins’ allegation, Jenny Morrison leapt to her husband’s defence. “I think Scott totally gets things,” she said. “I think he’s all about problem solving. And so, that can come across sometimes as serious, uncaring or lacking empathy. But it isn’t that at all.” She said her husband was very task oriented, and as a result of his focus, the environment in Parliament House was changing. “I feel happy that that will happen. “That my girls in like 10 years’ time – heaven forbid if they want to go into politics – can walk safely around and know what’s going on.” Jenny Morrison said her husband should be permitted to reflect publicly on some of their private conversations. “I think he should be able to say what happens with us in our life. “Yes, he talks to me regularly. Do I make policy decisions? Absolutely not. Would you want me to? Because they’d be bad. But I can tell him how I feel about something.” The prime minister’s wife said the ruthlessness of professional politics repelled her, but she said she wanted her husband to win the coming election contest. A Newspoll published on Sunday evening has Labor 10 points ahead of the Coalition on that survey’s two-party-preferred measure. Parliament resumes on Monday.Ukraine has allocated $592m (£437m) to guarantee the continuation of flights to and from the country, as fears of flying over its airspace led some airlines to scrap or divert flights as tensions between the west and the Kremlin mount over a possible Russian invasion. The prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said the funds “were allocated to ensure flight safety in Ukraine for insurance and leasing companies” and would “stabilise the situation on the market of passenger air transportation and will guarantee the return to Ukraine of our citizens who are currently abroad”. The Dutch carrier KLM had earlier cancelled flights to Ukraine after the Netherlands government issued a travel warning over the risks of flying in the region, while Germany’s Lufthansa said it was considering suspending air traffic. A passenger plane operated by the Ukrainian charter airline SkyUp, which was on its way to Kyiv from Madeira in Portugal, was meanwhile diverted on Saturday to the Moldovan capital, Chișinău, after the plane’s Irish owner said it was banning flights in Ukrainian airspace. Ukraine’s state air traffic service on Sunday advised airlines to avoid flying over the open waters of the Black Sea until Saturday because of Russian naval exercises involving more than 30 Russian ships near the Crimea peninsula. But an adviser to the president’s chief of staff said there was “no point” in further closing the skies and speaking after KLM’s suspension said it “somewhat resembles a kind of partial blockade”. The Netherlands is especially sensitive to the potential dangers of Ukrainian airspace after a Malaysia Airlines flight, en route to Kuala Lumpur from Amsterdam, was shot down over an area in eastern Ukraine held by Russia-backed rebels in July 2014, killing all 298 people onboard, including 198 Dutch citizens. An investigation by the Dutch Safety Board found that the BUK surface-to-air missile that downed the plane had come from a Russian military base. KLM said in a statement that its decision followed “adjusted travel advice to code red and an extensive safety analysis”. “KLM has not been flying over the eastern regions of Ukraine and Crimea since 2014,” the company added. “There are now no more KLM flights through Ukrainian airspace until further notice.” A spokesperson for Lufthansa told Reuters on Sunday: “Lufthansa is monitoring the situation in Ukraine very closely.” Governments of 39 countries have warned their citizens to leave Ukraine as soon as possible, according to the Ukrainian news site Novoe Vremya. Many foreigners were rushing to book flights after rumours that Ukrainian airspace may soon be closed. “From tomorrow, airlines are advised not to fly … over this area, and to plan optimal routes in advance, taking into account the current situation,” Ukraine’s state air traffic service said. Mustafa Nayyem, Ukraine’s deputy infrastructure minister, said on Sunday the government had not closed the country’s airspace. “Closing the airspace is a sovereign right of Ukraine and the government has not taken this decision,” Nayyem wrote on Facebook. Nayyem said the majority of airlines continued to operate but some were facing difficulties with insurers, given fears of a Russian attack. “We expect that in the nearest time the situation will stabilise, but nevertheless the state is ready to support airlines and plans to offer additional financial guarantees to support the air travel market,” wrote Nayyem. Kyiv’s Boryspil airport said it continued to operate normally on Sunday afternoon. “As of today, almost all flights are on schedule and without changes,” the airport said. “Stay calm, and watch for possible changes in the schedule.” Both KLM and Lufthansa began rescheduling flights in January to avoid airline crews having to stay in the Ukrainian capital overnight as the buildup of Russian troops at the Ukrainian border intensified. The Irish low-cost airline Ryanair said in late January that it had reduced flights to and from the country.Good morning. Australia has ordered the evacuation of its embassy in Kyiv as the Ukraine crisis worsens. Some countries are warning their citizens to leave the country entirely. And vulnerable Australians are being forced to hide at home due to expensive Covid tests. Roughly one in three Australians have confidence in the Morrison government, which is the lowest approval since the 2019-20 summer bushfires, according to a survey. The longitudinal survey of 3,472 Australians was conducted in the final two weeks of January, as the Omicron wave and eased restrictions resulted in some days with more than 100,000 new Covid cases. The ANU’s Centre for Social Research and Methods found 34.5% of adult Australians had confidence or were “very confident” in the federal government, down from a peak of 60.6% in May 2020. Scott Morrison has ordered the evacuation of the Australian embassy in Kyiv, warning the situation in Ukraine has reached a dangerous stage. The order echoes that of many other countries, including Britain and Germany, who have advised their citizens to leave immediately. Australia’s foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, says the government has directed the departure of embassy staff to a temporary office in Lviv, with the buildup of Russian troops on the border. Britain believes that Russia’s powerful FSB spy agency has been given the task of trying to engineer coups in Ukraine’s major cities in the immediate aftermath of any invasion launched by the Kremlin. Meanwhile, fears of flying over Ukrainian airspace have led some airlines to scrap or divert flights as tensions between the west and the Kremlin mount over a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine. Vulnerable Australians are being forced into “hiding at home” and lower-income workers are forfeiting meals because of the cost of rapid Covid antigen tests, unions and welfare charities have warned as they plead with the Morrison government to reverse its long-held opposition to providing free testing kits for all people. Despite the government’s recent move to make rapid antigen tests tax deductible for workers and businesses, a coalition of advocacy groups including the Australian Council of Social Services (Acoss) and the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) warn the tax write-off plan provides a greater discount to higher-income earners. Australia The so-called “Super Saturday” byelection results may be bad for the NSW government, but they are not surprising. While the full results won’t be known for weeks, it was clear by Saturday evening that the government had lost Bega for the first time since the seat was created in the 1980s. Two years of the pandemic have meant drops in essential screening and detection, while cancer patients undergo treatments alone and isolate to avoid Covid risks. A proposed new coal-fired power station at Collinsville in north Queensland is now being pitched as a “flexible” firming project – a pivot that neatly aligns with federal government moves to bankroll such plans. Unemployment in regional Australia has dropped below the magic 4% but experts say the outcome is “double-edged”, as surging vacancies amid a shallow labour pool looms as the bigger issue. As disillusionment with the Morrison government grows, a new generation of female independents is emerging to run against the system itself. The world Rudolph Giuliani, who was prominent in Donald Trump’s efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election result, is considering giving testimony to the congressional committee investigating the deadly 6 January Capitol insurrection, the New York Times reported on Sunday. Police moved in to clear and arrest the remaining protesters near a key US-Canadian border bridge early Sunday, trying to end one of the main demonstrations that have broken out across Canada against Covid vaccine mandates and other restrictions to bring the pandemic under control. The husband of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, the British-Iranian charity worker detained in Iran, has said she is “very, very angry” after learning about the collapse of a deal to bring her home. Zaghari-Ratcliffe fears she is a “bargaining chip” in ongoing nuclear talks and is filled with “anger at her life being stolen” and the government’s “lack of urgency” in securing her release, Richard Ratcliffe said. New research into sudden weight loss finds a possible cause of cachexia in cancer patients and Cockayne syndrome in children. Recommended reads Trekking into a walk-in campsite with a tent and provisions for fire-cooked meals on your back can definitely be a romantic experience. But if you’re after intimacy and seclusion that is a little less rugged, accommodation in scenic areas often escalates from under-the-stars to five stars, with not much in the middle. We’ve scoured Australia for short stays and experiences that feel special but not extravagant, within a few hours of every capital city. “In 2021 my mother lost her partner of 33 years and my year-long relationship ended,” writes Natasha May. “The grief we feel in missing romantic love has bound us tighter than ever.” Listen It’s been one year since Brittany Higgins came forward with sexual assault allegations that shook the government. Last week she spoke at the National Press Club alongside former Australian of the Year Grace Tame about Scott Morrison’s failure to lead on this issue. Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to political reporter Amy Remeikis about how this tumultuous year inspired her book On Reckoning and the government’s response to a national reckoning. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Through a skeleton career almost derailed by a lack of funding and a severe concussion, Jackie Narracott found a way to win Australia’s most unlikely Olympic medal. Steven Bradbury became part of folklore with his speed-skating gold medal heroics while Chloe Esposito snatched a surprise modern pentathlon gold, but Narracott winning a silver medal in a sport where Australia has no facilities or training program tops the lot. Australia defender Harry Souttar muses on flying back to England with an ACL injury, how his club fortunes changed and the target as he battles back. Media roundup In Queensland, people are hunting to find the unmarked graves where people from South Pacific islands were kidnapped, tricked or lured to Australia to work in the sugar industry in the late 19th and 20th century, the ABC reports. Woodside and Santos face shareholder votes to reveal the cost to decommission their facilities as activists continue to protest the oil and gas industry, WA Today reports. Coming up Counting continues in the NSW byelections. And if you’ve read this far … Down, dirty and explosively entertaining, the Ozploitation movement of the 70s and 80s produced some sensationally good films. From 1971’s Wake in Fright to 1986’s Dead End Drive-in, Guardian Australia’s film critic Luke Buckmaster ranks 17 of the greatest. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Before 60 Minutes went to air on Sunday night, a mate of mine called to express her frustration. She’d seen the clips of the prime minister strumming his Hawaiian instrument while the Morrison family looked on semi-awkwardly and Karl Stefanovic presided at the head of the table, a couple of margaritas in, looking like he’d just bagged a Logie. She’d seen April Sun in Cuba (Oh-Oh-Oh-My-God-Make-It-Stop); the breathless promos trumpeting Jenny Morrison as her husband’s “secret weapon”. Enough already, was her point. Enough of whatever this infomercial was. Enough of Morrison’s ephemera, the featherweight impressionism, the rehearsed verisimilitude. Daggy dad. Sharkies fan. Curry chef. Identities curated and stacked inside one another like hollow babushka dolls. Why, my mate wondered, can’t we just have a prime minister? Just that. A prime minister. Plain and simple. Weighted and steadied by the office. The times felt too serious for this vaudevillian engineering his reboot on prime-time television. Morrison’s first-world problem – would he win the coming federal election? – didn’t really feel that pressing, with people still dying, with businesses struggling to come back from their government-induced hibernation. She felt of all the characters Morrison had constructed, his character of prime minister remained the least fleshed out, and consequently, the least convincing. Given the character of prime minister would be the only one that ultimately mattered, this seemed an oversight. Prime minister Morrison – if he was ever really there forcefully enough to make a lasting imprint – was now in danger, she felt, of disappearing entirely. The constant packaging and repackaging was overwhelming the present. I had these observations front of mind on Sunday night as Morrison sat beside wife Jenny and spectated while she said a bunch of things the prime minister evidently felt he couldn’t say. Like sorry about that ill-timed overseas holiday (but I remember a time when prime ministers were allowed to be humans). Like Grace Tame’s cause is noble but that young woman should learn to mind her manners. Like that Magda Szubanski isn’t very nice. Like my husband absolutely isn’t a psycho, he’s just very task-oriented. Like Peter van Onselen shouldn’t ask questions at the National Press Club that upset my daughters and make me “feel sick to my stomach”. It was prime ministership by proxy. By character reference. This is not intended to be a criticism of Jenny Morrison. She’s an intelligent woman. A warm and relatable person. A loyal spouse is as entitled to express her views as anyone else. She doesn’t need anyone’s permission to speak. But there’s a simple point to make. If there’s a mess, Jenny Morrison isn’t responsible for the cleanup. It shouldn’t be incumbent on her to have to explain or translate her husband to Australian voters; to be Scott’s secret weapon. This idea is actually so patronising it’s hard to know where to begin with it quite honestly. Before Sunday night’s program went to air I just assumed such a hackneyed conceit was a bit of troglodyte magazine television puffery – a cliche rolling off the same production line as happy wife, happy life, and boy, he’s punching above his weight there. But Jenny to the rescue was the trope of choice, and everyone did seem to lean in. Here’s the thing. In case it isn’t obvious, Scott Morrison is the prime minister. It is Morrison’s record voters will be evaluating in a few months time. If the prime minister is having trouble connecting with people, if people are angry with him, that’s on him. If people are tired of poor judgments, the antidote is simple. The prime minister needs to make better judgments. If people think Morrison lacks empathy, he could try a little humility. I suspect that’s more effective than special pleading. And most of all: if Morrison has a substance problem, if voters are wondering what is real, the answer to that is not more puffery.Trouble with defenders has been the defining theme of the season so far for Leicester but in the run-up to the visit of West Ham, Brendan Rodgers was offered a kind of comfort – in the form of a reminder that things could, in theory, have been worse. All of the many players he has had to use in defence have made costly mistakes in this campaign, sometimes several times in the same match. But none have featured in home movies involving a tormented cat. So there’s that. Much of Leicester’s chronic instability can be traced back to the injury suffered in pre-season by Wesley Fofana, the precocious Frenchman who quickly became fundamental to Leicester after joining from Saint-Étienne as a 19-year-old in 2020. Fofana continues to make his way back from the leg break inflicted in an August friendly and may return to full training this month. Whenever he is fit enough to regain his place, he will be welcomed back warmly. There was no such welcome on Sunday for West Ham’s Kurt Zouma, just boos when the stadium announcer read out his name. Another player to arrive in English football from Saint-Étienne as a 19-year-old, the Frenchman has played in the Premier League for four clubs over the past eight years and generally been regarded as a decent, dependable centre-half, apt to head a goal from a set-piece but otherwise unlikely to inflame passions. And then came that outrageous, ludicrous, sad video. Suddenly Zouma is a public enemy, an ex-cat owner and embarrassment to his club. West Ham fined him but chose not to drop him. On Friday David Moyes appealed for the player to be shown “a little bit of forgiveness” and to be allowed to learn and atone. Which is convenient for the club who have invested a lot of money and hope in the player. But it is also a fair plea, especially in an age when justified condemnation can quickly acquire a metaphorical, hypocritical bloodlust. Some denouncers of human folly or wickedness have at least one trait in common with the hunters on MyOutdoorTV, the subscription channel run by a company owned by Arsenal’s Stan Kroenke. It turned out that West Ham did not get to deploy Zouma at Leicester because the player, apparently, felt unwell during the warmup and had to pull out of the match. One hopes he recovers. Issa Diop stepped into the visitors’ defence in place of Zouma. It took him less than 10 minutes to make his mark and, in the process, he tore a now-familiar look of panic across the faces of Leicester’s defenders. Diop’s long straight pass from the back exposed the looseness and slowness of the home defence. Jarrod Bowen peeled off James Justin and raced into the space behind Caglar Soyuncu and Daniel Amartey before lashing a crisp left-foot finish past Kasper Schmeichel. West Ham have been frustrated in recent weeks by teams who sit deep and deny them such space but Leicester seldom play that way, especially at home, and their offside trap was faulty. Leicester’s grim luck with injuries continued on the half- hour when Justin, only recently back from 11 months out with knee damage, was forced off. Rather than wallow in their misfortune, Leicester kept trying to pick their way through the West Ham defence. They were not making many inroads until Aaron Cresswell failed to use his head and gave them a hand. Youri Tielemans dispatched the penalty perfectly. Leicester played from there like a team reprieved. Soon they splayed the visiting defence regularly. Harvey Barnes caused Vladimir Coufal so much pain that Moyes decided the merciful thing to do was replace him with a different right-back. Ryan Fredericks coped better. On the left Cresswell was at times overwhelmed. When Barnes duped Coufal on the hour and chipped a cross to the back post, Ricardo Pereira hurled himself in front of Cresswell to head his first league goal since rupturing a cruciate ligament two years ago. It was a moment of personal triumph for the Portuguese as well as a kind of collective redemption for Leicester’s defenders, who had tightened up since that inauspicious start. It seemed for a while that it would also be the winning goal. But West Ham are chasing Champions League qualification and Leicester’s defensive record incites opponents. They have conceded more goals from set pieces than any other Premier League team this season so, when Bowen swung in a corner in stoppage time, there was no surprise to see Diop’s central defensive partner, Craig Dawson, leaping above Amartey to send the ball into the net. The fact that it did not come off his head as he intended, but off the top of his arm, added a touch of bad luck that made the goal all the more typical of Leicester’s season.Not the knockout blow Eddie Jones was seeking when urging his side to channel Muhammad Ali but mercifully it is always a safe bet Marcus Smith will float like a butterfly when afforded this much time and space. Italy’s 34th consecutive Six Nations defeat will not live long in the memory but this could yet prove to be a seminal moment in Smith’s England career. The 22-year-old is destined for a long and prosperous run in the No 10 jersey and already you sense England’s World Cup hopes next year will largely hinge on Smith’s form. His performance here is significant in that regard because this was the first time that Jones has truly given him licence to showcase his full array of attacking talents, the first occasion where it has felt like he has his head coach’s total trust. To illustrate, it was the 28th minute when Smith hoisted a high kick down the middle of the field to be contested. When he made his debut last summer against USA it was the very first thing he did but here, with the lively Harry Randall inside him, with Harlequins teammates Alex Dombrandt and Joe Marchant rarely far away, Smith was given the freedom of Rome by Jones. Short of a battering ram at inside-centre – the role that André Esterhuizen performs so well for Harlequins – while Manu Tuilagi gets back up to speed, Jones gave Smith all the ammunition he needed to “light up Rome”. His determination to run with the ball, to play with his head up was evident throughout and it was little surprise that he got the ball rolling with the opening try. Maybe the best compliment to be paid to Smith is that it does not bear thinking about how England might have performed had he not been on the field. Indeed, Jones rarely bows to external pressure but it felt telling that when he introduced George Ford in the closing stages Smith stayed on the field. That was less about versatility and more to do with acknowledging his performance had been too polished to withdraw him from the field prematurely, as he did against Scotland. It allowed him to produce a trademark goosestep late on – as England emerged from the slumber they slipped into in the second half it was he who fizzed a fine pass to Elliot Daly for his try. All be told it was a performance full of swagger from Smith, who displayed a maturity against Scotland but an assuredness here. A different challenge posed and another emphatic answer. The intent was obvious the moment Jones announced a team with so many attacking threats but perhaps the most interesting selection was that of Randall at scrum-half, next to Smith, who also caught the eye. The 24-year-old has had his injury problems but he and Smith dovetailed well last summer and Jones clearly believes it is a partnership worth persevering with. That in itself is interesting because, those matches against USA and Canada aside, Ben Youngs had started every England match since the 2019 World Cup. It is a rare thing indeed for Youngs to be omitted from the starting lineup and the fact that this was the occasion when he equalled Jason Leonard’s all-time England caps record of 114 yet still he was benched felt telling. For his willingness to trust Randall demonstrates his determination to broaden England’s attacking horizons and certainly the Bristol scrum-half provides Smith with a speed and crispness of ball that Youngs does not always offer. His kicking left plenty to be desired and it would be a bold move to start him against Wales but it must be said his withdrawal coincided with England’s slip into ennui. “[Marcus and Harry] made a really good start,” said Jones. “There was a lot of pace on the ball early. Marcus took the ball to the line really well in patches and Harry added that little bit of zip.” What’s more, for all the promise that Smith and to a lesser extent Randall showed, there were times when England looked frantic. Max Malins had a fine match but early on he twice fumbled the ball and for all that Ellis Genge delivered a delightful assist for Jamie George’s second try, for Smith’s pass to Daly, equally there were some sloppy mistakes or missed opportunities. Freddie Steward had a far more accomplished performance than against Scotland but he really ought to have found Smith on his inside in the first half while Dombrandt found himself running around in a circle at one point – evidence that the new attacking machine is not truly oiled just yet. What will disappoint England supporters the most is the manner in which their side coasted to the final whistle in the last 20 minutes. It is entirely understandable that the levels of intensity did not come anywhere near to matching Saturday’s two gripping contests but still, supporters wanted to see England as Jones has urged them: to be ruthless and leave Italy on the canvas. In truth it was never a heavyweight contest but with Smith at the helm, chalk it up as an emphatic England win on points.David Moyes insisted Kurt Zouma pulled out of West Ham United’s 2-2 draw with Leicester City less than half an hour before kick-off with sickness rather than stress. The West Ham manager said he had lined up Issa Diop to deputise after Zouma came down ill overnight after a week in which the defender was fined £250,000 for kicking his cat in a video posted on social media. The RSPCA is investigating the incident. Moyes said he excluded the defender from the pre-match team meeting before naming him in his starting lineup for a game West Ham drew 2-2 thanks to Craig Dawson’s stoppage-time equaliser. Moyes said Zouma was “desperate to play” but that after taking part in the warm-up here – during which he was booed by Leicester fans – he had to withdraw. “[Diop] was made aware he had a chance of playing because Kurt was not well last night and was sick during the night and did not eat with us today and stayed out of the meeting,” said Moyes, who expects Zouma to be available next weekend. “We did that not because we were worried, just in case it was a Covid symptom. But it has been sickness and he just could not make it.” Moyes had been widely criticised for selecting Zouma last Tuesday, for the 1-0 win over Watford, shortly after the video had gone viral. But the manager said he could not hear as the visiting fans chanted their support of Zouma with an unedifying song about kicking cats here. “I have hard-enough hearing at my age never mind hearing what the fans are shouting,” he said. West Ham stay fourth but with Manchester United held 1-1 by Southampton on Saturday and Tottenham losing 2-0 at home to Wolves on Sunday, Arsenal were arguably the big winners among the teams chasing Champions League qualification, even though they did not play. Mikel Arteta’s side sit two points behind West Ham with three games in hand. Jarrad Bowen had given West Ham the lead with his seventh goal in his last seven games, before Youri Tielemans’ penalty and Ricardo Pereira scored for Leicester, and Moyes hopes that a slight shin injury will not keep him out. “He is certainly coming up with the goals for us and we need him at the moment,” Moyes said.• The headline and text of an article said river dredging had been carried out for the freeport on Teesside (Study links crab deaths to dredging for government’s freeport, 8 February, p5). Dredging has occurred, but not for this project. • David Lammy’s review of the justice system was commissioned by David Cameron, not Theresa May, who expanded its terms (Munira Mirza: Culture warrior draws surprise line in the sand, 4 February, p14). • Other recently amended articles include: Digested week: claims of Carrie’s crimes against humanity are sexist rot Durham University’s largest donor pulls funding over Covid restrictions Infant killed after coast guard opens fire on boat carrying Venezuelan migrants Screeching U-turn as Unilever’s shareholders balk at £50bn GSK deal Fleetwood Mac: after its 926 weeks on the chart, who’s still buying Rumours? Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam apologises for long Covid testing queues as new restrictions bite Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Eddie Jones believes there is no limit to Marcus Smith’s potential after the England fly-half inspired his side to a comfortable 33-0 victory against Italy in Rome. Jones’s side failed to ruthlessly thrash Italy as he had urged them to but Smith was the standout performer, scoring the first try and delivering another fine showing in England colours. He finished with 13 points and his second try of the championship after exchanging passes with Max Malins, with whom he dovetailed impressively throughout. Last week Smith was replaced against Scotland with 17 minutes remaining when England led by seven points – his withdrawal coinciding with England’s capitulation. “There’s no ceiling to how good he can be,” said Jones. “If he keeps on wanting to get better, keeps having a learning mindset, he could be an absolutely outstanding player at Test level by the World Cup. And obviously that’s pretty important, to have a good 10.” Jones was largely satisfied with the performance, which plateaued for long spells of the second half before Kyle Sinckler added the fifth try. England also kept Italy scoreless for the first time in the Six Nations. “You always want more,” Jones said. “You always want a few more sparklers, a few more rockets. But we went out with the strong intent of taking the game to Italy and not allowing them into the game. I think we did that but we’d have liked to have finished a few more of the rockets at the end that we didn’t get.” England’s bonus-point victory moves them to second in the Six Nations table with back-to-back matches at Twickenham to come against Wales and Ireland, but Smith echoed Jones’s view that there is room for improvement. “I thought in parts we were good, but we’re all striving for perfection,” he said. “We’re not satisfied at the minute. But to come away with five points in this tournament is always nice.” Jones was tight-lipped on the incident that saw Jack Nowell withdrawn for a head injury assessment – which the Exeter winger failed – in the first half. The referee Damon Murphy came in for criticism amid claims he appeared to hastily restart play. Nowell was taken off soon after, just 16 minutes into his first England start for three years. The incident comes after an England doctor came in for criticism for how a head injury to Deago Bailey was handled in the under-20s side’s defeat on Friday. But Jones said: “I don’t have any understanding. I am told if he can play or not and if he can’t I’ll make a replacement.”A fly-half is the centre of attention at the best of times, but this match – more than most – was a tale of two 10s. We didn’t have to go far before the analyses of the showdown between Dan Biggar and Finn Russell. Sure enough, theirs were the narratives that shaped the match. In the end, the earthier qualities for which Biggar is renowned prevailed over the airy brilliance of Russell. In his 100th Test, Wales’s captain shook off the knee injury that dogged him throughout and stepped into the limelight once more to land a winning drop goal 10 minutes from the end. Ryan Elias was the official man of the match, but he was only too happy to defer to his captain afterwards. “He took a knock early doors,” the Wales hooker said. “I thought the way he was rolling around he could be going off. It’s just a testament to the bloke he is and the player he is. He’s so resilient. You’d have to carry him off in a box, I think, before he gets substituted. He had a great game. That aerial pressure, I thought he was class again today.” The irony is the match’s turning point, the moment the fates of Biggar and Russell separated, of Wales and Scotland, was a miss by Biggar. Each fly-half had missed a conversion in the first half from out wide, but they had not missed a penalty between them, both four from four, when Biggar tried his luck from long range. His attempt hit the crossbar and rebounded back into play. Alex Cuthbert secured it, and in the passage of play that followed Russell knocked the ball on in an attempt to intercept. He was sent to the sin-bin for his pains. Scotland’s soul went with him. With the stage his, Biggar suddenly decided those three points he had tried out for from a suitably dramatic long range were no longer quite so appealing from a much closer position. So he sent the next two penalties to the corner. When the ball came back to him following the second lineout, his instincts for the moment were triggered. Cardiff had its latest victory against visiting Scots. For Russell, the sure touch of regular victory remains agonisingly elusive, which means it does too for Scotland. For them to be rated favourites in Cardiff represents significant progress, but if ever they might have fancied their chances this would have been it. Not only are they riding as high in rugby’s estimation as they have this century, Wales are missing more than 600 caps’ worth of experience. The wise will point to the hyper-competitiveness of this Six Nations, that barely anything separated these two teams in a match that could have swung either way, just as had been the case when Scotland found the wherewithal to prevail over England the weekend before. If teams are to be capable of beating one another, it stands to reason they each must lose. But in Scotland’s case the laments of the more impetuous are also valid. Stirring victory followed by dispiriting defeat is a pattern all too familiar. Gregor Townsend would not be drawn on the fateful error of his talisman Russell, a player whose genius echoes that of Townsend himself, even if the two have had their disagreements. “We are all aware that in any sports team there are going to be performances that aren’t up there with what we aspire to achieve. But in defeat it is important that we all stay together and work out how we can get better for the following game.” The good news is that Scotland’s next game is back at Murrayfield; the bad news is that France are coming, the only unbeaten team left after only two rounds. Dare one point out that France have not won a Six Nations match in Edinburgh since 2014? They have not beaten Scotland in the championship at all since 2019. The loss of Matt Fagerson in the first half will trouble Townsend, all the more so given Jamie Ritchie is already lost to Scotland’s back row for the rest of the tournament. For Wales, though, there are hopes of a return to action for a few of their wounded. Josh Adams and Willis Halaholo will be in contention, and Taulupe Faletau continues his return from injury with Bath. Josh Navidi, too, may come into the reckoning. Wales have proved better this century at riding the expectations of the watching world – hence their record as the most successful team of the Six Nations. Which is just as well, since their next trip is to Twickenham, the venue they love to storm more than any. “We still have a chance in this competition depending on results, but you want to be in the fight,” said Jonathan Davies, who came on for his 100th cap too. “We go to Twickenham as a group, and we can take some confidence out of today. But we know there’s a huge amount of work to do.” They all still have a chance in this competition. The various tales should provide a few more twists yet.Nick J Fuentes, the 23-year-old founder of the America First Foundation, wants there to be no more immigration to the US. “White men founded this country. It wouldn’t exist without white men and white men are done being bullied … Genocide is being perpetrated against the white man.” He thinks women should stay in the home. “They have been convinced it’s dignified to abandon your children – literally out of their womb – and go work in an office, go work for a corporation. How sick is that?” He thinks they shouldn’t have the vote either, “but that’s probably not going to land soon”. Articulate, charismatic and convincing, he has built a substantial following, beginning with the online gaming community, and now, spreading outward from there, holds his own rallies. He also wants to be president. The most terrifying part of this opening episode of Louis Theroux’s new three-part documentary series, Forbidden America (BBC Two), is that by the end of it you can see no reason why he could not be. Theroux’s latest outing is – for all the compelling interviews that abound – really about the tentacular reach and spectacular, unprecedented power of the internet (alongside whatever else it has brought us); its ability to politicise, radicalise, give voice to would-be demagogues and hatemongers who would once have had their influence naturally curtailed by time and distance, encourage the worst in humanity and then unite people on that basis. Theroux – more carefully and slightly more forcefully than usual – interviews Fuentes and other prominent figures of the latest incarnation of the far right in the US at length. It builds, as the best of his work does, into a vision of the whole that is more revelatory even than its individual parts. And when the individual parts are as forthcoming as the likes of Fuentes, Anthime Gionet (more commonly known as livestreamer and self-described internet troll Baked Alaska) and Beardson Beardly (real name Matt Evans, and considered by the movement to be Fuentes’ “general”), that’s some bar to hit. There is a maelstrom of sentiments such as: “You think [immigrants] really like white people? They want to kill you”; “Stop acting like a Black woman. Black women are obnoxious”; and “Brittany, if I ever see you, I’m gonna rape you in person”. Combined with footage of anti-semitic chanting, signs emerge of the group coalescing round certain valuable – to them – goals. Moving the window of acceptable political discourse is one of them, so they flinch at any suggestion from Theroux that they are white nationalists or neo-Nazis. Far right? “Probably, yes,” says Baked Alaska. Because, he explains, white people should stand up for themselves and the US should stay majority white, but he doesn’t support slavery. Beardson Beardly twice gave something that looked indistinguishable from a Nazi salute as he left a rally with Fuentes but “I’m not a white nationalist … I’m a gamer”. They still have work to do on themselves and their comms. When Theroux pushes them on their far-right politics, they almost always retreat first behind humour (there’s a reason “irony-bros” has become a recognised term), then become defensive, verbally abusive and frequently take to their shows or YouTube channels to denounce him as a “pretentious” member of the mainstream media with “a gay agenda” and so on. But if they are individually fragile, together they are increasingly strong. Which is, one presumes, a large part of the attraction. Ever since Theroux in effect made the Westboro Baptist Church famous – on his most recent visit, he met people who had been prompted to join the notoriously and aggressively homophobic sect after they saw his documentary about it – the question of whether he (or anyone) should be drawing attention to extremists and potentially giving them access to new audiences has been particularly pertinent. For my money, in the case of the far-right movement (or the rise of neo-fascism, or whatever else you want to call it, depending on how gay your agenda is, I suppose), increasing general public awareness of how it’s gaining ground – and Theroux gave more context and analysis to his interviewees’ practices than usual here – and how far it has got, is likely to do more good than harm. But maybe “likely” is doing too much work there. When Theroux interviewed Brittany Venti, one of the rare women involved in the bros’ work and the recipient of the above rape threat, she said she had assumed most of what they said was tongue-in-cheek. But when they turned on her, she realised the misogyny (“They say all women are whores”) was real rather than ironic. She has not yet extrapolated further, still making light of anti-semitic footage and although mixed race herself, apparently unperturbed from the beginning by the racism that is central to the cause. It makes the question of whether documentary-makers should amplify the far right’s message both harder – and more pressing.Interrupted sleep can affect our mood, relationships and ability to function during the day. Turn these tips into new habits to maximise your night hours and be raring to go when dawn breaks. 1. Re-evaluate your bedroom lighting Our bedroom should be the cosiest room in the house. That doesn’t just mean soft pillows and the ideal mattress – getting the lighting just right is also critical to a good night’s sleep. A dark room is ideal. If you have blinds or curtains that let in light from outside, it can help to install block-out blinds or hang a heavier piece of fabric over the window. A low night light might be appropriate if you prefer not to sleep in total darkness. More intense lighting has been shown to suppress melatonin, a hormone that helps our body respond to darkness. Installing smart lighting can help you control light colours and levels. Smart lighting can even mimic fading light or be set to a timer so the brightness dims as you drift off. 2. Get your partner on the same page Sleeping with another person in the bed can mean compromising on evening routines, the best brand of blanket and ambient noise. Studies show that sleep and relationship problems tend to occur at the same time, especially during periods of transition or significant events, such as having a baby. Over time, couples actually become bound together by their sleep routines – so it’s important to get them right. Over time, couples actually become bound together by their sleep routines. Some mattresses cater to different preferences on each side of the bed, so you can tailor to your preferred comfort level without having to compromise. If you like a plush mattress but your partner prefers a firmer feeling mattress, a range such as SleepTailor can give you the best of both worlds in one mattress. The quality of our sleep is affected by how we’ve interacted with our partners during the day, our mental health and other factors, such as snoring. To avoid fights over who’s hogging the doona, keep lines of communication open and talk to your partner before hopping under the covers. 3. Work with your circadian rhythm to relax Circadian rhythms are natural processes that respond primarily to light and dark. Most living things are affected, from animals and plants to microorganisms and humans. An example of a circadian rhythm is our sleep-wake cycle. We tend to wake during daylight hours and sleep when it’s dark. When we interrupt this pattern – for example, by using bright screens at night – it can confuse our bodies into thinking we’re at a different stage of the cycle, and affect our sleep. Seeking out sunlight while we’re awake can reinforce the body’s cue to be awake. Embracing our circadian rhythm is a good way to relax. For example, seeking out sunlight while we’re awake can reinforce the body’s cue to be awake and even improve our mood, while limiting exposure to bright lights at night can help our bodies recognise it’s time to wind down. 4. Wind down with a calm mind Relaxation is never instant. Our bodies need time to settle into an evening rhythm. Meditation and mindfulness can help improve the quality of our sleep and reduce the known impacts of poor sleep, such as low mood and concentration, by igniting the parasympathetic nervous system and encouraging slow breathing. Consciously using slow breathing techniques can help combat insomnia and reduce the pre-sleep arousal that makes it harder for us to drift off. Some studies have also shown that listening to relaxing music can help us feel like we have had a better sleep. Guided sleep meditations can be a great complement, helping us let go of the day, lower our heart rate and rest our mind. Choose a routine that will take you towards a satisfying slumber, such as Andrew Johnson’s Deep Sleep Meditation. And keep doing it – research suggests maintaining the habit over time can significantly improve sleep quality. Sometimes, soothing tunes can help you tune out. Try listening to our wind-down playlist and use it to build out your own. Snoozefest playlist 5. Make sure your mattress is the best fit for you Being comfortable in bed is one of the most crucial parts of having a satisfying sleep. The right mattress can make or break even the most dedicated sleepyhead. Mattress technology is always evolving, and current options are designed to give you the most restful experience. Ask about features such as Nested Duo pocket springs, which are interlaced to provide a seamless feel from one side of the mattress to the other, and a 3D comfort layer that provides added comfort and can help to alleviate pressure. You might even be able to tailor your mattress to suit your individual requirements. 6. Treat yourself to special linen While there’s no scientific evidence to confirm the sleep benefits of fresh sheets, everyone knows they are the best. With your lighting, sleep routine and mattress in check, top it off with cotton or bamboo cotton for the cosiest snooze possible. Customise your mattress for a better night’s sleep with the Snooze SleepTailor range.A 96th-minute header from the substitute Luuk De Jong rescued a 2-2 draw for Barcelona at their city rivals Espanyol. Both sides had a man sent off in the closing stages and Espanyol looked set for a first league victory over Barça in 16 years before De Jong turned in Adama Traoré’s cross. Xavi Hernández’s side moved back into La Liga’s fourth and final Champions League spot, level on 39 points with Atlético Madrid. It had looked like Barça would be in for a comfortable evening when they took the lead inside the first two minutes, Pedri turning in Jordi Alba’s cross. Ferran Torres and Traoré went close for the visitors but they were pegged back on the stroke of half-time as Sergi Darder curled an effort in from the edge of the box after good work from Raúl de Tomás. Darder then returned the favour as he sent De Tomás away with a ball over the top that had looked to have won the game. Tempers flared late on as Gerard Piqué and Nico Melamed were sent off after a coming together off the ball before De Jong’s late equaliser. Nabil Fekir struck twice to help third-placed Real Betis keep up their fine form with a 4-2 win at rock-bottom Levante, who had Roberto Soldado sent off late on. Milan climbed to the top of Serie A with a 1-0 win over Sampdoria on Sunday, as an eighth-minute strike from the in-form Rafael Leão proved decisive at San Siro. The Portugal forward collected a long clearance from the Milan goalkeeper, Mike Maignan, skipped past his marker and found the bottom corner from a narrow angle to score his 10th goal of the season. The Sampdoria goalkeeper, Wladimiro Falcone, made a string of fine stops, palming over a fierce Junior Messias strike near half-time before blocking an acrobatic Olivier Giroud effort after the break. Falcone denied Giroud again from a header and also saved Ante Rebic’s shot, but the visitors could not threaten Maignan’s goal. Milan move ahead of Internazionale and Napoli, who drew 1-1 in Naples on Saturday. Inter are one point behind with a game in hand with Napoli two points back in third place. Danilo scored a stoppage-time equaliser to rescue a 1-1 draw for Juventus at Atalanta and earn a point that could prove crucial to his team’s top-four ambitions. The Brazilian headed in from a corner in the 92nd minute, cancelling out a long-range thunderbolt from Ruslan Malinovskyi that had put Atalanta on the verge of reclaiming fourth place. Both sides had chances in a gripping encounter, as Atalanta’s goalkeeper Marco Sportiello denied Dusan Vlahovic with a superb save and Hans Hateboer hit the bar for the hosts. Bryan Cristante rescued a point for Roma in stoppage time in their 2-2 draw at 10-man Sassuolo. Tammy Abraham put the visitors into the lead from the spot after a Vlad Chiriches handball but Chris Smalling’s own-goal, caused by a howler from keeper Rui Patrício, levelled things up before Hamed Traoré made it 2-1 to Sassuolo, who soon went down to 10 men. Cristante’s 94th-minute header keeps José Mourinho’s side within six points of the top four. Nabil Fekir struck twice to help third-placed Real Betis keep up their fine form with a 4-2 win at rock-bottom Levante, who had Roberto Soldado sent off late on. In Germany, Marco Reus scored twice to lead Borussia Dortmund to a 3-0 win at Union Berlin and cut Bayern Munich’s Bundesliga lead to six points. It also went some way to answering mounting criticism after Dortmund’s 5-2 loss at home to Bayer Leverkusen the previous Sunday, which had allowed Bayern to pull nine points clear. “Now it’s important that we also enjoy the win,” Reus said. “That we were able to let out all the frustration we built up in the last game and during the week. We had a very, very restless week.” And Hoffenheim took themselves up to fifth with a 2-0 win against Bielefeld. In Ligue 1 Arkadiusz Milik scored with a spectacular overhead kick to hand Marseille a late 2-1 win at struggling Metz on Sunday as they consolidated second place. Lorient had earlier boosted their hopes of beating the drop with a 0-0 draw at Monaco. Lorient keeper Mathieu Dreyer denied Wissam Ben Yedder and Jean Lucas to frustrate the hosts and damage their top-three hopes.The alpine slalom skier Dave Ryding insists that Britain’s blank medal tally so far at these Winter Olympics has only made him more determined to ride to the rescue by winning gold this week. Ryding, who clinched his first World Cup victory in Kitzbühel last month, believes the Yanqing course and artificial snow suits his style of skiing. And the 35-year-old says he is prepared to “risk it for the biscuit” – in other words go for broke – when his competition starts in the early hours of Wednesday UK time. “I am going to have to risk more than normal, but I am in the mindset that I will have to do or die,” said Ryding, who will be competing in his fourth Winter Games. “I’ve had a ninth place at the Olympics, so I have had a decent one, and there is no point going for another ninth. I may as well try to go better – and with slalom the only way is to risk it. The winner will take it all, and I have to go for it. There is no reason why not.” Ryding learned to ski on a dry slope in Pendle, Lancashire that was full of sheep, who would sometimes run across while he was training. On other occasions they would, in his words, “do their business when we weren’t there – a rainy night and you would get a lot of splatters, it was horrible”. However, learning on those dry ski slopes will, he believes, help on the artificial snow he finds himself facing in China. “I don’t know how to describe it other than it is icy and slippy, but when you get your edge into it it is unbelievably aggressive and grippy,” he added. The man known as “the Rocket” also knows that the lack of a medal in the first 10 days has put pressure on him, and other members of the British squad that are still to compete. But he insists that with Team GB’s men’s and women’s curlers still in contention, and high hopes in the two- and four-man bob, Britain’s results could yet be turbocharged in the final week. “Obviously we probably would have liked to medal already but these things are not just given out – there are a lot of open sports where anything can happen,” he said. “It is easy to watch and delve on the negatives but it isn’t all doom and gloom. I have seen much worse situations. As Brits we stick together and we are a hardy nation. I might get a T-shirt – keep calm and watch slalom. “Charlotte Bankes has won three or four World Cups, is rarely off the podium, but on the day of the Olympics, one thing goes wrong and it is over. It is what it is. We do our best and everyone is human, whether it is me or you.” There was better news for Team GB on Sunday as the men’s curling team beat China 7-6 before following that up with a 5-1 win against Denmark, while the women beat Denmark 7-2. But realistically their first shot of a medal is on Tuesday when Kirsty Muir, who finished fifth in the women’s freeski big air, is due to go off in the slopestyle, assuming she gets through qualifying on Monday. But Ryding insists that if Team GB has no medals when he competes it will make him even more determined. “If it still happens that there are no medals when Wednesday comes I will be extra motivated,” he said. “I will dig even deeper. I will do what I can. It is part of sport. I have been in positions where it is not going well for me and I have dug something out. Who knows? We give it our all.” Ryding also conceded that the slalom was particularly open – with 14 people having made the podium in six World Cup races so far this season. “One of those guys who had a podium has to finish 14th, you know? It is as simple as that, but I know it is within me to win and I know I can be reassured I am in the form to do whatever on the day.”Pep Guardiola has said he wants Raheem Sterling to sign a new contract at Manchester City but claims any decision over the forward’s future will ultimately be taken by the club. Sterling’s deal expires in June 2023 and there has been little progress in negotiating fresh terms. He said in October that he would be open to receiving more game time elsewhere and floated the possibility of a move abroad. The 27-year-old’s form has stuttered over the past year but he scored a hat-trick in the win at Norwich on Saturday, including a fine opener, and his manager emphasised the importance of keeping him on. “Nobody doubts how important it is,” Guardiola said. “What I want is [day after day] to play good. Not just him, but all the players. If we count the amount of games he has played since we are together, it is a lot. He is a key player. “About the future, I don’t know what is going to happen. The club decides. I give my opinion but of course the club takes the decision all the time.” Sterling started only two of City’s first seven Premier League games this season, at which point he suggested he would consider a move abroad, but has begun all of their past 12. His goals at Carrow Road meant he has already equalled his relatively meagre tally last season of 10 top-flight strikes and Guardiola said fluctuations in fortune should be expected of any player. “I am pretty sure tonight will be massive for his confidence,” he said after the game. “I have known Raheem for six seasons; this season he was outstanding in goals, assists and his contribution to the team and for himself. During that period there are highs and lows, it is part of life. “These are not honeymoons. Always there are problems and you have to solve it. The important thing is to see the next chapter, next games, next moments with a big smile, being positive and trying to do it.” Guardiola said he has not sought a conversation with Sterling in order to ascertain his intentions. “No, what I want is the best for the players,” he said. “I am really pleased if they are happy, but about the contract it is not my business. I have never been involved.”Priti Patel must shoulder some blame for the public’s plunging trust in the police in the wake of Cressida Dick’s resignation, her Labour counterpart said on Sunday. It comes as Keir Starmer placed the Tories’ record on crime at the heart of Labour’s local election campaign which launched just days after the Met commissioner’s departure, and as Boris Johnson faces possible fines for attending parties during lockdown. Yvette Cooper said the home secretary had been “silent” on policing for a year while failing to implement reforms or defend the model of policing by consent. Her criticisms follow Dick’s dramatic resignation on Thursday evening after the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, made clear he had no confidence in her plans to reform the service. On Sunday morning, Labour and the Conservatives traded blows over police failings and who was to blame for Dick’s surprise resignation after a series of scandals around misogyny and racism within the Metropolitan police. Appearing on BBC One’s Sunday Morning programme, Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said Patel had failed to tackle systemic and cultural issues including reforms to training, vetting and misconduct strategy. “At the moment, there’s been none of those reforms from the home secretary. The home secretary has been silent on policing for a year,” she said. Sources close to Patel have hit back, claiming the home secretary had begun reforming police training colleges and police crime commissioners, and had sent Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary into the Met. “What does she [Cooper] actually want to do? She just says reform vetting and training, but what?” said an aide. In the latest strategic move by Labour which will seek to capitalise on the possibility of fines being imposed on Johnson and his staff, Starmer said that the government “do one thing and say another” when it comes to tackling crime. The former director of public prosecutions said violent youth crime has cost £11bn since the Conservatives took office in 2010. “The Tories are creating a perfect storm of failing communities that don’t feel safe, failing to tackle violent crime and failing to provide the ambition and opportunities young people need to make positive choices,” he said. Dick’s departure followed a barrage of criticism of the force including over its handling of the case of Sarah Everard, who was raped and murdered by a serving Met officer, and recent revelations of officers bragging about violence towards women and exchanging racist and Islamophobic messages. Patel was angered by the London mayor’s failure to inform her that he had called Dick to a meeting on Thursday afternoon, which she considered “unprofessional”. The Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, claimed on Sunday that Khan had played politics to force Dick out. He told Times Radio: “I think he should’ve been consulting with the home secretary, bearing in mind this is a man who just a couple of months ago extended Cressida Dick’s contract.” Asked if he thought the mayor was playing politics, he responded: “Possibly, to be frank.” Responding to Lewis’s comments, a source close to Khan said it was the mayor’s job to hold the Met to account. They said: “It is absolutely right that he ensures it has the right leadership to command the trust and confidence of Londoners.” Pressure is building on Patel and Khan to agree on who will replace Dick, amid reports that the home secretary could look abroad for a successor. The Mail on Sunday claimed that among the shortlisted officers were the Queensland police commissioner, Katarina Carroll. By convention, the commissioner is drawn from the ranks of serving senior officers in the UK. Home Office sources said they could recruit from abroad but it was likely the next commissioner would come from the UK. In the Observer this weekend, Khan wrote that he would not support the appointment of a new commissioner “unless they can clearly demonstrate that they understand the scale of the cultural problems within the Met and the urgency with which they must be addressed”. The mayor’s office for policing and crime is in discussions with the Home Office about the process to recruit the next commissioner. Sources close to the mayor indicated that he remained “open-minded” as to who that person might be. Whoever follows Dick will have to deal with “a real cultural issue” in the force that cannot be fixed overnight, according to the former HM inspector of constabulary Zoë Billingham. She told Sky News’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday: “Whoever the incoming commissioner is, they will have a very very full inbox. They will have precisely the same problems that Cressida was contending with to deal with.”Didier Drogba has backed Romelu Lukaku to move on from his struggles on and off the pitch after the £97.5m striker played a key role in Chelsea becoming world champions for the first time. Lukaku has not looked settled since leaving Internazionale last summer, and upset Thomas Tuchel after airing his unhappiness with life at Stamford Bridge during an unauthorised interview with Sky Italia earlier this season. The Belgian’s comments did not go down well with his manager and he was under pressure to raise his level when Chelsea flew to Abu Dhabi to play in the Club World Cup. Encouragingly, there were signs of an improvement in the Middle East. Lukaku scored the winner when Chelsea beat Al Hilal in the last four on Wednesday and he opened the scoring with a fine header as the European champions saw off Palmeiras in Saturday’s final. The goal was Lukaku at his best and Drogba, who was instrumental in Chelsea winning the Champions League in 2012, is confident that the 28-year-old can put his infamous interview behind him. “He took his responsibility to talk and put a bit more pressure on himself and delivered tonight, scoring an important goal,” the former Chelsea striker said after watching his old club lift the trophy at the Mohammed bin Zayed Stadium. “Every player always has something to prove and will always want to do better but hescored the goal to give us the lead and I’m happy with this performance.” Drogba is able to offer a good insight into the former Inter striker’s difficulties. The Ivorian was often outspoken during his playing career and was Chelsea’s main man when they first brought Lukaku to England in the summer of 2011. It is not easy to lead the line for Chelsea. Lukaku made little impact during his first spell at Stamford Bridge and expectations were high when he returned to west London last summer, but he has been unable to help Tuchel’s side challenge for the title. “He put himself under a certain pressure because coming back to the club where you start was difficult, and you come back because you want to prove a point,” Drogba said. “But he’s winning and I think he’s going to make it.” Drogba also revealed that he offers advice to Lukaku, who has only scored 10 goals in all competitions this season. “I hope he learned from me,” Drogba said. “He’s a goalscorer. He’s having a difficult moment, but bouncing back [and] this kind of trophy will bring his confidence back. “When we have the time to speak I give him some advice, but after that it’s his career, it’s his responsibilities now. It’s him now. He’s in charge of the attacking players, so he has to find the ideas and make it his own story.” Chelsea needed a late penalty from Kai Havertz to see off Palmeiras in extra time. They found it difficult against the Copa Libertadores champions, but Drogba was delighted that Chelsea have finally won every major trophy under Roman Abramovich. “That was the ambition when I joined the club in 2004,” he said. “We started by winning the League, the FA Cup, the Carling Cup. The goal was to win trophies, but also to inspire the next generations. They knew how important this was for the club. Now I’m here and I’m celebrating with them as well.” Chelsea’s focus now will be on a successful end to the season. They have faltered in the league of late and lie third in the Premier League, 16 points behind leaders Manchester City. Tuchel has now won three trophies since his appointment last year, though, and is popular with the club’s board. The club hierarchy believe that the disruption caused by Covid-19 dented Chelsea’a title push and they are fully behind Tuchel. The team face Lille in the last 16 of the Champions League next week and meet Liverpool in the Carabao Cup final at the end of this month. César Azpilicueta, the first Chelsea player to win every major honour at club level, was relieved to have made up for losing the Club World Cup final to Corinthians in 2012. “This chance doesn’t come very often and we did a very good job,” the captain said. “We’ve tried to create our own history. After what happened in 2012, I didn’t think we could make it again but we’ve done it.” Callum Hudson-Odoi, who impressed as a makeshift left wing-back, said that he is hungry for more success. The 21-year-old created Lukaku’s goal and is determined to keep progressing. “I don’t feel like a legend at all,” Hudson-Odoi said. “I’m young, I’ve got a long way to go. I’m delighted to win trophies. You keep adding and adding to the cabinet and it’s nice. But you can’t say you’re a legend at 21.” Hudson-Odoi is pleased he decided not to join Borussia Dortmund on loan last summer. “You want to win as much as possible with a club like this,” he said. “Our aim is always to win games and win as many as possible. If I went out in the summer I wouldn’t get opportunities to play like this and win trophies. I’m really delighted that I stayed and obviously I got the opportunity to play. For me I’ve just got to give it 120% from minute one every single game.” The youngster was reluctant to say whether he would commit his international allegiance to England and reject the chance to switch to Ghana. “Hopefully,” Hudson-Odoi. “I don’t know. At the end of the day, we will wait until that time comes.”Russia’s actions on the Ukrainian border could lead not only to war in that country but to a much wider conflict, the Guardian’s world affairs editor Julian Borger reports from Washington. Julian writes that the increased deployment of Russian and Nato forces in the region significantly increases the danger of accidents and unintended consequences. Danny Sjursen, a former army major and director of the Eisenhower Media Network, tells him: “The risk of something going down like a mid-air collision, or a trigger-happy Russian or American, can really escalate things quickly.” Read the full story here. Here’s a round-up of the day’s biggest developments from the crisis in Ukraine. Ukraine has announced a $592m (£437m) fund to help guarantee the continuation of flights through its airspace after a number of airlines signalled they would begin rerouting flights. The prime minister, Denys Shmygal, said the money would be “allocated to ensure flight safety in Ukraine for insurance and leasing companies”. The British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, announced he had cancelled a planned long weekend abroad with his family. He said he had taken the decision because the government was “concerned about the worsening situation in Ukraine”. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, held an hour-long phone call with President Biden. Zelenskiy used the call to urge Biden to increase US support to Ukraine and to visit the country as a show of support. On the same call, Biden told Zelenskiy the US would respond “swiftly and decisively” to Russian aggression. Ukraine has requested talks with Russia and other members of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe within 48 hours. The remaining diplomatic staff in the US embassy in Ukraine have been relocated from Kyiv to the western city of Lviv. Canada has temporarily withdrawn its military personnel from Ukraine to an undisclosed location in Europe. Boris Johnson is planning to hold more talks with world leaders this week as part of attempts to bring Russia “back from the brink”. Newly re-elected German president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, called on Vladimir Putin to “untie the noose around Ukraine’s neck”. US national security adviser Jake Sullivan said the world is “in a window when invasion could begin at any time”. Zelenskiy asked to see evidence to substantiate claims by Western leaders that Russia could launch an invasion within days. Ukraine received further shipments of anti-aircraft missiles and ammunition from the US and Lithuania. Preparations are underway in Poland for a possible influx of refugees from Ukraine. More than a dozen countries have now advised their citizens to leave Ukraine or to avoid travel to the country. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, is planning to hold more talks with world leaders this week as part of attempts to bring Russia “back from the brink” of invading Ukraine. The prime minister is understood to be receiving daily intelligence briefings on the situation and to want to work with allies to continue providing support to the government in Kyiv, PA reports. A statement from Downing Street read: “The crisis on Ukraine’s border has reached a critical juncture. “All the information we have suggests Russia could be planning an invasion of Ukraine at any moment. This would have disastrous consequences for both Ukraine and Russia. “There is still a window of opportunity for de-escalation and diplomacy, and the prime minister will continue to work tirelessly alongside our allies to get Russia to step back from the brink.” The statement didn’t set out which world leaders the prime minister hopes to speak with or where he will be travelling, but he is understood to planning to travel to Europe near the end of this week. Pictures show members of the Ukrainian military unloading a consignment of weaponry from Lithuania on Sunday. The shipment contained US-made Stinger surface-to-air anti-aircraft missiles as well as ammunition, Reuters reports. It followed another two planes that delivered some 180 tonnes of ammunition from the US earlier in the day. Officials in Ukraine say the country has been able to significantly increase the capacity of its armed forces with similar shipments from the US, Britain, Turkey, and other allies in recent weeks. Canada has temporarily withdrawn its military personnel from Ukraine, the country’s defence ministry has said. Since 2015, Canada has maintained a mission of around 200 troops in Ukraine to help train the country’s soldiers, Reuters reports. Canada’s defence ministry said on Sunday that armed forces stationed in Ukraine had been moved to an undisclosed location in Europe owing to the “complex operational environment linked to Russia’s unwarranted aggression against Ukraine”. It comes after the government in Ottawa yesterday announced the relocation of its diplomatic staff from Kyiv to an office in the western city of Lviv. Canada has the third-largest population of Ukrainian people in the world after Ukraine and Russia. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has reportedly asked Joe Biden to visit Ukraine. The two leaders had a phone call on Sunday morning Eastern Time that lasted roughly an hour. Zelenskiy used the call to ask Biden to visit Ukraine “as soon as possible”, CNN reports, citing a Ukrainian official who had been briefed on the conversation. Zelenskiy is also said to have asked Biden to increase current support to “show Putin that the west stands with Ukraine”. US officials have reportedly cast doubt on the prospect of Biden making a visit to Ukraine. In a tweet following the call, Zelenskiy said the two had talked about “security, economy, existing risks, sanctions and Russian aggression”. Ukraine has asked for talks with Russia and other members of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) within 48 hours to discuss the build-up of Russian forces on its border. It comes after Ukraine’s invocation of the Vienna document, a series of security and confidence-building agreements between the 57 members of the OCSE, on Friday. In a series of tweets, the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said Russia had failed to respond to the questions raised within the 48-hour window allowed. “Consequently, we take the next step,” he said. “We request a meeting with Russia and all participating states within 48 hours to discuss its reinforcement and redeployment along our border and in temporarily occupied Crimea. “If Russia is serious when it talks about the indivisibility of security in the OSCE space, it must fulfil its commitment to military transparency in order to de-escalate tensions and enhance security for all.” Zelenskiy reportedly used a call with Biden on Sunday to ask that the US increase its financial and military support. The pair spoke by phone for just under an hour on Sunday morning Eastern Time. Speaking to CNN, a Ukrainian official who had been briefed on the call said that the Ukrainian president sought to offer “concrete ideas to diminish the Russian threat to Ukraine”. He is said to have asked Biden to up the US’s provision of advanced weaponry and to set out a significant package of financial support. Ukraine has announced the creation of a $592m fund to guarantee the continuation of flights through its airspace, Reuters reports. It comes after ongoing tensions prompted a number of airlines to review whether they would continue to send flights into Ukrainian airspace. Dutch carrier KLM has already cancelled flights to Ukraine, while Germany’s Lufthansa said it was considering suspending air traffic. Announcing the fund on social media, Prime Minister Denys Shmygal said the money would be “allocated to ensure flight safety in Ukraine for insurance and leasing companies”. “This decision will stabilise the situation on the market of passenger air transportation and will guarantee the return to Ukraine of our citizens who are currently abroad,” he said. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has asked to see evidence to support claims that Russia intends to invade Ukraine within days. It follows reports that the US has picked up intelligence suggesting an invasion could be launched as early as this Wednesday. The White House’s national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, also told CBS’s Face The Nation on Sunday that Putin could give an order for military action “essentially at any time”. Speaking the same day in a live broadcast, Zelenskiy said: “We understand all the risks, we understand that there are risks. “If you, or anyone else, has additional information regarding a 100% Russian invasion starting on the 16th, please forward that information to us.” The German president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, has called on Vladimir Putin to “untie the noose around Ukraine’s neck”. Speaking following his re-election for a second five-year term, Steinmeier said that responsibility for ongoing tensions lay with Russia, AFP reported. The comments come as the newly-elected chancellor, Olaf Scholz, prepares to travel to Kyiv to meet with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Monday and then on to Moscow to meet with Putin on Tuesday. They also follow criticism of Germany by some for its apparent reticence to back measures proposed by its allies in the US and Europe to deter Russian aggression against Ukraine. “I appeal to President Putin: Lift the noose from the neck of Ukraine,” Steinmeier said. “We are in the midst of a military conflict, a war in Eastern Europe. Russia is responsible for this. “People [in Ukraine] have a right to a life without fear and threats, to sovereignty, and to self-rule. No country in the world has the right to destroy it, and we will respond resolutely to anyone who tries this.” Joe Biden has told the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, that the US will respond “swiftly and decisively” to any further Russian aggression. The two leaders spoke by phone for just under an hour on Sunday morning Eastern Time, CNN reported. A White House readout of the call said: “President Joseph R Biden spoke today with President Volodymyr Zelenskiy of Ukraine. President Biden reaffirmed the commitment of the United States to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. “President Biden made clear that the United States would respond swiftly and decisively, together with its allies and partners, to any further Russian aggression against Ukraine. “The two leaders agreed on the importance of continuing to pursue diplomacy and deterrence in response to Russia’s military build-up on Ukraine’s borders.” The US embassy to Ukraine’s remaining diplomatic staff will work from the western city of Lviv, the online newspaper Ukrainskaya Pravda cited a US diplomatic source as saying on Sunday. Washington said on Saturday it was ordering most staff at its embassy in Kyiv to leave Ukraine immediately due to the threat of an invasion by Russia. “This is a temporary decision, the embassy team will return to Kyiv as soon as the security situation allows,” the source was quoted as saying. Fears of flying over Ukrainian airspace have led some airlines to scrap or divert flights as tensions between the west and Kremlin mount over a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine. The Dutch carrier KLM cancelled flights to Ukraine after the Netherlands government issued a travel warning over the risks of flying in the region, while Germany’s Lufthansa said it was considering suspending air traffic. Read our full story here: Ukraine has received a consignment of Stinger anti-aircraft missile systems and ammunition by plane from Lithuania, the defence ministry in Kyiv said on Sunday, according to Reuters. Earlier on Sunday two other planes delivered about 180 tonnes of ammunition from the United States, Oleksii Reznikov said. Ukraine had so far received almost 1,500 tonnes of ammunition delivered on 17 flights, he said on Twitter. Military officials say Ukraine has significantly strengthened its armed forces with the help of allies, equipping the army, in particular, with American and British anti-tank systems and Turkish drones. The Pentagon has said that the latest top-level US-Russian contacts did not provide “any cause for optimism”, AFP reports. Pentagon spokesman John Kirby offered a grim assessment of the one-hour phone conversation on Saturday between Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin. “It’s certainly not a sign that things are moving in the right direction. It’s certainly not a sign that Mr Putin has any intention to de-escalate. And it’s certainly not a sign that he is recommitting himself to a diplomatic path forward,” Kirby told “Fox News Sunday” when asked about the lack of fundamental change after the call. “So, it does not give us any cause for optimism.” Here’s a recap of Sunday’s big developments on the Ukraine crisis. US national security adviser Jake Sullivan said the world is “in a window when invasion could begin at any time” and warned of likely civilian casualties if war begins. Sullivan said, however, that while the last 10 days have seen an acceleration of Russia’s 130,000 troop buildup, the country could still resolve the crisis through the diplomatic route. The US State Department’s Derek Chollet elaborated on what president Joe Biden meant by the “swifts and severe costs” he threatened if an invasion occurs. First, considerable and “crippling” economic sanctions on Russia. Second, bolstering and building up military capacity on Nato’s eastern borders. Ukraine advised airlines to avoid flying over the open waters of the Black Sea from Monday to Saturday due to Russian naval exercises. Poland is preparing for a possible influx of refugees. UK defence secretary Ben Wallace caused controversy in today’s Sunday Times, saying there is a “whiff of Munich in the air” – referring to 1938 appeasement of the Nazis. Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK, Vadym Prystaiko, then complained that the alarms being sounded by the west risked playing into Putin’s hands. Wallace’s allies in the afternoon emphasised that the comparison to appeasement was intended to apply only if Putin was negotiating in bad faith and always planned to invade. Meanwhile, Wallace said he is cutting short a European family holiday overseas due to the Ukraine crisis. The US envoy to the UN cancelled a visit to Liberia to focus on New York-based diplomacy. Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz will tell Putin of “heavy consequences” if he attacks Ukraine at their meeting this week, but he doesn’t expect results. Europe may be on the brink of war, Germany’s vice-chancellor Robert Habeck added. Ukraine’s ambassador to Germany, Andrij Melnyk, accused the country of “hypocrisy” over its refusal to supply defensive weapons to Kyiv. At least a dozen embassies have advised their citizens to leave Ukraine, avoid travel or question whether their presence is necessary. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew in London, for today. Bye for now. Poland is preparing for “various scenarios”, including a possible influx of refugees, if Russia were to attack Ukraine, Poland’s interior minister Mariusz Kaminski tweeted on Sunday. “It is obvious that due to the situation in Ukraine we are preparing for various scenarios. One of them is the actions of the [provinces] related to the possible influx of refugees from Ukraine who, due to a possible conflict, may seek a safe haven in our country,” Kaminski said. Poland and Ukraine share a 332-mile border. The mayor of the eastern Polish town of Ciechanow said on Saturday that he was asked by his regional government to prepare accommodation for possible refugees. “We were asked to indicate the list of accommodation facilities for refugees, the number of people it would be possible to accommodate, the costs involved and the time for adaptation of buildings with a recommendation of up to 48 hours,” Krzysztof Kosinski tweeted. In late-January, Poland’s deputy interior minister Maciej Wasik said Poland was bracing for up to 1 million Ukrainian migrants. Ukraine has advised airlines to avoid flying over the open waters of the Black Sea from Monday to Saturday due to Russian naval exercises taking place there, Reuters reports. More than 30 Russian ships have started training exercises near the Crimea peninsula as part of wider navy drills, RIA news agency reported. “From tomorrow, airlines are advised not to fly … over this area, and to plan optimal routes in advance, taking into account the current situation,” Ukraine’s state air traffic service said. Ukrainian airspace remains open, and earlier on Sunday an adviser to president’s chief of staff said there was “no point” closing the skies. “The most important point is that Ukraine itself sees no point in closing the sky. This is nonsense. And, in my opinion, it somewhat resembles a kind of partial blockade,” Mykhailo Podolyak told Reuters, after Dutch airline KLM suspended flights to Ukraine. Allies of UK defence secretary Ben Wallace sought to clarify the minister’s controversial Munich comments on Sunday afternoon. They emphasised that the comparison to the failed appeasement of 1938 was intended to apply only if Russia’s president Putin was negotiating in bad faith and always planned to invade Ukraine. Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK Vadym Prystaiko on Sunday morning complained that the alarms being sounded by the west risked playing into Putin’s hands. “It’s not the best time for us to offend our partners in the world, reminding them of this act which actually not bought peace but the opposite, it bought war,” the diplomat told the BBC. It comes after Wallace told the Sunday Times: “It may be that he [Putin] just switches off his tanks and we all go home but there is a whiff of Munich in the air from some in the west.” The US envoy to the UN has cancelled a visit to Liberia to focus on New York-based diplomacy over the Russian troop buildup on Ukraine’s borders, Reuters reports. The US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, was scheduled to lead a presidential delegation to the Republic of Liberia from the 14-16 February. US president Joe Biden and Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy will speak on Sunday at 10.45 ET (3.45pm GMT), the White House confirmed. Zelenski’s spokesperson, Sergii Nykyforov, said on Facebook the two leaders “would discuss the security situation and ongoing diplomatic de-escalation efforts”. Why does the west’s diplomacy with Russia keep failing? This Atlantic article, by Anne Applebaum, is cauing ripples today, arguing the US and its Nato allies are stuck playing by an old rules-based diplomatic playbook while Russia, which only respects hard power, runs rings around them. Tragically, the Western leaders and diplomats who are right now trying to stave off a Russian invasion of Ukraine still think they live in a world where rules matter, where diplomatic protocol is useful, where polite speech is valued. All of them think that when they go to Russia, they are talking to people whose minds can be changed by argument or debate. They think the Russian elite cares about things like its “reputation.” It does not. In fact, when talking to the new breed of autocrats, whether in Russia, China, Venezuela, or Iran, we are now dealing with something very different: People who aren’t interested in treaties and documents, people who only respect hard power. Applebaum suggests measures like stopping Russian oligarchs laundering money in London or Miami, ending reliance on Russian energy in Germany, or banning Russian political donations in France should be considered. Now we are on the brink of what could be a catastrophic conflict. American, British, and European embassies in Ukraine are evacuating; citizens have been warned to leave. But this terrible moment represents not just a failure of diplomacy, it also reflects a failure of the Western imagination; a generation-long refusal, on the part of diplomats, politicians, journalists, and intellectuals, to understand what kind of state Russia was becoming and to prepare accordingly. We have refused to see the representatives of this state for what they are. We have refused to speak to them in a way that might have mattered. Now it might be too late. Read the full story here. US National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan spoke to CNN’s State of the Union about the crisis in Ukraine, saying the world is “in a window when invasion could begin at any time” and warning of likely civilian casualties if war begins. Sullivan said, however, that while the last 10 days have seen an acceleration of Russia’s 130,000 troop build-up, the country could still resolve the crisis through the diplomatic route. Commenting on reports Russia could attack Ukraine as early as Wednesday, Sullivan said: We cannot perfectly predict the day, but we have now been saying for some time that we are in a window when an invasion could begin at any time, a major military action could begin by Russia in Ukraine any day now. Asked why US citizens are being urged to leave the country, Sullivan said: What we’ve seen just in the last 10 days or so is an acceleration of that build-up and the movement of Russian forces of all varieties closer to the border with Ukraine in a position where they could launch a military action very, very rapidly. Sullivan said Russia is laying the ground-work for a “false flag” attack which it could use as a pretext for invading Ukraine. He added this intellgience has been shared with Nato allies who share the US’s conclusions. This is consistent with the Russian playbook. We have seen them do this before.... If you look at the Russian media, they are laying the groundwork for a potential pretext by raising the possibility of attacks by Ukrainian forces on either Russians themselves or Russia’s proxy-forces in the Donbas. Sullivan said civilian casualties were likely: If there is a military invasion of Ukraine by Russia, it’s likely to begin with a significant barrage of missiles and bomb attacks. Those are never as precise as any army would like them to be ... so innocent civilians could be killed regardless of their nationality. It would then be followed by an onslaught of a ground force moving across the Ukrainian frontier, again where innocent civilians could get caught in the crossfire, or get trapped in places that they could not move from. Sullvian reiterated the US message that an invasion’s costs for Russia would be swift and severe, adding the US is drawing up lists of Russian economic elites and would potentially ship gas cargos to Europe if Russia “turns down the taps”. We are prepared to respond immediately and decisively, flanked by our allies and partners. If Russia moves forward, we will defend Nato territory, we will impose costs on Russia and we will ensure that we emerge from this as the West stronger, more determined, more purposeful than we have been in 30 years, and that Russia ultimately suffers a significant strategic cost for military action. Europe may be on the brink of war, Germany’s vice-chancellor Robert Habeck said on Sunday. “We may be on the verge of war in Europe,” Habeck told broadcaster RTL/NTV. “It is absolutely oppressive and threatening.” Meanwhile, chancellor Olaf Scholz will tell Russia’s president Vladimir Putin at their meeting this week of “heavy consequences” if he attacks Ukraine, but he doesn’t expect results. Cyprus has joined the growing list of countries advising citizens to leave Ukraine. In a statement citing escalating tensions, the Mediterranean island’s ministry of foreign affairs also urged Cypriots to avoid any unnecessary travel to the country. “On account of information regarding further possible escalation of tensions in the area, the ministry recommends Republic of Cyprus citizens to avoid travelling to Ukraine,” the statement said. The ministry also encouraged citizens residing permanently in the country to either register on the online platform Connect2Cyprus or contact the EU member state’s embassy in Ukraine. “If their presence in the country is not necessary, Cypriot citizens are encouraged to leave,” the statement concluded. Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz will tell Russia’s president Vladimir Putin of “heavy consequences” if he attacks Ukraine at their meeting this week, but he doesn’t expect results. That’s according to this Reuters report citing a German government source: Chancellor Olaf Scholz travels to Kyiv on Monday to meet Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy and to Moscow on Tuesday to meet Putin as part of diplomatic efforts to ease tensions. ... “The chancellor will make clear that any attack on Ukraine will have heavy consequences ... and that one should not underestimate the unity between the European Union, United States and Britain,” the German government source said. Scholz would tell Putin the troop buildup could “only be interpreted as a threat”, the source told a briefing with journalists, adding: “I do not expect concrete results but these direct talks are important.” ... A moratorium on any Ukrainian accession to NATO was not part of Scholz’s “tool kit”, the source said, adding that “what happens on the ground” would determine whether Russia was de-escalating. “The current situation is per se already a destabilising situation that can get out of control,” the source said. Ukraine’s ambassador to Germany, Andrij Melnyk, accused the country of “hypocrisy” over its refusal to supply defensive weapons to Kyiv. “NO weapons for Ukraine‘s self-defence against Russian military invasion BUT 366 million € (!) (German) exports of dual-use goods to Russia in 2020 alone which can be destined to boost weapons production (Nr. 4 on export list). Irrespective of EU santions (sic)‼️”, Melnyk said on Twitter. Last month, Germany’s defence secretary Christine Lambrecht said the country was supplying 5,000 helmets and medical training to Ukraine, but said: “The German government has very clearly agreed that we will not send any lethal weapons, or arms deliveries to conflict areas because we do not want to fuel these conflicts further”. Pope Francis led crowds in a silent prayer for Ukraine during his weekly Sunday blessing, appealing to politicians to seek peace. “The news from Ukraine is very worrying,” the head of the Catholic Church told thousands of people in St Peter’s Square, Vatican City. “I entrust every effort for peace to the intercession of the Virgin Mary and the consciences of responsible politicians.” The UK defence secretary Ben Wallace said he is returning from a family holiday overseas due to the Ukraine crisis. “As events worsen the secretary of state has cut short a planned long weekend with his children for half term,” a senior defence source said. Wallace was holidaying in Europe, PA reports, with his wife and children. Wallace said on Twitter: “having returned from Moscow early on Saturday morning and because we are concerned about the worsening situation in Ukraine i have cancelled a planned long weekend abroad with my family and will be returning.” It marks a departure from then-foreign secretary Dominic Raab’s decision to stay on his family jaunt in Crete as the Taliban seized Afghanistan – a call many believe later led to Raab’s sacking. Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK, Vadym Prystaiko, said UK defence secretary’s Ben Wallace’s comparison of diplomatic efforts with Russia to the Nazi appeasement of the 1930s was unhelpful. “It’s not the best time for us to offend our partners in the world, reminding them of this act which not brought peace but the opposite – it brought war,” Prystaiko told BBC Radio 4. Wallace told the Sunday Times there is a “whiff of Munich in the air” – seeming to refer to the 1930s appeasement of Nazi Germany, specifically the 1938 Chamberlain-Hitler brokered deal letting Germany annex the Sudetenland but ultimately failing to prevent the second world war. The UK’s Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis attempted to defend the comments on the broadcasting round this morning. Here’s a list of many of the countries urging their citizens to leave Ukraine, avoid travel or consider whether they need to remain: The US – leave the country. The UK – leave the country. Germany – leave the country. Australia – leave the country. Ireland – leave the country. Italy – leave the country. Sweden – leave the country. Jordan – leave the country. The Netherlands – leave the country. Kuwait – leave the country. Iraq – leave the country. Cyprus – leave the country. Finland – leave the country. Saudi Arabia – avoid travel to Ukraine and contact embassy to facilitate immediate departure. UAE – avoid travel to Ukraine. Turkey – avoid travel to Ukraine. Slovakia – avoid travel to Ukraine. Poland – avoid non-essential travel to Ukraine. Greece – keep in touch with the Kyiv embassy. Lithuania – assess whether continued presence is necessary. China – “pay close attention” but not told to leave. Ukrainians in the UK are plagued by anxiety and fear for relatives amid talk of an imminent Russian invasion, my colleague Shanti Das reports. Oksana Riwnyj remembers life under Soviet rule. “When I was at university, I wasn’t allowed to speak up and say what I think. We couldn’t go to church or celebrate Christmas. It was very tough, especially for the young people,” the 58-year-old primary schoolteacher said. Now, the news of Russia assembling troops on the Ukrainian border triggers memories that bring her to tears. “I never thought something like this could happen. It’s too horrible to even think about,” she said. Riwnyj is one of about 70,000 Ukrainians living in the UK who are watching anxiously to see what will unfold over the coming days. The mother-of-two lived for the first two decades of her life in western Ukraine, then part of the Soviet Union, which was toppled in 1991. She moved to the UK after meeting her husband, Stefan, a gas engineer, 25 years ago, and has a happy life in London, where – as a teacher at St Mary’s Ukrainian Saturday school – she is at the heart of the expatriate community. But while safe on UK soil, as the crisis in her home country intensifies, she is struggling to carry on with life as normal. “I’m trying to go about daily life but it’s a very stressful and worrying situation,” Riwnyj said. “I can’t sleep because all my family are over there.” Helplessness and fear are the feelings that emerge from UK-based Ukrainians in this Observer report. Read the full story below: US staff at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the world’s largest regional security organisation, began leaving by car from the rebel-held city of Donetsk in east Ukraine on Sunday, Reuters reports. The OSCE conducts civilian monitoring operations in the self-proclaimed separatist republics – such as Donetsk and Luhansk – where war since 2014 has killed 14,000 people. The OSCE has not commented on the US staff withdrawals. A 4 February OSCE report on the conflict in eastern Ukraine found, in 2021, there were 93,902 ceasefire violations, 91 civilian casualties (including 16 fatalities), 851 freedom of movement restrictions and 1,133 explosions attributable to weaponry fire. Denmark’s OSCE staff also left, Reuters reports. Ukraine sees no point in closing its airspace amid Russian tensions and the build-up of 130,000 troops on the border, an adviser to Ukrainian president’s chief of staff said on Sunday. “The most important point is that Ukraine itself sees no point in closing the sky. This is nonsense. And, in my opinion, it somewhat resembles a kind of partial blockade,” Mykhailo Podolyak told Reuters. It comes after Dutch airliner KLM said on Saturday it would immediately stop flights to Ukraine. (196 Dutch people died when 298 passengers were killed over eastern Ukraine, in 2014, after a Malaysia Airlines flight was shot down.) German airliner Lufthansa said on Sunday no decision has been taken but a suspension is being examined. As geopolitical headwinds continue to swirl around Ukraine, my colleague Shaun Walker in Kyiv has this dispatch on how life is humming along mostly as normal. As news of the latest grim White House briefing on Ukraine broke late on Friday evening in Kyiv, the bars and restaurants were as full as on any other Friday night, the atmosphere remained jovial, and anyone without access to a Twitter feed would have struggled to divine any sense of foreboding. While US officials and the Washington journalists briefed by them prophesied a “horrific, bloody” campaign to be launched against Ukraine imminently, nobody except journalists was paying much attention to what, to many in Kyiv, seems like just the latest in a line of apocalyptic briefings ... Of course, underneath the surface calm, many Ukrainians are making contingency plans, some to fight off an invasion, others to flee for safer places. It is not possible to buy an electricity generator in the city, and many discuss what they would do if the worst does happen ... But for many people here, the idea of a full-fledged invasion remains something outlandish and implausible. Many Ukrainians, up to and including the president, say they are well aware of the risk Russia poses but do not quite believe the American insistence that the threat is imminent. “I’m beginning to get pretty annoyed with this,” said one former Ukrainian MP, who asked not to be named. “I am very pro-western, but the way this invasion news is coming out reminds me of [unverified rumours on] Russian Telegram channels, about unnamed sources and backroom information. Read the full story here. The UK’s Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis said the world has to be “cognizant of the reality that [Russia] could move very quickly” to invade Ukraine if it desires, as 130,000 troops sit on the borders. Lewis reiterated the UK’s focus on a “diplomatic solution” opposed to any possible Nato miliatry action. He said the UK embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, which is encouraging British citizens to leave, is assisting people leave the country. “There is a threat … therefore safest thing to do is leave now,” he said. Lewis also had a second go at explaining UK defence secretary Ben Wallace’s statement that there is a “whiff of Munich in the air”, after his comments on Sky News. Lewis told the BBC’s Sunday Morning: “If you look back to that period of time [late-1930s], there was a lot of diplomatic engagement. There was an optimism at the time actually, that there may be a diplomatic way through that eventually proved not to be the case.” Lewis said Wallace was drawing parallels to the frustrations of diplomacy between western allies and Russia today. Labour’s shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper has called for a “very strong and united international response” to potential Russian belligerence. “We shouldn’t underestimate the importance of the kind of economic and financial sanctions that could be imposed,” Cooper told the BBC’s Sunday Morning, reiterating Labour’s commitment to Nato. The sanctions could cover the financial system, trade, energy and more. But Cooper urged the Conservative government to go further with potential sanctions, for instance looking into “golden visas” and other measures against Russia, but appeared to rule out British ground troops in Ukraine. (The UK has provided military armaments and training to Ukrainian forces.) The US State Department’s Derek Chollet has elabroated on what president Joe Biden meant by the “swifts and severe costs” he threatened if an invasion occurs. Chollet, on the BBC’s Sunday Morning, said the response would come in two main ways: Considerable and “crippling” economic sanctions on Russia – bringing economic hardship. Bolster and build up military capacity on Nato’s eastern borders – diplomatically isolating and providing a strategic military setback for Russia. Speaking about the nature of a potential Russian invasion, Chollet said: Whatever form it takes [airstrikes, ground incursion, etc.] if it is as large as we fear it will be, the circumstances will be profound for Ukraine and quite dangerous. The UK’s Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis tried to clarify comments from defense secretary Ben Wallace in today’s Sunday Times, that there is a “whiff of Munich in the air”, on Sky News this morning. Lewis told Sky: “In the run up to world war two there was lots of diplomatic work, people thought that was progressive but of course it turned out not to be.” I think what the defence secretary quite rightly was doing is drawing the comparison and being clear there’s a lot of diplomatic work going on … the Russian state is saying that it is not planning to invade but when you have 100,000, now 130,000, we estimate, troops on the border that would indicate there’s a possibility of an incursion. It’s that balance and that decision and that interpretation of the difference of what we hope will be a diplomatic outcome but a realistic possibility that something much more tragic could occur. Lewis will also appear on BBC’s Sunday Morning shortly. Russia is plotting a “false flag” operation to provoke war with Ukraine, the Telegraph reports. While Russia’s comments it has no plans to invade could be taken in good faith, a Whitehall source said, the country is “hoping to create the circumstances where they say they are responding to Ukrainian or Western aggression”. It follows US intelligence about a Russian “false flag” operation discussed on Thursday at the White House. Russia has insisted invasion fears are western “hysteria” – and accused the US of propaganda to seek cover for a Ukrainian attack on Russian-backed separatists in the country’s east. What does Putin want? My colleague Simon Tisdall has this helpful explainer on Russia’s potential motives. Why is Russia threatening to invade Ukraine? Russian spokespeople daily deny any intention to invade. So, too, did Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, when he met the French leader, Emmanuel Macron, last week, and when he spoke to US president Joe Biden on the phone. There are two problems with this. First, given Putin’s Johnsonian relationship with truth, few western governments believe the denials. Second, Putin has not explained why, if his intentions are peaceful, more than half of Russia’s armed forces, including 130,000 troops, are massed on Ukraine’s borders. It could all be a bluff. But who would bet the house on that? So what drives Putin? There are numerous theories. Putin is said to want to rebuild a Russian sphere of influence in eastern Europe, principally embracing former Soviet republics such as now independent Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, Georgia and Ukraine. He has frequently bemoaned their “loss” after the Soviet Union collapsed. Putin may also hope to demonstrate to the west (and Russians) that the country is still a superpower, even though by most measures (nuclear weapon stockpiles and geography apart) it is a failing medium-sized power. Why Ukraine? Putin fears strategically important Ukraine, commanding Russia’s south-western flank, is assimilating into the west. He objects to its growing closeness to Nato. He also opposes Kyiv’s developing links with the EU. Worse still, from his point of view, Ukraine is a democracy, with free speech and free media, which freely elects its leaders. In practice, Russians enjoy no such freedoms – if they followed Ukraine’s example, Putin would not last long. More broadly, Putin is a nostalgic revisionist who regards Ukraine as an integral part of historical Russia and its loss as a symbol of Russia’s cold war defeat. Read the full story here: US president Joe Biden on Saturday night warned Russian president Vladimir Putin that the US would “impose swift and severe costs on Russia” if his forces invaded Ukraine. In a phone call that lasted more than an hour, the US president said an invasion would “produce widespread human suffering and diminish Russia’s standing”. According to a White House readout, Biden stressed “while the United States remains prepared to engage in diplomacy, in full coordination with our Allies and partners, we are equally prepared for other scenarios.” Meanwhile, the UK defence secretary Ben Wallace said there is a “whiff of Munich in the air” – seeming to refer to appeasement, specifically the 1938 Chamberlain-Hitler brokered deal letting Germany annex the Sudetenland but ultimately failing to prevent the Second World War in 1939. “It may be that [Putin] just switches off his tanks and we all go home but there is a whiff of Munich in the air from some in the West,” Wallace told the Sunday Times, referring to a sense of frustration that British diplomatic efforts have not swayed Russia’s apparent intent. Wallace added an invasion is “highly likely” and could now come at any time. A UK diplomatic source also told the Times: “We obviously have a close intelligence-sharing relationship with the US and agree with them on the seriousness of the situation and risks of Russian military action. We believe the Kremlin have made no final decision over whether to invade Ukraine but the outlook does look bleak.” Good morning, this is Jem Bartholomew in London bringing you the latest developments on the Ukraine crisis today. Do get in touch with tips and thoughts: Email me here. Message me on Twitter here.