1) Can Rangnick solve his striking problem? There could be no quibbling with Ralf Rangnick’s decision to drop Cristiano Ronaldo for Tuesday’s game at Burnley. The 37-year-old provided evidence in the manager’s defence by adding to Manchester United’s catalogue of bungled opportunities after being introduced from the bench. Earlier in the season Ronaldo’s sharpness regularly saved United. Now he has gone five matches without a goal and Rangnick cannot ignore the fact that, when Ronaldo is not scoring, he does not offer much else, unlike Edinson Cavani. With a resurgent Southampton visiting Old Trafford this weekend and United still chronically fragile at the back, Rangnick will need to field forwards who can be relied upon to convert most of their chances if they are to avoid falling further behind in the race for the top four. Does he have any? PD Manchester United v Southampton, Saturday 12.30pm (all-times GMT) 2) A big scalp can add to Norwich’s momentum Last time Norwich fought a Premier League relegation battle, they beat Manchester City 3-2 in one of the standout games of the 2019-20 season. An entertaining but naive side ultimately went down with a whimper; the same seemed nailed on this time around but, under Dean Smith, the Canaries have discovered a steelier edge and have given themselves a shot at survival. They have played more games than those around them, though, and may find their fixture list dwindling all too quickly once a trip to Anfield has followed hot on the heels of the leaders’ visit. A big scalp could do wonders for their prospects: Manchester City have not lost in the league since October and are seemingly cruising to the title but if Norwich can repeat the trick of two years ago then a different end-of-season outcome could look more than realistic. NA Norwich v Manchester City, Saturday 5.30pm 3) Saint-Maximin and Coutinho promise a show Allan Saint-Maximin and Philippe Coutinho might well be the two best players outside the top three teams in the Premier League. The prospect of watching both in action helps to make Aston Villa’s trip to Newcastle this weekend’s most appealing match. It also promises to be a testing first Villa start for Callum Chambers, who, given Ezri Konsa’s suspension, is likely to be cast into a Villa defence that wobbled badly during the midweek draw with Leeds. With Bruno Guimarães also in line to make a first start for Newcastle, who are seeking a third consecutive win, there is quite a show in store at St James’ Park. PD Newcastle v Aston Villa, Sunday 2pm 4) Burnley struggle to create chances needed for survival One of Burnley’s problems when it comes to scoring is the creation of chances. They have few players capable of producing the assists required for strikers to score goals. A key creative asset is Dwight McNeil but he has provided a sole assist this season in 20 Premier League outings. To make matters worse for McNeil he has not found the back of the net either, which goes some way to explaining why Burnley have won only a single game and scored 17 goals in 20 matches. Against Manchester United, McNeil looked tired and struggled to get involved in the game despite playing the full 90 minutes. The new signing Wout Weghorst is supposed to be the man who can fire Burnley off the bottom and to safety, but he needs service from crosses and no one is providing it at the moment. Without them, and with formidable opponents due on Sunday in Liverpool, Burnley could be doomed. WU Burnley v Liverpool, Sunday 2pm 5) Leeds’ verve can unnerve Lampard Everton went into the last day of the 1950-51 season outside the relegation zone and knowing their survival would be guaranteed if they drew with the bottom club, Sheffield Wednesday. They lost 6-0. There was a whiff of that sort of haplessness in Tuesday’s defeat at Newcastle. Leeds are probably one of the last opponents Frank Lampard would have chosen to face as he tries to reverse Everton’s downward momentum. Marcelo Bielsa’s team, who have scored six in their past two away games, are likely to swarm all over a side who looked devoid of confidence and energy in midweek. Donny van de Beek might add quality to the home midfield if given his first start but that – and Anthony Gordon’s precocious class – are unlikely to be enough to suppress Leeds. In the event of an away win, Leeds fans are sure to remind Lampard that he risks becoming the first Everton manager in 71 years to preside over a relegation. PD Everton v Leeds, Saturday 3pm 6) Dasilva to give Brentford the spark they sorely need? Brentford have lost seven games of their past eight, in the top flight have played more times than anyone else in the bottom half and are only six points clear of 18th. If it looks like a relegation battle and sounds like one, then it probably is one: the cushion given to the Bees by their early-season form could only last so long and it is now vital they string some points together. Beating Crystal Palace would have the added bonus of dragging Patrick Vieira’s men to the fringes of the scrap. Thomas Frank needs to rediscover a winning formula and it cannot be long before he finds a place in the starting lineup for Josh Dasilva. The dynamic midfielder missed almost a year with a hip injury and his comeback as a substitute over the past week has been a positive. Dasilva is good for a goal and, at his best, a dominant presence; if he can find form quickly, perhaps alongside Christian Eriksen when the Dane is ready in a few weeks, Brentford may have the added spark needed to keep them away from trouble. NA Brentford v Crystal Palace, Saturday 3pm 7) Leicester may give Antonio space to rediscover form When these sides met earlier in the season, Michael Antonio scored twice and celebrated by holding up a cardboard cutout of himself. West Ham could probably have done with a real-life imitator of Antonio in recent matches, since the striker has been out of form. But that is partly because of the way that opponents have tended to start playing against West Ham, sitting deep and leaving Antonio no room to run into. Brendan Rodgers’ side are unlikely to play like that at the King Power, not least because they do not have a reliable defence. So Antonio and West Ham’s nifty attacking midfielders could have yet more fun at the expense of Leicester, against whom West Ham have scored 10 times in their last three encounters. PD Leicester v West Ham, Sunday 4.30pm 8) Sarr the key to get Watford firing Ismaïla Sarr has not played for Watford since 20 November, and the fact they have not won since is no coincidence. Sarr is one of the league’s best wingers and should not be toiling around its lower reaches. He is back in contention at last when they host Brighton and should have a spring in his step: Sarr made his comeback from a knee injury during the knockout stages of the Africa Cup of Nations, where he played an important role in helping Senegal to their first-ever continental title. There was certainly no suggestion of any rust during the final, when he regularly roasted the Egypt left-back Ahmed Fattouh, and Roy Hodgson must integrate him effectively if the Hornets are to stand any chance of staying up. They have looked solid enough in a 4-4-2 since the veteran manager’s arrival but goal threat has been limited: if Hodgson can find a way to get Sarr firing within his system, his final mission in management might just be accomplished. NA Watford v Brighton, Saturday 3pm 9) Bentancur can bring much-needed flair to Spurs Pierre-Emile Højbjerg created a goal against former club Southampton in midweek but Antonio Conte felt his overall performance merited being substituted on the hour. The Dane was poor in possession and frequently overwhelmed when Southampton attacked, as Højberg struggled to stem the flow in front of his defence. The midfielder has already made 36 appearances for club and country this season, which could explain a dip in form as fatigue kicks in after a long time without a noticeable break following the European Championships. Luckily for Conte, he can now call upon Rodrigo Bentancur in the centre of midfield. The man who arrived from Juventus in January came off the bench in the defeat on Wednesday and showed some nice touches to indicate he could make the difference in a midfield short of attacking flair and ideas. A start against Wolves could help Bentancur settle in the Premier League before the more daunting prospect of Manchester City next week. WU Tottenham v Wolves, Sunday 2pm 10) The conduct of crowds Late in January the Premier League met other governing bodies and the police to discuss the rise in crowd trouble at games, and it has led to an urgent review being launched. Events in the FA Cup last weekend – that included a Leicester fan attacking Nottingham Forest players as they celebrated a goal and subsequently being charged with common assault – suggested the problem will not abate in a hurry and the discussions about its cause will rumble on. A rise in drug use inside stadiums comes up in dispatches, as does the suggestion that bottled-up lockdown energy is coming out in ill-advised ways; perhaps there is also the fostering of an “I’ll do what I want” attitude led by a government that seems happy to ignore rules while professing disgust when others do exactly that. Either way it needs sorting: no one can pretend football hooliganism in England ever faded to zero but grounds should be safe and welcoming places for everyone. This weekend would be a good time to begin the journey back towards those conditions. NAIn 1995 Ai Weiwei held up an ancient Chinese ceramic vessel, opened his arms to let it go, and stood there as it shattered. His new exhibition about craft and fakery includes a recent remake of Dropping a Han Dynasty Urn in Lego. It’s impressive how the black, white and grey Lego bricks create shadowy Warholian images of the artist in three stages of smashing a masterpiece. I feel obliged to explain. But I can’t, really. I don’t actually know what is clever about smashing an archaeological treasure – the Han dynasty ruled China when the Roman Empire ruled Europe – so I will quote the exhibition guide instead: the “transformative act” of destroying a 2,000-year-old work of art (transforming it into little tiny pieces, I guess) “drew attention to the Chinese government’s widespread destruction of the country’s heritage”. And there you have this exhibition in a nutshell: a display of sometimes amusing but superficial art that we are urged to appreciate as “important” because of the artist’s unquestionably heroic political acts. Ai Weiwei is a true hero of free speech, braver than most of us will ever be, and – in his tireless campaigning for refugees – compassionate, too. I admire him deeply. But this exhibition made me seriously doubt whether he is a good artist. The problem with his new version of Dropping a Han Dynasty Urn is that he wants to have his cake and smash it. The alleged campaigning, critical point is the direct opposite of what it actually makes us feel. Seeing him smash an urn, we laugh. We don’t ponder the erosion of China’s heritage. Instead we enjoy seeing it happen before our eyes. And remaking the original photographs in Lego just accentuates that celebration of irony, freedom, the throwaway modern world. I think even that is an overreading. The gesture is – literally – throwaway. For in this show it sometimes seems Ai Weiwei is better at throwing concepts in the air than clarifying what he means by them, as they crash to earth. The Lego shares a gallery with old-fashioned wood-framed display cases containing a collection of ancient art from China that Ai Weiwei bought in 2020. It’s a mix of styles and periods, including a buckled-up image of a crouching hare in red sandstone and a sensual broken limestone Buddha. The artist claims at least five of these apparently time-hallowed sculptures are modern fakes. For the forgery business is so refined in contemporary China it is transforming the historical record. The gallery points out the “fakes”. For what it’s worth I think they do look dodgy. Their surfaces are cleaner and sharper. The signs of age appear artificial. But perhaps Ai Weiwei is playing with my mind, presenting the real as fake, the fake as real. If only I cared. The myth of authenticity, the fascination of the fake – this is the small change of postmodernism that has been around for decades now. As with smashing a Han urn, mixing real and fake ancient Chinese art just gets in the way of any chance, as a westerner, I might have of responding aesthetically to this art. We live in an entire world of inauthentic replicas. It is not at all daring or memorable to point that out, again. At least when Damien Hirst celebrates the inauthentic he does it on a colossal scale in his bad taste epic museum of fake treasures, The Wreck of the Unbelievable. But I suspect snooty, cosy Kettle’s Yard wouldn’t touch Damien with a surgical glove on the end of a bargepole. This exhibition is boring because its urge to provoke is constantly checked by an insistence on Ai Weiwei’s moral excellence. I cannot believe Ai Weiwei has put his name to a set of blue and white porcelain plates with childish paintings of refugees on them. A helicopter buzzing a crowd! A boat crammed with people – painted on a porcelain plate! It’s the kind of cheap, easy “gesture” I’d expect of Grayson Perry. Though that may be unfair – at least Perry aspires to satire. These well-meaning platters are merely mawkish and sentimental. I feel offended to have my distress at the treatment of refugees pandered to in this way. One sad possibility is that Ai Weiwei has the same problem now as dissident writers who fled communist Europe in the 1970s or 80s. The real meaning and power of his art lay in the sheer courage of his opposition to China’s dictatorial state. In exile, he is adrift. Some of the art here muddies his previously clear stance for freedom by implying democracy is just as unfree as a totalitarian state. Surveillance Camera and Plinth is a marble replica of a security camera – it might be anywhere, from Beijing to Cambridge city centre. But the meaning of these objects surely depends on how they are used, why and where. Anyway, the marble is overstated and artistically heavy. There are other everyday objects imitated in stone – a marble toilet roll, a jade sex toy and smartphone. Funny for a moment, but so what? Their meanings remain in the shallow end. Marcel Duchamp, more that a century ago, “chose” objects from the world as readymade art. His levity mocks Ai Weiwei’s stone gravity. Turning readymades into marble and jade is a ponderous way to make your point. In another brilliant act of antiquity abuse, he’s painted the Coca-Cola logo on a Han vase. It symbolises this exhibition, which itself resembles the cool Cambridge outlet of a global brand. But the guy is phoning it in, on a jade iPhone. Ai Weiwei: The Liberty of Doubt is at Kettle’s Yard, Cambridge, from 12 February to 19 JuneThe telco Optus has appointed the former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian, who is under investigation by the state’s corruption watchdog, to a senior executive role. In a statement, the Singapore-owned company said Berejiklian had been appointed to the newly created role of managing director, enterprise, business and institutional. Berejiklian resigned as premier in October after the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption announced it was investigating whether she broke the law by failing to report matters that she “suspected on reasonable grounds concerned or may concern corrupt conduct” by her ex-lover, the former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. She has consistently denied acting improperly during her relationship with Maguire, saying when she resigned: “I state categorically that I have always acted with the highest level of integrity.” Berejiklian said on Friday she was “excited and proud to join an organisation that impacts the lives of millions of Australians every day and prides itself in providing outstanding customer service”. “I look forward to working with Kelly [Bayer Rosmarin, the Optus chief executive] and the executive team of Optus who are providing inspiring and innovative leadership in the telco sector.” In a statement, Optus said the former premier’s job at the company was to “lift its focus on unlocking a greater share of the multi-billion-dollar enterprise, business, and institutional markets”. Bayer Rosmarin said Berejiklian would be a “game-changer” for the company. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Gladys is a proven leader who demonstrated her renowned strength, leadership, discipline, and composure in successfully guiding Australia’s largest state through one of the biggest challenges in its history while earning the support and gratitude of the community for her tireless contribution,” she said. “She also builds and fosters loyal and dedicated teams who really go above and beyond for her.” The company, which is owned by the Singaporean conglomerate Singtel, has been approached for comment. Berejiklian denied any wrongdoing or having any reason to suspect Maguire during public hearings which concluded late last year. The commission is yet to hand down its findings.That’s it from me, Helen Livingstone, for now. Please join us a little later for a new live feed where we will continue to cover the coronavirus crisis. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. I leave you with a summary of the latest developments from the past 24 hours: Prince Charles met the Queen two days before testing positive for Covid for the second time. A palace source said the monarch was not displaying any symptoms, but declined to say whether or not she had tested negative. Elsewhere in the UK, Boris Johnson was condemned by former Conservatiove prime minister Sir John Major as a lawbreaker whose disregard for honesty and ministerial standards risks undermining the UK’s long-term democratic future, on another politically bruising day for the prime minister. Brussels authorities have banned a pan-European “freedom convoy” of motorists protesting Covid restrictions from entering the Belgian capital, the regional government said in a statement. Reuters reports the convoy was expected to arrive at the home of European Union institutions and NATO on Monday. Authorities in Paris had earlier banned the convoy. Spain dropped the mandatory use of face masks outdoors. Although they will remain compulsory at large open-air gatherings where social distancing is not possible, they will no longer be required in school playgrounds. New Zealand has hit a new record daily of community Covid cases, with 446 announced on Friday. That is an increase of 140 cases from the previous record, which was set the previous day.Cases are expected to climb steadily now that Omicron is spreading within New Zealand. Novavax says its Covid vaccine has proved safe and effective in a study of 12- to 17-year-olds. Armed with the new data, Novavax plans to soon seek expanded use of its shots down to age 12. Later this year, it plans to begin testing in younger children. The Dutch government has said it aims to drop most of its coronavirus restrictions by the end of the month, as record levels of infections in recent weeks have only had a limited effect on hospital numbers. The Philippines welcomed back more than 200 foreign tourists on Thursday, becoming the latest south-east Asian nation to reopen in a bid to revive a battered tourism sector after its borders shut to visitors nearly two years ago due to the pandemic The UK recorded another 66,638 Covid infections and a further 206 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Coronavirus cases continue to rise rapidly on the Pacific island of Tonga. Health minister, Saia Piukala, told reporters that 31 more people had tested positive for the virus, nearly doubling Tonga’s active cases for the second day in a row to a total of 64. Covid passes are to be scrapped and the need to wear face coverings in certain venues removed later this month as coronavirus cases continue to fall, the Welsh government has announced. The changes will be confirmed on Friday during the first three-week review of Wales’s alert level zero measures. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who has been isolating since Saturday after contracting Covid, has tested negative, the state-owned Anadolu news agency cited his doctor as saying. The Costa Rican president, Carlos Alvarado, tested positive for Covid-19, his office said. “He is doing well and will be in isolation at his home,” it added. Africa is transitioning out of the pandemic phase of its Covid outbreak and moving towards a situation where it will be managing the virus long term, the World Health Organization’s regional head for Africa said. Dr Matshidiso Moeti also said the number of Covid infections in Africa could be seven times higher than official data suggested, and deaths from the virus two to three times higher. New Zealand has hit a new record daily of community Covid cases, with 446 announced on Friday. That is an increase of 140 cases from the previous record, which was set the previous day. Cases are expected to climb steadily now that Omicron is spreading within New Zealand. The Ministry of Health said in a statement, “The increase in cases today is a reminder that, as expected, the Omicron variant is spreading in our communities as we have seen in other countries. The number of cases will continue to fluctuate from day to day, but our expectation is that cases will continue to increase in the coming weeks.” The country is in the midst of rolling out booster shots and vaccines for children. Of those aged 12 and over, 95% have had two doses of the vaccine, and 56% have had a booster shot; 43% of children aged 5-11 have had a dose of the vaccine. Across the country, 23 people are hospitalised with Covid-19. A man who wanted to join the protests in Canada’s capital over mask mandates called in a bomb threat so police would waste their time chasing it, authorities said, but he called the wrong Ottawa — a village in Ohio. The man, a 20-year-old from Akron, Ohio, called the Putnam county sheriff’s office twice Monday, said sheriff’s Capt Brad Brubaker. The first time he made a bomb threat, and then in a second call he said he had been shot, Brubaker said. That’s when the man found out he was talking with someone in Ohio. “He wasn’t paying attention and just called the first number he found,” Brubaker told The Lima News. “He said he was mad about mask mandates.” More here: Hello, this is Helen Livingstone taking over the blog again from my colleague, Tom Ambrose. In the UK, Boris Johnson has been condemned by former Conservatiove prime minister Sir John Major as a lawbreaker whose disregard for honesty and ministerial standards risks undermining the UK’s long-term democratic future, on another politically bruising day for the prime minister. While he now has a brief respite from the threat of a confidence vote by Tory MPs, with the Commons in recess for 10 days, Johnson faces the prospect of at least some staff being fined for breaking lockdown rules, with police saying this seems likely. Major launched his attack on Johnson in a speech in London, saying the prime minister appeared to believe rules did not apply to him, viewed the truth as “optional”, and had tarnished the UK’s reputation overseas with populist-style “megaphone diplomacy”. Saying MPs had a duty to act in the face of the threats to trust, the former Conservative prime minister said he was confident Johnson and his aides had broken lockdown laws, and their denial of this had left the government looking “distinctly shifty”. “Brazen excuses were dreamed up,” Major said. “Day after day the public was asked to believe the unbelievable. Ministers were sent out to defend the indefensible – making themselves look gullible or foolish. “No government can function properly if its every word is treated with suspicion … the lack of trust in the elected portion of our democracy cannot be brushed aside.” Read more here: Novavax announced on Thursday that its Covid vaccine proved safe and effective in a study of 12- to 17-year-olds. Novavax makes a protein-based vaccine, a different type than the most widely used shots. Its shots have been cleared for use in adults by regulators in Britain, Europe and elsewhere and by the World Health Organization, and are under review by the US Food and Drug Administration. Armed with the new data, Novavax plans to soon seek expanded use of its shots down to age 12. Later this year, it plans to begin testing in younger children. The latest study enrolled 2,247 US children ages 12 to 17 last summer and found the two-dose vaccine was 80% effective at preventing symptomatic Covid infection. Covid passes are to be scrapped and the need to wear face coverings in certain venues removed later this month as coronavirus cases continue to fall, the Welsh government has announced. The changes will be confirmed on Friday during the first three-week review of Wales’s alert level zero measures. First Minister Mark Drakeford said vaccination levels and decreasing infection rates mean the country can “look forward to brighter times ahead”. He signalled that face masks could be scrapped completely by the end of March should public health conditions continue to improve. A plan will be published next month setting out how Wales will move beyond “the emergency footing on which we have been operating for nearly two years”, Drakeford said. The First Minister said: With increasing numbers of people vaccinated and boosted and thanks to the hard work and efforts of everyone across Wales, we are confident that coronavirus rates are falling and we can look forward to brighter times ahead. We can start to gradually and carefully remove some of the remaining protections we have in place at alert level zero. But we are not removing all the measures at once because the pandemic is not over yet. To keep Wales safe we need to remain cautious and do everything we can to reassure those who feel most at risk. Hello. I’m Tom Ambrose and I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world over the next hour or so. We start with the news that the Dutch government has said it aims to drop most of its coronavirus restrictions by the end of the month, as record levels of infections in recent weeks have only had a limited effect on hospital numbers. Bars and restaurants will be allowed to stay open until 1am as of 18 February, instead of the current order to close at 10pm, health minister Ernst Kuipers said in a letter to parliament. Social distancing measures will be dropped in public places by the end of the month, but visitors will need to show proof of either vaccination, a recent recovery from Covid or a negative coronavirus test. This would also allow theatres and sporting events to reopen at full capacity, while nightclubs and festivals could get back in business with a testing requirement for all visitors. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Prince Charles met the Queen two days before testing positive for Covid for the second time. A palace source said the monarch was not displaying any symptoms, but declined to say whether or not she had tested negative. The 95-year-old is believed to have spent time with Charles on Tuesday when her eldest son was carrying out an investiture on her behalf at her Windsor Castle home. She is understood to be fully vaccinated so will not be self isolating, although she will be advised to take daily lateral flow tests for a week. The Prince of Wales, who first tested positive for Covid in March 2020, is self-isolating, Clarence House said. He had attended a reception at the British Museum on Wednesday to celebrate the work of the British Asian Trust. The event had brought him into close contact with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, the home secretary, Priti Patel, and scores of others. Story here. Spain dropped the mandatory use of face masks outdoors. The Spanish government first imposed obligatory mask-wearing outdoors in May 2020, but lifted it in June last year. Wearing a face covering was still required for indoor public spaces. However, Spain reimposed the measure just before Christmas as Covid cases exploded due to the Omicron variant. Although they will remain compulsory at large open-air gatherings where social distancing is not possible, they will no longer be required in school playgrounds. More here. The UK recorded another 66,638 Covid infections and a further 206 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who has been isolating since Saturday after contracting Covid, tested negative, the state-owned Anadolu news agency cited his doctor as saying. Erdoğan said on Saturday he had tested positive for the Omicron variant. “The PCR tests we have done over the past two days have come back negative,” his doctor, Serkan Topaloğlu, was quoted as saying on Thursday. “I think the president will go back to his routine programme very soon, even tomorrow.” The Costa Rican president, Carlos Alvarado, tested positive for Covid-19, his office said. “He is doing well and will be in isolation at his home,” it added. Africa is transitioning out of the pandemic phase of its Covid outbreak and moving towards a situation where it will be managing the virus long term, the World Health Organization’s regional head for Africa said. “The pandemic is moving into a different phase,” Dr Matshidiso Moeti said. “We think that we’re moving now, especially with the vaccination expected to increase, into what might become a kind of endemic living with the virus.” Moeti also said the number of Covid infections in Africa could be seven times higher than official data suggested, and deaths from the virus two to three times higher. “We’re very much aware that our surveillance systems problems that we had on the continent, with access to testing supplies, for example, have led to an underestimation of the cases,” Moeti told a briefing. Story here. Spain dropped the mandatory use of face masks outdoors on Thursday, though many people kept them on in Madrid, with face coverings now an everyday staple, AFP reports. Spain first imposed obligatory mask-wearing outdoors in May 2020, but lifted it in June last year. Wearing a face covering was still required for indoor public spaces. However, the government reimposed the measure just before Christmas as Covid cases exploded due to the Omicron variant. Even as rules eased across the country on Thursday, in Madrid, some kept them on out of habit. “I’m wearing one and I’ll keep on doing so even though the law says I can take it off,” said Alberto Diaz, a pensioner from the southern Andalusia region who was in the city for a concert. Face masks have been embraced across Spain in all public spaces, both inside and out, and they have largely become ubiquitous like in many cities in Asia. Although they will remain compulsory at large open-air gatherings where social distancing is not possible, they will no longer be required in school playgrounds. Newlyweds Ricardo Alfredo Sanchez and Yvette Candero looked delighted as they had their photo taken in Puerta del Sol Square. “It’s not the same having a souvenir photo taken with your face covered, you can’t see the person’s expression or how happy they are,” said the groom. In another anticipated move, in the northeastern region of Catalonia, nightlife venues were set to open at the stroke of midnight. In late December, the Catalan government put in place some of Spain’s most restrictive measures to fight Omicron, imposing a night curfew from 1am, closing nightlife venues and halving the capacity in bars and restaurants. The bar and restaurant restrictions were eased last month, but nightlife venues had remained closed, until Friday - with most set to open just after midnight. Despite high vaccination rates, Covid cases exploded in Spain over the Christmas holidays, giving it one of Europe’s highest incidence rates, although that has now fallen. So far, Spain has registered some 10.5 million infections and more than 95,000 deaths. Czech restaurant and hotel operators saw light at the end of the tunnel on Thursday as the government cancelled rules requiring vaccination certificates to enter restaurants and events as Omicron infections started to ebb. Hotels and restaurants in Prague, a prime tourist destination, have suffered badly throughout the pandemic and now hope restrictions will not come back. “The relaxation means guests can come without any restriction or persecution, that’s of course welcome ... This has been long for everyone, not just us in gastronomy but the entire society,” Tomas Lachman, a manager at Oblaca Restaurant at Prague’s TV tower, told Reuters. The Czech Republic is the latest European country to ease restrictions as the government hopes the peak of the Omicron wave is over. Sweden lifted most restrictions on Wednesday. The country of 10.7 million has suffered one of the world’s highest death tolls per capita with 37,660 victims to date. Daily infections peaked at 57,232 on 1 February, falling to 29,059 on Wednesday. Enforcement of the vaccination certificate requirement has been weak and many pubs did not require guests to show them. Some actively refused to follow the rules. “We were in a perverse situation where those who followed the rules suffered while those who didn’t give a damn and even declared it openly were making money,” said Tomas Prouza, head of a lobby group for commerce and tourism, welcoming the end of the system. “The numbers are going down, hospitals are not full, this is a time when we have to start living normally.” The number of people in hospital has still been going up, to 3,784 on Tuesday, but is far below peaks of over 9,000 in March last year. The number of patients in serious condition was at just over 10% of the peak. The government maintained a mask mandate indoors and on public transport, as well as limits to the size of audiences at culture and sports events. Mandatory regular testing at schools and workplaces will end on 18 February. The prime minister Petr Fiala said on Wednesday that most remaining restrictions would be lifted from March. Katerina Joklova, general manager at Vienna House Andel’s Prague Hotel, told Reuters it had an occupancy rate of 10-15% and any relaxation was welcome. “It is certainly a light at the end of the tunnel, a sign that we are getting back to normal life.” The UK has recorded another 66,638 Covid infections and a further 206 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is compared with 68,214 cases and 276 fatalities recorded in the 24 hours prior. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who has been isolating since Saturday after contracting Covid, tested negative on Thursday, the state-owned Anadolu news agency cited his doctor as saying. Erdoğan said on Saturday he had tested positive for the Omicron variant. “The PCR tests we have done over the past two days have come back negative,” his doctor, Serkan Topaloğlu, was quoted as saying. “I think the president will go back to his routine programme very soon, even tomorrow.” The Costa Rican president, Carlos Alvarado, has tested positive for Covid-19, his office said on Thursday. “He is doing well and will be in isolation at his home,” it added. The Prince of Wales, who has Covid for the second time, met the Queen recently but the monarch is not displaying any symptoms, a palace source has told the PA news agency. It is not known when exactly the prince met the Queen. But he held an investiture on Tuesday at Windsor Castle, where the monarch is currently staying. People who develop coronavirus symptoms are asked to notify those they have been in contact with in the previous 48 hours. The prince took a routine test and is not thought to be showing symptoms. Charles usually greets his mother in public with both a kiss on the hand and a kiss on the cheek. The Queen is understood to be fully vaccinated so will not need to self isolate, unless she tests positive. But she will be advised to take rapid lateral flow tests, one a day for seven days. Downing Street said Boris Johnson hoped the Prince of Wales would make a swift recovery after he tested positive for Covid-19. Africa is transitioning out of the pandemic phase of its Covid-19 outbreak and moving towards a situation where it will be managing the virus long term, the World Health Organization’s regional head for Africa has said. “The pandemic is moving into a different phase,” Dr Matshidiso Moeti said. “We think that we’re moving now, especially with the vaccination expected to increase, into what might become a kind of endemic living with the virus.” Moeti also said the number of Covid infections in Africa could be seven times higher than official data suggested, and deaths from the virus two to three times higher. “We’re very much aware that our surveillance systems problems that we had on the continent, with access to testing supplies, for example, have led to an underestimation of the cases,” Moeti told a briefing. Moeti’s comments confirm what has increasingly been suspected by a number of researchers who have been working to understand the so-called “Africa paradox” – why official reporting from African countries had failed to capture the same distribution of infections and deaths as elsewhere in the world. Some have suggested the much younger age profile across countries on the continent may have contributed, but a consensus is coalescing around significant undercounting in countries with weak health surveillance systems that have failed to pick up infections and deaths over the past two years. According to a tally by Johns Hopkins University, recorded infections across Africa exceeded 11 million as of 10 February and deaths at 250,000. If the WHO’s estimates are correct the real figures could be nearer 70 million and 750,000 respectively. Concern about undercounting have been driven by a number of studies and serological surveys – not least in South Africa, which has one of the continent’s most sophisticated disease surveillance – that suggest higher rates of infection than previously thought. Africa is the latest region that the WHO has suggested may be transitioning out of the pandemic phase and moving towards a more stable situation. The WHO’s European regional director, Hans Kluge, said last week that the continent could soon enter a “long period of tranquillity” that amounted to a “ceasefire” in the pandemic thanks to the less severe Omicron variant, high levels of immunity and the arrival of warmer spring weather. His upbeat assessment said the 53-country region, which includes the UK, was in a position of higher protection that could “bring us enduring peace”, even if a new, more virulent variant than Omicron should emerge. He said Europe had recorded 12 million new cases in a week. the highest single weekly total of the pandemic, with about 22% of all tests returning a positive result. The story is here: Africa transitioning out of pandemic phase of Covid, WHO says Here is my colleague Tobi Thomas’s story on Prince Charles self-isolating after testing positive for Covid for a second time. Brussels authorities have banned a pan-European “freedom convoy” of motorists protesting Covid restrictions from entering the Belgian capital, the regional government said in a statement. Reuters reports the convoy was expected to arrive at the home of European Union institutions and NATO on Monday. Authorities in Paris had earlier banned the convoy. Protesters set out from southern France on Wednesday in what they called a “freedom convoy” that will converge on Paris and Brussels to demand an end to Covid restrictions, inspired by demonstrators who have gridlocked the Canadian capital Ottawa. “The Federal Police will control motorised vehicles on the main roads to Brussels that come to demonstrate in Belgium. The Region and the City of Brussels will issue decrees banning demonstrations with trucks on their territory,” a statement from the Brussels region said, adding they had not received yet any request to protest. In Canada, horn-blaring demonstrations demanding an end to Canadian Covid vaccine mandates for cross-border truck drivers have gridlocked Ottawa for weeks and have now spilled over to key Canada-US border crossings. Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, has accused Boris Johnson of announcing an end to England’s Covid restrictions as a blatant attempt to “distract and deflect” attention from the partygate crisis. Yousaf said the policy appeared to have been cooked up at Downing Street with little scientific or expert support. The prime minister had failed to notify the UK’s devolved governments about the move, a signal it was a hasty political decision. “This wasn’t a thought-out policy backed up by public health expert advice, it was a dead cat thrown on the dispatch box of the House of Commons in order to distract and deflect,” Yousaf said on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. He said the Scottish government, which sets its own policies on Covid restrictions, had since asked for clarification about the basis of Johnson’s decision but had not yet had any. It had no plans to follow suit, he added. “Since this decision was made – and it was a unilateral decision, one that wasn’t discussed with any of the other three nations of the UK – we’ve asked for that public health advice and none has been forthcoming. “And I think we should just be frank … This was clearly an attempt to deflect scrutiny away from the prime minister’s behaviour”. Johnson told MPs he expects to end England’s self-isolation rules for those infected with or exposed to Covid this month, a full month earlier than the 24 March expiry date currently set out in the regulations. A legal requirement to self-isolate will be replaced by unenforceable advice to do so. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, is due to publish a comprehensive plan on a phased end to Covid restrictions on 22 February. She announced on Thursday that pupils and teachers in secondary schools in Scotland would no longer need to wear face coverings in classrooms from 28 February. Face masks in schools and physical distancing rules in enclosed spaces have been mandatory in Scotland. Prof Andrew Watterson, a public health expert at Stirling University, said Johnson’s proposals were a “leap in the dark” and were out of step with policy across Europe. It would be unwise for Scotland to follow the prime minister’s lead, he said. “It’s almost a big-bang approach by the UK government, a leap in the dark,” he told BBC Radio Scotland on Thursday. “It’s not measured in terms of gradually relaxing the controls, it’s a big leap. But there’s also confusion because it’s quite clear that what’s being called for, and even the prime minister has said this, is not an end to self-isolation, it’s an end to the regulation about it.” Get the full story here: Scottish health secretary calls Johnson’s plan to scrap Covid rules a ‘dead cat’ Prince Charles has tested positive for Covid-19, his office said on Thursday, the second time the heir to the throne has contracted the virus. “This morning The Prince of Wales has tested positive for Covid-19 and is now self-isolating,” Clarence House said, adding he had cancelled his planned engagements for Thursday. “HRH is deeply disappointed not to be able to attend today’s events in Winchester and will look to reschedule his visit as soon as possible.” Charles, 73, who said in December both he and his wife Camilla had received their booster shots, first tested positive for Covid in March 2020 when he said he had been “lucky” to have suffered only mild symptoms. He spent seven days in self-isolation at his Birkhall home in Scotland before resuming his duties. On Wednesday, he attended a reception for the British Asian Trust at the British Museum with Camilla, where the other guests included the chancellor Rishi Sunak, the home secretary Priti Patel and the health secretary Sajid Javid. Several US states, many of them governed by Democrats, began rolling back mask mandates this week, a move public health experts warn could set back progress in containing Covid. On Wednesday, Massachusetts, Illinois, New York and Rhode Island joined California, Connecticut, Delaware, New Jersey and Oregon in lifting mask mandates for some public places. The wave of relaxations comes after months of private meetings among state leaders and political focus groups after the November elections, according to reports. “Now, it’s time to give people their lives back,” Sean Maloney, chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, tweeted in support of New York suspending its indoor mask-or-vaccine mandate. Yet the lifting of rules has not been universally applauded and is coming at a time when the vast majority of the country (99%) is still seeing high transmission of the virus, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Public polls show consistent support for mask mandates and other precautions, and experts say the time to relax precautions is not here yet – and acting prematurely could prolong this wave. “In my view, it’s too soon. I feel like we’re anticipating too much,” said Justin Lessler, a professor of epidemiology at the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health. “We’re being too confident that things are going to keep going the direction that they have been going.” The CDC’s director Rochelle Walensky also recently said that “now is not the moment” to drop masks in public, although the agency is reportedly weighing changes to its guidance on masks. While Covid cases have dropped from Omicron’s record-shattering peak, the US still has an average of more than 230,000 cases each day – similar to the height of last winter’s wave – and more than 2,300 people are dying from Covid each day, according to the CDC. While hospitalisations are beginning to fall, 80% of hospitals are still under “high or extreme stress”. Treatments, including antivirals and monoclonal antibodies, that keep Covid from progressing to serious illness and death are still in short supply throughout the country. Children under the age of 5 are not yet eligible for vaccines, while less than a quarter of kids ages five to 11 are fully vaccinated. “We have hundreds of thousands of people dying, we have millions who’ve been hospitalised and we have an unknown number who have long Covid and who will get long Covid as we roll back what little mitigation we have,” said Julia Raifman, assistant professor at Boston University School of Public Health and creator of the Covid-19 US state policy database. “Saying things are normal undercuts us in getting more people vaccinated and in helping people wear masks, because transmission actually remains quite high,” Raifman said. “The best way to help people think things are more normal is to reduce the amount of virus with the mitigation measures that we have.” The full story is here: Blue states are rolling back mask rules – but experts warn it’s too soon AstraZeneca forecast higher 2022 sales and lifted its annual dividend for the first time in a decade after beating fourth-quarter profit expectations, but warned the boost from its Covid-19 products would decline. The Anglo-Swedish drugmaker made almost $4bn (£2.9bn) from its Vaxzevria Covid jab last year, including more than $1bn from Europe and $2.3bn from emerging markets. The jab has not yet been approved by US regulators. AstraZeneca’s total revenues increased by 41% to $37.4bn last year. In the final quarter, sales rose 62% to $12bn. Despite the jump in sales, the drugmaker made a loss before tax of $265m (£195m), compared with a profit of $3.9bn the year before, after spending more on product launches, research &amp; development and the acquisition of the rare diseases specialist Alexion. Its R&amp;D spend rose by 62% to $9.7bn. AstraZeneca’s vaccine sales pale in comparison with Pfizer’s near $37bn (£27.2bn) take from its Covid-19 jab last year, which made it one of the most lucrative products in history and led campaigners to accuse the US drugmaker of “pandemic profiteering”. Read the full story here: AstraZeneca forecasts higher 2022 sales and lifts annual dividend Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Here are some more quotes (via Reuters) from Dr Matshidiso Moeti, World Health Organization regional director for Africa, regarding the situation on the continent with respect to Covid. She told a regular online media briefing: I believe that we are transitioning from the pandemic phase and we will now need to manage the presence of this virus in the long term. The pandemic is moving into a different phase ... We think that we’re moving now, especially with the vaccination expected to increase, into what might become a kind of endemic living with the virus. Africa’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic had improved over time but the continent needed to accelerate the pace of vaccination to control the pandemic, the head of the World Health Organization’s Africa division said today, Reuters reports. “We are finally able to say that if the current trends hold, there is light at the end of the tunnel. As long as we remain vigilant and we act intensively particularly on vaccination, the continent is on track for controlling the pandemic,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, World Health Organization regional director for Africa. She said the response had become more effective with each new wave of the virus, noting that the first wave had lasted 29 weeks while the fourth was over in six weeks. However, Moeti said 85% of Africans had yet to receive a single dose of vaccine, and uptake needed to be significantly accelerated. “A steady supply of doses is now reaching our shores, so the focus needs to be on translating those into actual shots in people’s arms,” she said. The Philippines welcomed back more than 200 foreign tourists today, becoming the latest south-east Asian nation to reopen in a bid to revive a battered tourism sector after its borders shut to visitors nearly two years ago due to the pandemic. From Reuters: Popular for its white sand beaches and rich marine life, the Philippines has seen a sharp drop in coronavirus cases. Tourism officials at Manila’s airport greeted passengers flying in from countries including the United States and China to visit beaches or reunite with family and friends. “I think it will be a good boost for tourism and the Filipino economy,” said Shawn James Stickney, 31, a Malaysian social media influencer living in Australia who flew in to surprise his girlfriend. At the Walled City of Intramuros in Manila, horse carriage drivers and bike rental operators were preparing for what they hoped would be a steady flow of vacationers to revive their incomes. “Half of our guests are foreigners who are on vacation here so we are very happy to know that our country is finally open to foreign tourists,” said Russel Leyco, a bike rental manager. New coronavirus cases in the Philippines have fallen from a September peak of more than 33,000 to just over 3,500 a day, while more than half of the country’s 110 million people have now been fully vaccinated. Tourists need to show proof of vaccination but do not need to quarantine and travel companies hope the trickle of arrivals will turn into a flood to give the sector a lift. “We hope that these numbers continue to increase in the days, weeks and months ahead,” said Jose Clemente, head of a tourism industry group. The Philippines had 8.26 million visitors in 2019, but that fell 82% in 2020 when borders shut. A scientist has said the imminent relaxation of Covid rules in England is “a political statement rather than a scientific one” and an “act of irresponsibility”. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced yesterday that all Covid regulations, including the requirement to isolate after testing positive, are to be abolished in England in two weeks, a month earlier than originally anticipated (via PA Media). Prof Tim Spector, who runs the Zoe app Covid study at King’s College London, told Times Radio: This is more a political type of statement rather than a scientific one, and I think we have to really look at this in the context, both of politics and science, and also what’s happening, because there is some rationale to this and other countries are doing things similar, but it’s clearly a race for the government to say that Britain is first, Britain is the first to come out of this, Britain has conquered Omicron, our booster programme is world beating etc, etc. But I think what they’re relying on is data that is highly disputed scientifically that, really, the UK has come out of this faster and better than anyone else. He said hospital admissions and deaths were down but the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and the Zoe data show the UK is still at more than 200,000 cases a day “and we’re still close to where we were on 1 January and that peak we had”. He added: It’s definitely not over – your risk of getting it is huge – and to suddenly give the wrong message ... by saying ‘We’re getting rid of all restrictions, if you’ve got an infection don’t bother isolating’, which is sort of implied but not said, that is totally wrong. So, other countries might be doing this, but they have a much stronger public health message and a much better-educated public about the pandemic which we lack here in this country. He said other countries will stick with four or five days of isolation. “They won’t be saying to everyone ‘Don’t bother, just go and infect your workmates’ which seems crazy,” he said. Asked if Boris Johnson’s announcement was “an act of irresponsibility”, Spector replied: “I think it is ... giving the impression that Britain, that the UK, has beaten Covid, I think it’s totally the wrong way to do it.” The Paris police authority said it had decided to ban the so-called motorists’ “freedom convoy” from holding protests in the French capital, due to begin tomorrow and last four days, Reuters reports. Protesters had set out from southern France yesterday with plans to converge on Paris and Brussels to demand an end to Covid-19 restrictions, inspired by demonstrators who have blocked a Canadian border crossing. About 200 protesters assembled in a parking lot in Nice, on France’s Mediterranean coast, with many displaying Canadian flags in a nod to the truckers in Canada who are protesting their government’s Covid-19 restrictions. Coronavirus cases continue to rise rapidly on the Pacific island of Tonga, with tests confirming that the particularly contagious omicron variant is behind its first community outbreak since the start of the pandemic, the Associated Press reports: Health minister, Saia Piukala, told reporters that 31 more people had tested positive for the virus, nearly doubling Tonga’s active cases for the second day in a row to a total of 64, the online Matangi Tonga news portal and other media reported. While the number may seem small, the nation of 105,000 had managed to escape thus far without any infections aside from a single case brought in from a missionary returning to Tonga from Africa last October, which was successfully isolated. But with the deliveries of critically-important international aid following the 15 January eruption of the massive undersea volcano and a resulting tsunami, two dock workers tested positive at the start of last week for Covid-19. Despite efforts to contain the outbreak, it has been spreading and is now being reported in more areas, Piukala said. Five tests that had been sent to Australia for analysis confirmed it was the omicron variant of the virus, he said. Three people were confirmed killed in the eruption and tsunami, and several small settlements in outlying islands were wiped out. The Red Cross and other health authorities have warned that as Tonga tries to deal both with the aftermath of the natural disaster and the coronavirus outbreak, its fragile health care system risks becoming quickly overwhelmed. At the same time, Tonga’s isolation — which helped protect it from the virus for more than two years — is now a liability, making it more difficult to provide outside assistance. In a sign of hope, however, Piukala said all of the latest cases have so far only reported mild symptoms, and that all were vaccinated except for the children. He did not say how many children were affected. Tonga’s vaccination program had already been doing well, but the current outbreak has led thousands of people to turn out for their first shots or boosters. As of yesterday, 98% of the country’s eligible population, aged 12 and up, had received at least one dose and 88% were fully vaccinated. More than 67% of Tonga’s total population has been fully vaccinated, according to the Health Ministry. The Oscars will reportedly not require proof of Covid-19 vaccination in order attend the in-person ceremony in Hollywood on 27 March. Instead, the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences will require guests to provide a negative PCR test or a negative rapid antigen test on the day of the event, the Hollywood Reporter and Variety reported on Wednesday. Attendees are encouraged to be vaccinated and those who are not will have to comply with stricter testing requirements in order to attend. This year’s ceremony will return to the Dolby Theater after a smaller, scaled-down event at Union Station in Los Angeles last year. This year will also mark the first time the event has had a host since 2018, though the Academy has not yet announced who that will be. Read on here: The Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics Organizing Committee says that a total of 9 new Covid-19 cases were detected among games-related personnel on 9 Feburary, Reuters reports. Six of the cases were found among new airport arrivals, according to a notice on the Beijing 2022 official website. Three others were among those already in the *closed loop* bubble that separates all event personnel from the public, and all three were classified as either an athlete or team official, the notice said. Japan’s biggest wave of Covid-19 cases to date is showing signs of peaking though authorities are extending virus curbs into next month to try to bring down the rate of hospitalisations, Reuters reports. Top medical adviser Shigeru Omi said on Thursday that health centres would shift towards focusing on care for the elderly and those at risk of developing serious illness. “While infections are still increasing, there’s a relative slowing trend among working people in their 20s and 30s,” he told reporters after a health taskforce meeting. Japan will on Friday begin a long weekend that have in the past coincided with increases in cases. Virus curbs in Tokyo and 12 prefectures that had been due to expire on Sunday will be extended until March 6, prime minister, Fumio Kishida, said on Wednesday. A expert panel said that while the rate of infections was slowing, the medical system remained under pressure and hospitalisations may continue to rise. Tokyo reported 18,287 new infections on Wednesday, down from a record 21,576 on Feb. 2 in the first week-on-week decline in almost two months. Nationwide data show the same flattening trend, while cases in the southern prefecture of Okinawa, where this latest wave first gained momentum, continue to ebb. After Boris Johnson announced plans to end restrictions a month early, Guardian readers have shared their reactions, ranging from “fully justified” to “very bizarre”. Here’s a small selection of their thoughts: In more news from New Zealand, police began evacuating anti-vaccine protesters from parliament grounds on the third day of their demonstration, with more than 120 arrested after clashes. Police brought in around 150 extra officers from around the country on Thursday to try to clear the protesters from parliament grounds, where they had pitched tents and parked cars, blocking traffic. The police picked people off one-by-one at the front of the line, prompting scuffles to break out, and sparking shouts from the crowd of “shame on you, shame on you!” towards the officers. By Thursday afternoon, the police had arrested 120 people and used pepper spray on some members of the crowd, but made little headway in moving the protesters off parliament’s grounds. Two police staff were injured and some protesters suffered minor injuries. The police expect the protest will continue over some days, requiring a rolling door of officers to be brought in from other parts of the country, said Wellington district commander superintendent Corrie Parnell. There had been good lines of communication with some of the organisers, but Parnell said that had “eroded to a point where [the police are] beyond engaging, educating, encouraging”. He said protestors had been putting their children on the frontline of the protest, which presented a significant risk for those children and was “less than ideal” for officers trying to move people on. Read more here: New Zealand has announced 306 new community infections of Covid-19 today, a new record. Case numbers have been tracking upward since Omicron arrived several weeks ago, and the country now has 2,470 active cases in the community, and 815 in border facilities.In a statement, the Ministry of Health urged New Zealanders to prepare in case they were infected or had to self-isolate. “As cases of Omicron continue to be identified around the country, it’s important New Zealanders are as ready as they can be if they contract the virus or come into contact with someone else who has the virus.” “Make sure you have your personal plans ready, and follow the key public health advice of getting vaccinated, boosted, tested (if you’re symptomatic) and masking up.” Ninety-five per cent of New Zealanders aged over 12 have had two doses of the vaccine, and 55% have had a booster dose. The government is currently running a campaign to get booster levels as high as possible before Omicron becomes widespread. This week, the government also announced exemptions from self-isolation for some workers, in an effort to keep critical supply chains running. “We’ve seen overseas that a combination of high rates of Omicron alongside isolation periods for contacts has put severe strain on supply chains and the provision of important services,” Covid-19 response minister Chris Hipkins said. Under the new regulations, workers at critical businesses will be able to continue working after being exposed to Covid-19, as long as they return daily negative rapid-antigen tests. Democratic standards across the world fell again in 2021 amid the pandemic and growing support for authoritarianism to leave just over 45 percent of the world’s population living in a democracy, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) said on Thursday. As in 2020, less than half of the world’s population is living in a democracy but the trend has deteriorated further, the London-based analysis group said according to Reuters. Its annual democracy Index “sheds light on continued challenges to democracy worldwide, under pressure from the coronavirus pandemic and increasing support for authoritarian alternatives,” the group said. Its annual index, which provides a measurement of the state of global democracy, registered its biggest fall since 2010 and set “another dismal record” for the worst global score since the index was first produced in 2006. In Europe, Spain was downgraded to a “flawed democracy”, reflecting a deterioration in its score for judicial independence. The EIU said the UK also dropped in the ranking following controversies over party financing and a series of scandals, but remains a “full democracy”. Less than half - 45.7 percent - of the world’s population now live in a democracy of some sort, a significant decline from 2020 where the figure was 49.4 percent. Even fewer - 6.4 percent - reside in a “full democracy” after Chile and Spain were downgraded to “flawed democracies”. Spain’s downgrade reflects a deterioration in its score for judicial independence, it said. More than a third of the world’s population live under authoritarian rule, a large proportion of which are in China. “China has not become more democratic as it has become richer. On the contrary, it has become less free,” the EIU said. The top three places in the index are occupied by Norway, New Zealand and Finland while the final three countries are North Korea, Myanmar and Afghanistan. Along with Tunisia, Myanmar and Afghanistan recorded the biggest declines in the index following the military coup and Taliban takeover in those countries. Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Livingstone. Democratic standards across the world fell again in 2021 amid the pandemic and growing support for authoritarianism to leave just over 45 percent of the world’s population living in a democracy, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) said on Thursday. New Zealand has announced a record 306 new community infections of Covid-19, while police have arrested more than 120 people at a protest against public health measures on parliament’s grounds in Wellington. Case numbers have been tracking upward since Omicron arrived several weeks ago. Here’s what else has been happening over the past 24 hours: In the UK, The Metropolitan police is going to review its decision not to include the Christmas quiz in Downing Street on 15 December 2020 in its partygate investigation in the light of a new picture showing prime minister Boris Johnson with a bottle of prosecco and two staff members. Sweden scrapped almost all of its few pandemic restrictions and stopped most testing for Covid, even as the pressure on the healthcare systems remained high and some scientists begged for more patience in fighting the disease. New Zealand’s anti-vaccine protesters are being evicted from parliament grounds on the third day of their protest, with more than 50 arrested after clashes with police. Blockades on the busiest border bridge between Canada and the US to protest against coronavirus rules could have a serious impact on the economies of both countries, disrupting the automotive industry, agricultural exports, and causing multimillion-dollar losses, the two countries’ governments have said. The US government is planning to roll out Covid-19 jabs for children under the age of 5 as soon as 21 February. The US Food and Drug Administration is considering authorising the use of the Pfizer Inc and BioNTech SE vaccine in the age group even though it did not meet a key target in a clinical trial of two- to four-year-olds. Palestinian authorities have ramped up Covid testing and vaccinations in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and have warned that public indifference to calls for mask-wearing and social distancing is hampering efforts to fight the pandemic. The Palestinian Authority health ministry registered more than 64,000 active cases of Covid on Wednesday. Boris Johnson plans to abolish the last domestic Covid restrictions in England, including the requirement for people with the virus to self-isolate, in less than two weeks, a month earlier than initially proposed, he announced. Top European Union officials said low absorption of Covid-19 vaccines in African countries had become the main problem in the global vaccine rollout following a recent increase in supplies of jabs, Only five hospitals in Afghanistan still offer Covid treatment, with 33 others having been forced to close in recent months for lack of doctors, medicines and even heating, the Associated Press reports. It comes as the economically devastated nation is hit by a steep rise in the number of reported coronavirus cases. Spain’s King Felipe has tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday after displaying mild symptoms overnight and will remain in isolation for seven days, the Royal Palace has said. Japan is set to extend Covid restrictions in Tokyo and 12 prefectures by three weeks as the Omicron variant continued to spread. The country has been breaking daily records for coronavirus cases and deaths amid a surge in infections driven by Omicron. Denmark’s Queen Margrethe II has tested positive for coronavirus and is showing mild symptoms, the royal court said. The 81-year-old monarch received a third dose of the vaccine in November, the court said.The governor of Nevada announced he is immediately rescinding the state’s mask mandate, joining several other Democratic governors who have recently moved to relax coronavirus-related restrictions. However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention continues to recommend masking in areas of high and substantial coronavirus spread, which accounts for about 99% of all US counties right now. US prices rose by 7.5% in January compared to a year earlier, marking the country’s highest level of inflation in 40 years. A number of economists have said they expect inflation to subside over the coming year, but Democrats fear that the high prices at grocery stores and gas pumps could hurt their chances in the midterm elections this November. Joe Biden delivered a speech on the urgent need to lower US healthcare costs in Culpepper, Virginia. The president noted the US pays more than its peer nations for the same prescription drugs, and he reiterated his administration’s commitment to lowering healthcare costs for American families. “I’ve long said health care should be a right, not a privilege, in this country,” Biden said. The Senate unanimously passed a bill that will end the use of forced arbitration in workplace sexual harassment cases. The bill, which easily passed the House earlier this week, now heads to Biden’s desk for his signature. The White House has already indicated the president supports the bill and plans to sign it. The House oversight committee opened an investigation into potential violations of the Presidential Records Act by Donald Trump, after he retained and destroyed some documents relevant to the Capitol attack inquiry. The House committee investigating Capitol attack has also reportedly found gaps in critical hours on the day of the riot in White House telephone logs, according to the New York Times. – Joan E Greve Joe Biden urged American citizens in Ukraine to “leave now”. In that interview with Nightly News, Biden told NBC’s Lester Holt that “things could go crazy quickly” in Ukraine. If Putin is “foolish enough to go in, he’s smart enough not to, in fact, do anything that would negatively impact on American citizens,” Biden said. “I didn’t have to tell him that, I’ve spoken about that. He knows that.” The US State Department has warned that it “will not be able to evacuate US citizens in the event of Russian military action anywhere in Ukraine.” Joe Biden said he has a shortlist of supreme court nominees and expects that some Republicans will also support his pick. In an interview with NBC Nightly News, the president said he’s already looked into “about four people”. Like the judiciary committee Democrats, Biden said he looks forward to appointing a justice with qualities similar to Justice Stephen Breyer, who is retiring. The Senate judiciary committee Democrats have wrapped their meeting with Joe Biden. “We don’t rule out that there will be some Republican support for this nominee,” said Amy Klobuchar, a Democratic senator of Minnesota, but noted that the president would be picking his nominee based on his and the Democrats’ values. Democrats, who hold a slim majority in the Senate, will be able to confirm Biden’s pick without Republican support. “We didn’t come up with a list of names,” said Dick Durbin, chair of the committee, but said that members shared recommendations with the president. Nancy Pelosi has extended proxy voting in the House for another seven weeks, citing the ongoing “public health emergency”. About three dozen members of Congress have tested positive for Covid-19 just this year so far. The spread of Havana syndrome has “dramatically hurt” morale in the US diplomatic corps and affected recruitment, according to the head of the American Foreign Service Association (AFSA). Eric Rubin, whose association represents nearly 17,000 current and former diplomats and foreign aid workers, said it was getting harder to find young people to work abroad, because of concerns about Havana syndrome – and about whether the government would look after them if they got sick. “People have suffered real trauma and real injury, and it has dramatically hurt our morale, our readiness, our ability to recruit new members in the foreign service,” Rubin told the first medical symposium on the syndrome since it began affecting US diplomats and intelligence officers in 2016, organised by the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. The cause of the syndrome, which involves long-term loss of balance and cognitive function, remains a mystery. A report by a US intelligence panel of experts last week found that pulsed electromagnetic energy and ultrasound were plausible causes in at least some cases. A CIA assessment made public last month however determined that the majority of the thousand possible cases reported were most likely not the result of a global campaign by a foreign power, while in some two dozen incidents the cause could not be explained. Rubin did not speculate over the cause, but said that the syndrome was having a potentially serious effect on US diplomacy. “It is getting harder when we recruit people,” the AFSA president said. “I’ve had young members of the cohort that’s coming into the foreign service ask me: ‘If I do this, what am I getting into? And is this going to get worse? Is this going to get solved? If I get attacked and if I get injured, who’s gonna be there for me?’ “We’ve got to address that,” Rubin said. Rubin said that care was improving for US officials who have been affected, but that the AFSA was still encountering bureaucratic resistance. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next couple of hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The governor of Nevada announced he is immediately rescinding the state’s mask mandate, joining several other Democratic governors who have recently moved to relax coronavirus-related restrictions. However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention continues to recommend masking in areas of high and substantial coronavirus spread, which accounts for about 99% of all US counties right now. US prices rose by 7.5% in January compared to a year earlier, marking the country’s highest level of inflation in 40 years. A number of economists have said they expect inflation to subside over the coming year, but Democrats fear that the high prices at grocery stores and gas pumps could hurt their chances in the midterm elections this November. Joe Biden delivered a speech on the urgent need to lower US healthcare costs in Culpepper, Virginia. The president noted the US pays more than its peer nations for the same prescription drugs, and he reiterated his administration’s commitment to lowering healthcare costs for American families. “I’ve long said health care should be a right, not a privilege, in this country,” Biden said. The Senate unanimously passed a bill that will end the use of forced arbitration in workplace sexual harassment cases. The bill, which easily passed the House earlier this week, now heads to Biden’s desk for his signature. The White House has already indicated the president supports the bill and plans to sign it. The House oversight committee opened an investigation into potential violations of the Presidential Records Act by Donald Trump, after he retained and destroyed some documents relevant to the Capitol attack inquiry. The House committee investigating Capitol attack has also reportedly found gaps in critical hours on the day of the riot in White House telephone logs, according to the New York Times. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden is scheduled to now meet Democratic members of the Senate judiciary committee at the White House to discuss the upcoming supreme court vacancy and the search for a nominee. Justice Stephen Breyer announced late last month that he would step down from the court this summer, and Biden has promised to nominate a Black woman to the seat. If confirmed, Biden’s nominee will become the first Black woman to serve on the supreme court. The White House has said that the Democratic senators meeting with Biden will talk to reporters after the discussion wraps up, and they may have some new insights into the president’s search. Stay tuned. Substitute teachers suddenly find themselves on the winning end of a supply-and-demand problem facing schools across the country: Too few full-time teachers, and not enough substitute teachers to cover for them. As the Omicron variant hurtled across the nation, political leaders from the White House to local school boards faced intense pressure to keep open brick-and-mortar schools – and most have. “Let’s put it in perspective: 95%, as high as 98%, of the schools in America are open, functioning and capable of doing the job,” president Joe Biden said at a press conference last month. He urged school districts to use funding to keep schools open. But that reality has left the nation’s public schools scrambling to fill holes created by a lack of available teachers to fill vacancies. And it’s created a cascade of day-to-day disruptions within school buildings as staff chip in to cover for absent colleagues, leaving some assigned duties aside in the process. Read the Guardian’s full report: Dr Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, has expressed skepticism about Democratic-led states’ push to relax mask mandates. “We have always said at the CDC that these policies are gonna be made at the state and local level. And so we stand by that. These are state and local decisions,” Walensky told SiriusXM Radio on Tuesday. “We will also say that our current recommendations have not changed, that we still encourage all students in schools to wear well-fitting masks ... consistently and while indoors.” Walensky emphasized the importance of ensuring students are able to keep attending class in person, given how much educational ground was lost when schools were forced to close their doors because of the pandemic. “Around the country, I know people are really cautiously optimistic as they’re seeing case rates go down, but what I will say is that we still have about 290,000 cases a day and hospitalizations that are higher than they ever were in our Delta peak even,” Walensky said. “And so, right now I don’t think is the moment to start relaxing those restrictions.” On Wednesday, Massachusetts, Illinois, New York and Rhode Island joined California, Connecticut, Delaware, New Jersey and Oregon in lifting mask mandates for some public places. The wave of relaxations comes after months of private meetings among state leaders and political focus groups after the November elections, according to reports. “Now, it’s time to give people their lives back,” Sean Maloney, chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, tweeted in support of New York suspending its indoor mask-or-vaccine mandate. Yet the lifting of rules has not been universally applauded and is coming at a time when the vast majority of the country (99%) is still seeing high transmission of the virus, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Public polls show consistent support for mask mandates and other precautions, and experts say the time to relax precautions is not here yet – and acting prematurely could prolong this wave. “In my view, it’s too soon. I feel like we’re anticipating too much,” said Justin Lessler, a professor of epidemiology at the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health. “We’re being too confident that things are going to keep going the direction that they have been going.” Nevada Governor Steve Sisolak underscored that there will still be some places in the state where masks are required, such as airports, hospitals and long-term care facilities. In schools, masks will no longer be required, but Sisolak emphasized that school districts should work with local health officials to develop protocols for responding to potential outbreaks. “Masks are a great tool that we have at our disposal. I expect going forward to still see Nevadans and visitors occasionally utilizing masks when they are out in public,” Sisolak said. The governor also reminded his constituents to continue abiding by the mask policies implemented by individual businesses and to respect the decisions of others who may feel more comfortable wearing masks. “I hope that in this moment, and as we move forward, we can remember and continue to lead with kindness and to treat our fellow Nevadans and visitors how we would like to be treated,” Sisolak said. “I want kindness to be just as contagious as Covid is.” The governor of Nevada, Steve Sisolak, has become the latest Democratic governor to announce that he is relaxing coronavirus-related restrictions in his state. Delivering an update on Nevada’s coronavirus response today, Sisolak said that the state’s mask mandate would be rescinded effective immediately. Sisolak pointed to the state’s falling coronavirus case rate and expanded access to tests to justify ending the requirement to wear masks in public spaces, including schools. “Given all of these updates and the tools we have, now is the appropriate time for me to announce that Nevada will rescind our mask mandate, effective immediately,” Sisolak said. Sisolak’s announcement comes one day after the governor of New York, Kathy Hochul, said she would allow the state’s indoor mask requirement to lapse. Several other Democratic governors also announced plans earlier this week to relax mask mandates in schools. However, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Dr Rochelle Walensky, said yesterday that the agency still recommends masking in areas of high or substantial coronavirus spread. According to CDC data, about 99% of US counties currently qualify as areas of high or substantial spread. Before leaving Culpepper, Virginia, Joe Biden sat down with NBC News anchor Lester Holt for an interview, which is set to air during the network’s Super Bowl pregame show on Sunday. Portions of the president’s interview are also expected to be shown on NBC Nightly News tonight and tomorrow night. “Taking place in Virginia, this marks President Biden’s first sit-down interview of 2022 and his first since marking one year in office,” NBC said in its announcement of the interview. The Federal Reserve has signaled that it intends to raise interest rates at its meeting in March in an effort to dampen spending and bring down prices, as the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported US inflation has hit a 40-year high. In a note to investors, Oxford Economics argues the latest consumer price index (CPI) news was likely to mean rate rises in the months ahead. “The Fed sees its top priority as taming inflation. These strong price data raise the prospect of the Fed starting its tightening cycle with a 50bps [basis points] rate hike at its March policy meeting, followed by consecutive rate hikes at the subsequent meetings,” it wrote. The House oversight committee on Thursday opened an investigation into potential violations of the Presidential Records Act by Donald Trump, after he retained and destroyed some records relevant to the Capitol attack inquiry. The panel asked the National Archives to turn over communications with the former president about missing and destroyed records, as well as a description of materials in boxes retrieved from Trump’s residence in Mar-a-Lago last month. The House committee investigating Capitol attack committee has also reportedly found gaps in critical hours on the day of the riot in White House telephone logs, according to the New York Times. Although investigators know Trump was making calls at those times, there are only sparse records of calls in the official logs. Trump was known to regularly use cellphones to communicate, and investigators say they do not have evidence that official phone records were interfered with. The boxes retrieved from Trump contained documents that had been requested by the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack and what the Archives believed were classified materials, according to a source familiar with the matter. Joe Biden’s event on lowering healthcare costs has now concluded. Here’s where the day stands so far: US prices rose by 7.5% in January compared to a year earlier, marking the country’s highest level of inflation in 40 years. A number of economists have said they expect inflation to subside over the coming year, but Democrats fear that the high prices at grocery stores and gas pumps could hurt their chances in the midterm elections this November. Joe Biden delivered a speech on the urgent need to lower US healthcare costs in Culpepper, Virginia. The president noted the US pays more than its peer nations for the same prescription drugs, and he reiterated his administration’s commitment to lowering healthcare costs for American families. “I’ve long said health care should be a right, not a privilege, in this country,” Biden said. The Senate unanimously passed a bill that will end the use of forced arbitration in workplace sexual harassment cases. The bill, which easily passed the House earlier this week, now heads to Biden’s desk for his signature. The White House has already indicated the president supports the bill and plans to sign it. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. In his remarks on the need to lower prescription drug costs, Joe Biden also nodded to the latest report on US inflation, which showed that prices increased by 7.5% between January 2021 and January 2022. “Inflation is up,” Biden said. “But the fact is that, if we’re able to do the things I’m talking about here, it will bring down the costs for average families.” The president once again pointed to provisions in the Build Back Better Act, which has stalled in the Senate, that would help families deal with the costs of childcare and healthcare. However, Biden acknowledged that the costs of gas and food have become particularly burdensome for American families in the past year, as prices continue to rise. “I know food prices are up. We’re working to bring them down,” Biden said. “I’m going to work like the devil to bring gas prices down.” Taking the stage in Culpepper, Virginia, Joe Biden emphasized the need to lower the price of prescription drugs to help American families’ struggling under the weight of healthcare costs. “I’ve long said health care should be a right, not a privilege, in this country,” the president said at Germanna Community College. “Diabetes, Alzheimer’s, cancer — they’re not partisan issues, they’re not Democrat or Republican. This is about whether or not you and your loved ones can afford the health care you need and the medicines you need to stay healthy.” The president argued that his Build Back Better agenda would help to lower the cost of prescription drugs and give families more financial breathing room. Democrats’ Build Back Better Act has stalled in the Senate because of opposition from Joe Manchin, but the president expressed optimism that his party will be able to enact some version of the legislation. “Now we just have to get it through the United States Senate,” Biden said. “And we’re close.” Joe Biden was introduced by two Americans who have been deeply impacted by the high cost of prescription drugs, Shannon Davis and her 12-year-old son Joshua. Shannon explained that, even though her family has health insurance, they spend between $6,000 and $7,000 a year on insulin for Joshua and his father, who both suffer from Type 1 diabetes. Shannon said they often stretch their supply of insulin by draining every last drop of a vial or using expired medication, even though that is not recommended. She noted that capping the cost of insulin at $35 a month, as many Democrats have called for, would be “life-changing not only for our family but for the millions of families impacted by diabetes”. Joshua then took the stage to explain how he has relied on insulin since he was 11 months old, when he was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes. “I’m thankful that insulin was invented because because it is my life support,” Joshua said. “I don’t have a choice whether or not to use it.” Health and human services secretary Xavier Becerra spoke at Germanna Community College in Culpeper, Virginia, before Joe Biden took the stage for the event. Becerra lamented the unreasonable costs of healthcare in the US, noting that each American spends an average of about $1,500 on prescription drugs each year. The cabinet secretary said the rising prices of prescription drugs have forced families to choose between their health and other vital necessities like housing or food. “We pay more than any comparable nation for life-saving medications,” Becerra said. “Price-gouging means Americans face impossible choices: refill your gas tank or refill your prescription medication.” Meanwhile, Joe Biden has arrived at Germanna Community College in Culpeper, Virginia, where he will soon deliver remarks on his administration’s efforts to lower Americans’ healthcare costs. In his remarks, Biden may touch on the latest inflation report, which showed that US prices increased by 7.5% between January 2021 and January 2022. The president and his team have previously said Democrats’ Build Back Better Act will help families deal with rising prices by lowering healthcare and childcare costs, but that legislation has stalled in the Senate. Biden’s remarks are scheduled to begin at any moment, so stay tuned. Senators held a celebratory press conference after the upper chamber unanimously passed a bill to end forced arbitration in workplace sexual harassment cases. One of the guests of honor at the press conference was Gretchen Carlson, the former Fox News journalist who sued the network’s former chairman, Roger Ailes, for sexual harassment. Carlson’s lawsuit was one of several high-profile cases that kickstarted the #MeToo movement, which brought renewed attention to the prevalence of sexual violence. Carlson thanked the senators for working to ensure a safer workplace for millions of Americans, saying she is “incredibly bullish” about the road ahead for the movement against sexual violence. “Marching in the streets can inspire us. Editorials can open our minds. Hashtags can galvanize, but legislation is the only thing that lasts,” Carlson said. “On behalf of all American workers, thank you so much.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer also expressed gratitude to Carlson for being a voice for change on this issue. “We wouldn’t be here without you,” Schumer said. “You started it, you had courage.” Joe Biden is expected to swiftly sign the bill ending forced arbitration in workplace sexual harassment cases once it reaches his desk, as the White House has already indicated he supports the proposal. “This bipartisan, bicameral legislation empowers survivors of sexual assault and sexual harassment by giving them a choice to go to court instead of being forced into arbitration,” the White House said in a statement of administration policy last week. “This legislation advances efforts to prevent and address sexual harassment and sexual assault, strengthen rights, protect victims, and promote access to justice. The Administration is committed to eliminating sexual harassment and assault, and looks forward to working with the Congress on the Ending Forced Arbitration of Sexual Assault and Sexual Harassment Act as it proceeds through the legislative process.” The Senate has passed a bill aimed at reforming how private companies handle accusations of sexual harassment or sexual assault by ending the use of forced arbitration. The bill passed the Senate by voice vote, meaning no member objected to the proposal, and it will now go to the desk of Joe Biden for his signature. The bill has been crafted through four year of bipartisan negotiations, and it represents Congress’ most concrete response yet to the #MeToo movement against sexual violence. Politico reports: The legislation’s four-year-long path to likely enactment highlights the winding road many bills take before being signed into law, despite the sense of urgency that both parties often use to jolt bills toward passage. While the Senate last year pulled together a bipartisan infrastructure package in a matter of months and in 2020 crafted a coronavirus relief package in the span of days, the chamber’s norm is closer to the grinding path that the #MeToo legislation has traveled over the past several years. The Gillibrand-Graham bill would give sexual harassment and assault victims the option to take their claims to court, as opposed to going through forced arbitration, a mediation between alleged victims and perpetrators that takes place outside of the traditional judicial system. The House easily passed the bill earlier this week, and Biden is expected to quickly sign the legislation once it reaches his desk. Meanwhile, congressional Republicans are blaming the sharp increase in US prices over the past year on Joe Biden’s economic policies. “Yet again, the data confirm what working families already know painfully well: rampant inflation and soaring prices are crushing the American people.,” Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell said in a floor speech this morning. “This is not about financial inconvenience for wealthy people who can afford to stomach it. This is about massive price increases for essential goods that make up a huge share of working families’ budgets.” Biden and other Democrats have noted that inflation has increased around the world as economies have started to recover from the pandemic, but McConnell pointed to a Pew Research Center study showing US prices have gone up at a disproportionately high rate. “The severity of this inflation was directly fueled by the reckless, far-left spending spree that every single Democrat in this chamber voted to ram through at President Biden’s behest last year,” McConnell said, referring to the coronavirus relief package enacted last year. “And we see the results all around us. Families are living with the results every day.” Brian Deese, the director of the White House National Economic Council, argued that provisions in Joe Biden’s Build Back Better agenda would help to lower families’ bills. For example, policies to cut the cost of childcare and enact clean energy tax credits would help average Americans’ budgets, Deese told MSNBC’s Stephanie Ruhle. “These are practical ways to provide people relief. We could do so without increasing the deficit and then as a result not adding to inflationary pressures,” Deese said. Acknowledging the severe impact of rising prices, Deese added, “This inflation challenge is real. We need to address it. We need to provide people relief, and we need Congress to work on that right now.” Joe Biden acknowledged that rising prices in the US are having a significant impact on families’ budgets, even as the American economy more broadly continues to recover from the effect of the coronavirus pandemic. “On higher prices, we have been using every tool at our disposal, and while today is a reminder that Americans’ budgets are being stretched in ways that create real stress at the kitchen table, there are also signs that we will make it through this challenge,” Biden said in a new statement. The president noted that many economists believe inflation will ease substantially by the end of 2022, as some pandemic-related bottlenecks ease and the Federal Reserve enacts interest rate hikes. Biden also pointed to the data on wage growth and declining unemployment claims to argue that Americans are still benefitting from the economic recovery. “That’s a sign of the real progress we’ve made in getting Americans back to work over the last year,” Biden said. “My administration will continue to be all hands on deck to win this fight.” Joe Biden will visit Culpeper, Virginia, today to discuss his administration’s “work to lower health care costs, including prescription drug costs, for American families,” according to his schedule. The president may stop to take questions from reporters as he leaves the White House, giving him an opportunity to address the latest report on inflation. Biden has previously acknowledged how rising prices are hurting American families’ budgets and tempering the impact of recent wage increases. “Average people are getting clobbered by the cost of everything today,” Biden said last Friday. “Gas prices at the pump are up. We’re working to bring them down, but they’re up. Food prices are up. We’re working to bring them down as well.” The president argued his Build Back Better Act, which has stalled in the Senate, would help give families more financial breathing room by lowering the cost of childcare and healthcare. But given Joe Manchin’s alarm over the latest inflation report, it’s unclear what version of the Build Back Better Act, if any, can make it through the Senate. Joe Manchin, the Democratic senator who killed the Build Back Better Act because of his opposition to the cost of the spending package, argued the latest inflation report sent an ominous message to lawmakers. “Inflation taxes are draining the hard-earned wages of every American, and it’s causing real and severe economic pain that can no longer be ignored,” Manchin said in a new statement. “As inflation and our $30 trillion in national debt continue a historic climb, only in Washington, DC do people seem to think that spending trillions more of taxpayers’ money will cure our problems, let alone inflation.” Although Manchin does not mention the Build Back Better Act specifically in the statement, he has previously linked his opposition to the $1.75tn bill to concerns over the growing federal debt and its impact on rising prices. “Now, more than ever, we must remember it is not our money, it’s the American people’s money. It is not our economy, it’s their economy,” Manchin said. “We all have a responsibly to do all that is possible to roll back inflation and manage our debts because the longer we or the Federal Reserve waits to act, the more economic pain will be caused.” The statement will likely cause some concern among Democratic leaders, who are trying to bring Manchin back to the negotiating table to pass a new version of the Build Back Better Act. Rising prices have battered Joe Biden’s approval ratings even as the jobs market has roared back from its pandemic slump. The US economy grew at 5.5% last year, the strongest growth rate since 1984, and more than 1.6m new jobs have been added in the last three months. But with gas prices, food and housing prices still rising, just 37% of Americans approve of how he is handling the economy, according to a poll conducted by Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research. On Wednesday ahead of the latest CPI release, the White House warned the latest consumer prices snapshot could be high. “We expect a high yearly inflation reading in tomorrow’s data,” said Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary. “Above 7%, as I think some are predicting, would not be a surprise.” “What we’re looking at is recent trends … the inflationary increases are decreasing month to month,” Psaki said. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported this morning that US prices increased by 7.5% in January from a year ago, marking the country’s highest level of inflation in 40 years. The Guardian’s Dominic Rushe reports: The rise in the consumer price index (CPI) survey – which measures the costs of a wide variety of goods – was the largest since February 1982. CPI rose 0.6% from December, higher than expected. Inflation in America has been driven higher by soaring demand and a lack of supply caused by Covid-19’s global impact on trade. Price rises for food, electricity, and shelter were the largest contributors to the increase. The food index rose 0.9% in January following a 0.5% increase in December. The energy index also increased 0.9% over the month. Democrats fear that Americans’ frustration with higher prices could weaken their chances in the midterm elections this November, potentially giving Republicans the opportunity to take control of the House and the Senate. Joe Biden has acknowledged families’ concerns about inflation, and he has promised that Democrats’ Build Back Better Act will help Americans deal with the cost of childcare and healthcare. But as of now, the Build Back Better Act is stalled in the Senate, and it’s unclear when Democrats may reach a deal on the spending package. Biden will hold an event later today on lowering healthcare costs, and he may be asked about the latest inflation report, so stay tuned.The Lord of the Rings and Get Back director, Peter Jackson, has topped the Forbes magazine rich list as the highest paid entertainer of 2021. Jackson made US$580m (A$809m, £428m) last year, primarily through the sale of part of his visual effects business Weta Digital to Unity Software, for $1.6bn. Forbes estimates Jackson personally made about $600m in cash and $375m in stock from the deal, making him the third person in history to become a billionaire from making films, after Steven Spielberg and George Lucas. The top 10 entertainers on the list are all male, with only three women making the top 20. The musicians Bob Dylan, Paul Simon and Bruce Springsteen all made the top 10 from selling their back catalogues, with the latter coming in at No 2 after selling his music to Sony Music for an estimated $500m. South Park’s creators, Trey Parker and Matt Stone, came in at No 6 with $210m, having signed a six-year $900m deal with Paramount+ to make several films. The musicians Kanye West, Jay-Z and the actor Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson also made the top 10 – from films and music sales but also from lucrative commercial deals selling sneakers, champagne and tequila, respectively. Reese Witherspoon was the top-earning woman last year at No 12, having made $115m through her production company Hello Sunshine, which focuses on female-led stories, and a reported $20m payday for her role in Apple TV’s drama The Morning Show. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning Television features heavily, with the creator of Two and a Half Men and The Big Bang Theory, Chuck Lorre, ranking 13th with $100m; Law &amp; Order’s creator, Dick Wolf, coming in at 15th with $86m; Friends co-creators Kevin Bright, Marta Kauffman and David Crane making $82m to jointly rank 17th; and the Bridgerton producer and Grey’s Anatomy creator, Shonda Rimes, following in 18th spot with $81m. Other musical acts that made the list include the Red Hot Chili Peppers, in at No 11 after selling their back catalogue to the music investment fund Hipgnosis; Mötley Crüe, who ranked 22nd with $72m after selling nine of their albums to the music rights holder BMG; and the Beach Boys, with $64m after they sold their music to the entertainment executive Irving Azoff. “There has never been a better time to be a sellout – especially if you’re a superstar holding the rights to decades of hits,” wrote Forbes’ Lysette Voytko.Leaders of the Ottawa “Freedom Convoy” protest have warned fellow protesters that the risk of violence is growing, amid speculation the police may move to disperse the nearly two-week occupation of Canada’s capital. Daily “intelligence reports” compiled by protest leaders and seen by the Guardian – as well as public comments by the organisers – have grown increasingly alarmist in recent days. While the reports include misinformation, and should not be taken as credible intelligence, they nevertheless offer an insight on the occupiers’ conspiratorial mindset. Thursday’s report warns that “the Office of the Prime Minister (PMO) has directed that Freedom Convoy 2022 be dispersed by not [sic] later that [sic] Saturday, 12 February 2022.” In Canada, politicians cannot direct police operations, but the increasing paranoia of the protesters present a worrying change in tone. The reports are prepared by Tom Quiggin, a private security consultant who has previously been accused of spreading misinformation, particularly by overplaying the threat of terrorism posed by Canada’s Muslim community. Roughly 1,000 people have blockaded downtown Ottawa since late January, demanding an end to all Covid vaccine mandates. Some are calling for Justin Trudeau to step down as prime minister or be removed from office. They say their occupation will continue until their demands are met, and other protesters have since blocked the international Ambassador Bridge between Detroit and Windsor, Ontario, and two smaller border crossings. It is not clear how widely these reports are shared, but they accurately reflect the public talking points of the lead organizers. Police near the Ambassador Bridge have begun receiving additional manpower, Drew Dilkens, mayor of Windsor, told CNN on Thursday, and the city was seeking an injunction from Ontario superior court to have the protesters removed. “[If] the protesters don’t leave, there will have to be a path forward. If that means physically removing them, that means physically removing them, and we’re prepared to do that,” Dilkens said. However he later added he was striving to resolve the issue peacefully and ensure nobody was hurt. “It may be gratifying for someone to see the forced removal of the demonstrators, [but] such action may inflame the situation and certainly cause more folks to come here and add to the protest, and we don’t want to risk additional conflict,” Dilkens said. General Motors Co and Chrysler-parent Stellantis said on Thursday they had to cancel or reduce shifts because of parts shortages, adding to earlier cuts announced by Ford and Toyota. Toyota said it was suspending production until Saturday at plants in Ontario and Kentucky. The protesters’ reports portray the city’s police chief, Peter Sloly, as an antagonist, saying that he “has played a role in creating a political space where violence can occur”. Earlier this week Tom Marazzo, a protest leader who is described as a “police liaison”, said that “the statements and actions by the Chief of Police have deliberately set the conditions for potential violence against the peaceful protesters.” The protesters insist that they are entirely peaceful, but they have resisted attempts to clear them from downtown and stop them resupplying with diesel. Local residents complain that life in the city has been made intolerable by the occupiers’ blaring truck horns and nightly fireworks. “Our city is under siege,” said Councillor Diane Deans, who described the protests as a “nationwide insurrection”. Ottawa police say they have made 23 arrests since the occupation began, which includes resistant arrest and breach of probation – another 85 criminal investigations are ongoing. Efforts to clear the occupiers have been complicated by their extensive physical infrastructure – including wooden shelters and hundreds of trucks – and the presence of children in about 100 vehicles, police say. Officers have also warned that some protesters are believed to have firearms. “We’ve been worried about how tooled up these guys are,” said a source who has been part of the city’s emergency response. The protest leaders’ reports and public comments make it clear that the occupiers will resist police attempts to move them. In a video posted online, one of the organizers told protesters to lock themselves in their trucks if the police move in. “Guys, lock that door. Crawl into that bunk. But before you do that, grab that horn switch and don’t let go let that fucking horn go, no matter what time it is, and let it roll as long as possible until they’re busting your fucking windows down,” said Chris Barber. In one report, Quiggin claims that “police forces are increasingly uneasy with their role” echoing a view among protesters that – unlike the upper echelons of the Ottawa police and Royal Canadian Mounted Police – frontline officers are sympathetic to their cause. In contrast, the report accuses Sloly and other senior officers of being aligned with “corporatist power structures”. That mentality may embolden the protesters to stand their ground. “There has been a pervasive narrative in this movement that any violence is not the fault of the protesters, but instead instigated by ‘Antifa’ … or orchestrated by the deep state,” said Stephanie Carvin, a Carleton University professor and former intelligence analyst. “In my view, this is entirely consistent with that narrative.” Quiggin’s reports also reveal the intensely conspiratorial nature of the occupation. Protesters have made constant allusions to a conspiracy theory which holds that the World Economic Forum is seeking to use the Covid pandemic to stage a “Great Reset”, which would purportedly create a “Marxian-inspired totalitarian system”. Many proponents of this conspiracy theory blame the Forum for creating Covid-19 itself. On Thursday, Quiggin’s daily intelligence report incuded a list of Canadian officials who it falsely claimed are members of the World Economic Forum, including Trudeau, several members of his cabinet, two Conservative members of parliament and a host of other government and civil society officials. (Politicians cannot be members of the organisation whose partners are all businesses.) One MP on the list told the Guardian that in recent days they had received a significant increase and worrying rise in harassment and abuse mentioning the World Economic Forum. The Ottawa police force and Royal Canadian Mounted Police did not respond to requests for comment.As Cressida Dick confirmed she will be leaving Scotland Yard in the coming weeks, those affected by the controversies during her tenure welcomed her resignation. “The first time I dealt with Cressida Dick was in 2012 and since then all she has done in relation to my family is just delay, obstruct and disappoint on a huge level,” said Alastair Morgan, who has spent decades campaigning for justice for his murdered brother. The private detective Daniel Morgan was killed with an axe in a pub car park in Sydenham, south-east London, in 1987. The Met was described as “institutionally corrupt” and Dick was personally censured for obstruction by an independent inquiry. Morgan continued: “Although I think it is a shame that we are seeing another commissioner disappear under a cloud of smoke, it is necessary. My only anxiety now is who is going to replace her and face the massive job in front of them of rebuilding confidence in the Met.” Dick has also faced criticism of failure to act on complaints of institutional sexism and misogyny within the Met’s ranks. When Sarah Everard’s killer, a serving Met officer, was sentenced to a whole-life term in September 2021, the Met leadership was mocked for saying that women who were worried about an officer approaching them could wave down a bus. Dick pledged to “do all I can to improve women’s safety and reduce the fear of violence”, but she was also criticised for her handling of a vigil held for Everard which resulted in clashes and arrests. Patsy Stevenson, who was detained, said she was pleased Dick had stepped down. She added, however: “We need to focus as well on this not being a token gesture. This does not fix anything, and I just hope that whoever is in charge next understands that radical change needs to be implemented to fix the systemic issues within the Met.” Campaign group Reclaim These Streets, which is bringing a legal challenge against the force over its handling of the vigil, simply tweeted: “Good riddance.” Meanwhile, the feminist group Sisters Uncut said: “Cressida Dick is resigning but she is leaving behind an institution that is rotten to the core.” Other scandals had included the handling of the murders of sisters Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman in a north London park in June 2020. Two PCs who were stationed at the crime scene were jailed for taking photographs of their bodies and sharing them with friends and colleagues on WhatsApp. The force’s apologies were angrily rejected by their family. In her victim impact statement their mother, Mina Smallman, said: “Those police officers felt so safe, so untouchable, that they felt they would take photographs with our murdered daughters.” She also believed racism was a factor in the lack of initial search by the force when the women were reported missing. It also emerged that a Met officer disciplined after an inquiry into misogynistic and racist messages was promoted. Messages about hitting and raping women were shared by up to 19 officers based mainly at Charing Cross police station. Harriet Wistrich, director of the Centre for Women’s Justice charity, said: “There were far too many stories of officers accused of violence and abuse still in their jobs, and of whistleblowers victimised instead of listened to.” Wistrich said Dick “rose to the top of the Met, only to preside over an institution where misogynists, racists and homophobes can hold on to their jobs when they are meant to be tackling crime”. She added: “The problem with Cressida as the first female to rise to the top of the most difficult job in policing is that in order to do so she had to put loyalty to her officers above all else. “Any future leader of the Met must be able to listen to victims and be prepared to tackle the culture of misogyny and racism that pervades the underbelly of Met policing.” Ricky Waumsley, whose partner Daniel Whitworth was murdered by serial killer Stephen Port, also welcomed Dick’s resignation. He said: “When I was let down by the Met police because of their blatant homophobia towards the four victims that Stephen Port killed, and the inquest concluded that the Met failures ‘probably’ contributed to their deaths, I held Cressida accountable for these failures and made a statement that she should ‘resign with immediate effect’, so I am glad.” The former chief crown prosecutor for north-west England Nazir Afzal said that he took “no joy” in calling for Dick to resign on several occasions. He tweeted: “She was an excellent investigator. But she became a human shield for the Govt. The problems in policing are bigger than one person”.Australia’s 2030 and 2050 targets, as pledged at the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference (Cop26), lean heavily on private sector ingenuity to reduce Australia’s carbon footprint. The good news is that some industries are already moving independently towards a more sustainable future. Many of the real-world day-to-day impacts on individuals may be overwhelmingly positive – where they’re noticed at all. The cars we drive are a case in point. “From Toyota’s perspective, we’re still engaging (with stakeholders) but not waiting for specific mandates to be introduced, we’re progressively introducing more low and zero emissions products that continue to meet the needs of our customers,” says Matt MacLeod, manager, future technologies and mobility, with Toyota Australia. Toyota is committed to being part of the solution. The world’s biggest-selling auto brand has been investing heavily in greener technology since before the launch of the Prius into the Japanese market in 1997. The company persevered with the first mass-produced hybrid electric car for four years, and about 75,000 global sales, before it started to make a profit on each Prius sold. Across the world, Toyota customers choosing hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) over internal-combustion-only models in the years since have saved an estimated more than 120m tonnes of CO2. Since 1995, investment in greener tech has been a key part of Toyota’s global Six Challenges blueprint to reach net zero by 2050. Stunning progress has been made, with widespread acceptance across the brand’s HEV and plug-in hybrid (PHEV) ranges, and the announcement of a range of battery electric vehicles (BEVs), such as the marque’s forthcoming bZ4X, as well as hydrogen fuel cell models. Several examples of the second-generation Mirai, Toyota’s hydrogen-powered electric car, are already being driven on Australian roads by organisations such as the CSIRO, with more deliveries pending. Toyota provides a range of low- and zero-emission options to give buyers the widest range of choices – and get the most people into a more sustainable car of any type. Globally, Toyota has also pledged to develop commercial trucks, including semitrailers, that run on fuel cell tech, and “completely eliminate all CO2 emissions throughout the entire vehicle life cycle” for all its cars. Unlike some automakers, Toyota hasn’t flagged a move to BEV-only sales over the next decade. It prefers, MacLeod says, to provide a range of low- and zero-emission options to give buyers the widest range of choices – and get the most people into a more sustainable car of any type. “The second-generation Mirai arrived in April 2021,” MacLeod says. “The bZ4X will be here in the near future. So regardless of what the targets are, Toyota’s got its own philosophy on our contribution, and on our impact on the environment.” In a nutshell, MacLeod describes the transition to electrification on our roads as seamless: a gradual shift, wherein emissions fall, mileage leaps off the charts (a HEV Camry can conquer more than 1,000km* between top-ups), and choices open up. Empowering industrial innovation to reduce Australia’s footprint means any transition – as a consumer – should be smooth, with individuals making the jump to cleaner power at their own discretion. “From Toyota’s perspective, we’re not in a position of telling people what cars they’re going to drive, or what kind of powertrain they’re going to use – the market’s going to decide that,” MacLeod says. “There’s now basically a minimal price difference between a full internal combustion engine and, say, a hybrid – and no difference in lifestyle, or in function – and the hybrid is essentially more cost-effective.” As a result, customers are already gravitating towards greener cars. Last year, the lion’s share of all Corolla, Camry and RAV4s sold – some of Australia’s most popular cars – were electrified. What’s the bottom line? Big business is already set to meet and beat Australia’s commitments – mandated or not. Discover how Toyota is working towards a cleaner tomorrow, today. *Distance is approximate and may vary depending on driving conditions and style, vehicle condition, load and options and accessories.Scott Morrison has moved to clarify his apology to Brittany Higgins following concerns it could affect the trial of the man charged with her alleged rape, stating it was “by no means a reflection on the matters before a court”. The prime minister on Tuesday apologised in parliament to Higgins for the “terrible things that took place” during her time working in Canberra. That prompted a rebuke from Warwick Korn, the lawyer representing the man accused of her rape, Bruce Lehrmann. Korn told News Corp Australia the prime minister’s comments could reduce the chances of Lehrmann having a fair jury trial. “In light of the complexity, difficulty and importance of the task before any jury already, the behaviour of our prime minister and others in this past 24 hours truly beggars belief,” he said. Morrison’s office subsequently sought to clarify his comments. A spokesperson said on Friday the apology referred generally to “the many terrible experiences Ms Higgins has detailed during her time working at Parliament House and the treatment that she has described receiving whilst working here. This is by no means a reflection on the matters before a court.” The ACT supreme court has set a tentative trial date for June. Lehrmann is accused of raping Higgins in a parliamentary office in 2019 and faces one charge of sexual intercourse without consent. He denies the charge, saying no form of sexual activity took place, and the trial is expected to last three to four weeks. The ACT supreme court no longer allows judge-alone trials for sexual assault cases, meaning the matter must go before a jury. The jury selection process and judicial directions are generally used to ensure external commentary and pre-trial publicity does not compromise jurors’ ability to act impartially. The ACT’s director of public prosecutions declined to comment.The departure of Cressida Dick as Britain’s most senior police officer is the main story in most of the papers on Friday, although there is some difference in emphasis about whether she deserved her fate. The Guardian led with the line that the Metropolitan police commissioner had to leave because London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, lost confidence in her ability to reform the scandal-hit force. “Met police chief forced out over toxic culture failings”, its main headline reads, reporting that Dick quit when she realised that her plan to tackle a culture of misogyny and racism among the ranks did not pass muster at City Hall. The Times splash headline says “Scramble for new Met chief after Dick quits” and reports that her resignation had “blindsided” the home secretary, Priti Patel, who now has to find a new chief at a time when the force is investigating her boss, Boris Johnson, over the Downing Street parties scandal. An analysis says it was a “dramatic fall for a police officer once widely regarded as the best of her generation”, but who had become engulfed in scandal. The Telegraph’s main story says “Cressida Dick forced out as head of the Met” and chief reporter Robert Mendick also raises the nagging question about what Dick’s resignation might mean for the under-pressure prime minister. “For Mr Johnson, it remains unclear whether the departure of a commissioner who had his full backing when her contract was up for renewal only last year will have devastating consequences for his career,” Mendick writes. Other papers have a different take, typified by the Mail’s splash headline, which is: “Calamity Cressida fired – but what took so long?”. It says she was responsible for “catastrophic blunders” such as failing to root out Sarah Everard’s murderer Wayne Couzens from the ranks that have “wrecked public trust in police”. The Express leads with “Fears grow for Queen as Charles gets Covid”, but it has picture of Dick on its front page and the headline is along the same lines as the Mail’s: “Scandal hit Yard chief Cressida Dick FINALLY quits”. The i goes with the line that Dick had announced her intention to stay in the post earlier on Thursday, only to later realise that Khan was not going to back her. “Defiant Met chief forced out of Yard”. The Metro leads with “Cressida ditched” while the Yorkshire Post has the main headline “Dick quits as Metropolitan police chief”. The Mirror leads on “Queen Covid scare” but has a small story on its front and the headline “Top cop Dick forced out”. Ditto the Sun, which leads on a royal line but says in a secondary story that the Met chief has paid the price for a series of damaging stories. “Dick axed for scandal at Met”, it says. The FT’s main front-page picture is of the outgoing police chief and the headline “Dick forced to quit after report into sexism and racism at Met”. But its main story is “Johnson looks for investment ‘big bang’ with regulatory deal”.The wildly popular online puzzle Wordle has been credited with keeping people across the world sane amid the ravages of the pandemic. But now it has been hailed as a potential life saver, by providing the clue that helped rescue an 80-year-old woman from a 20-hour home invasion hostage ordeal. Denyse Holt, a retired teacher, found herself locked in her basement in her home in Illinois after being woken up by a naked, knife-wielding intruder in the middle of the night. After the shivering man got into her bed, he threatened to “cut her” if she screamed before backing down from his threats and asking her to help warm him up in the bath. Eventually, the man locked her in her basement without food or medication, leaving Holt fearing for her life. She told the Washington Post that she tried to rally herself and did exercises to keep herself going. She thought to herself: “I don’t want to die like this, and I don’t want my kids to hear that their mother was murdered.” However, help was at hand, partly thanks to her enthusiasm for Wordle, the viral word game in which players are given six guesses to work out a five-letter word. Thousands of miles away on the west coast the oldest of her two daughters noticed that her mother had not texted over her Wordle score as she usually did each day. “I didn’t send my older daughter a Wordle in the morning. And that was disconcerting to her,” Holt told Chicago’s WBBM. When the concerned siblings tried to reach their mother on her landline only to be told it was disconnected, they enlisted the help of a neighbour. He found no answer at the door despite Holt’s car still being in the drive and called the police. When they went round they heard her shouting “I’m here! I’m here! I’m here in the basement!” and freed her. They also arrested a 32-year-old man in an upstairs bedroom. They believed he had experienced a mental health crisis.Religious groups have expressed disappointment at the federal government’s decision to shelve controversial religious discrimination laws, claiming parliament lost sight of the original intent of the legislation. Groups such as the Australian National Imams Council (ANIC) have urged the government to return their focus to the initial purpose of the bill, which was to protect religious minorities. ANIC spokesperson Bilal Rauf told Guardian Australia it was “disappointing” to see the bill delayed, saying there was a “significant gap” in protective laws. “I think the primary focus of this bill was always those protective provisions to bring it in line with the protections based on other attributes – that was always the primary provision and there was no dispute or question about those proposed provisions,” he said. “The rest was secondary, and sadly the secondary provisions became the subject of debate. “It’s disappointing that it has been shelved, and we hope that it’s something that will quickly be revived and pursued.” Rauf said the ANIC supported the bill because there were currently little to no protections for people based on religion. He said it would give recourse for potential instances of discrimination, such as if a Muslim woman was fired for wearing the veil, or a Muslim man denied time to attend the obligatory Friday prayers. “If a person said ‘I’ve got to go and do something connected with my race or sexual preference or carer responsibility’, the employer has to be very careful because they can be pursued for discrimination. But if it’s a religious activity, the employer can do what they want. “And this really is the first time that there has been any consideration. So that’s a welcome shift, that there’s an acknowledgment that we do need something in circumstances where, for a long time, it wasn’t even an issue in the minds of many.” Rauf also emphasised the importance of the vilification amendments that Labor proposed, mentioning that there was also no recourse for people who faced hate speech rooted in religious belief. “There are already some laws there which protect against vilification based on other attributes. It’s just as important to protect against hate speech based on a person’s religious identity. “We know from direct experience of people in the community that there are many who have had to deal with very acerbic comments based on them wearing the hijab or having a beard or something relating to their religious identity.” Abdullah Khan, the president at the Islamic Schools Association of Australia, told the Guardian that Islamic schools generally supported the bill as a means of protection. “These protections are critical,” he said. “Something that is missing is the protection against vilification based on religion. It’s something we wanted to see addressed by the bill, it’s a protection we need.” “The intent of Islamic schools is not based on discriminating against students on any level, and this was not just about Islamic schools but protecting the whole community.” Ravi Singh, chairman of the Australian Sikh Association, said he supported shelving the bill as it stood, but believed religious discrimination laws should have been introduced 20 years ago. He said his community was confused by the process and debate. “It’s frustrating and a little confusing. We did not clearly know what was being protected and who was being discriminated against. It was hard to distinguish in the end who the bill was serving. “Some parts of the community, especially the LGBTQ communities, had some serious concerns, as well as people in religious institutions. So a lot of questions were raised, and it looked as if they hadn’t been thought through properly. “I think it’s better we take a deep breath and reorganise ourselves to find a better solution for all involved.” Singh said measures to address religious discrimination were long overdue. “These protections are especially important for the Sikh and Muslim communities, because we are easily identifiable. Our kids have faced lots of discrimination in schools for their beards and turbans, and I myself have been called all the names under the sun. “Overall it’s a good step. It was needed over 20 years ago.” Peter Wertheim, the co-chief executive of the Executive Council of Australian Jewry, said that the shelving of the bill was “preferable” to it being defeated in the Senate. “Although the shelving of the religious discrimination bill will disappoint many faith communities who have been hoping to draw a line against the incremental erosion of religious rights and freedoms in Australia, the delay is preferable to the prospect of the bill being defeated in the Senate after a divisive debate. “This issue is too important to the future of our country to be held hostage to an arbitrary electoral timetable.” “There are major issues standing in the way of an agreement between the Coalition and Labor on the bill, but only a small number of them, and if more time is needed to arrive at a compromise that most of the country will support, then so be it.”While many in the media saw the National Press Club speeches of Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame as a “call to action, a warning against complacency in an election year”, Sky News Australia’s Andrew Bolt had his usual contrary take. On his Wednesday evening program, the Murdoch columnist described the outpouring of anguish and frustration from the two young women as an “orgy of hate that should shame the press club” and an example of our “sick” political culture. It reminded us of his treatment of another Australian of the Year, Adam Goodes, when he accused the AFL great of being racially divisive for calling out a 13-year-old girl in the crowd who racially vilified him. Bolt couldn’t see past what he characterised as personal and unfair attacks on the prime minister. He even claimed the audience heard “not one serious practical policy from the two speakers”. The Herald Sun columnist jumped to the defence of the prime minister, who he had dismissed only a few days earlier as “a man with the fight beaten out of him”. Tame “went for Morrison’s throat”, Bolt told his Sky viewers, while Higgins threw the PM’s apology “back in his face”. His stablemate Chris Kenny, an associate editor on the Australian, said it was “part of a campaign” to weaponise sexual harassment and abuse as a party-political issue. “There is no doubt they deserve admiration for their public advocacy, their calls for better support and justice for victims of sexual assaults,” Kenny said. “But none of this gives them a free pass from scrutiny or accountability about the highly politicised nature of their media-driven campaigning.” Tame is of course used to being “commodified” by parts of the media, telling the audience she had been “re-victimised, commodified, objectified, sensationalised, delegitimised, gaslit, thrown under the bus by the biased mainstream media”. Last drinks? With an election looming, TV current affairs shows are rolling out their features on the prime minister and his challenger, Albanese. On Monday the ABC’s Four Corners talked to undecided voters about what they thought of Morrison and how he had handled the past three years. In an attempt to be even-handed the program used “two political research companies and a range of community forums to recruit undecided voters”, according to executive producer Sally Neighbour. Next week reporter Sean Nicholls will subject Albanese to the same treatment. Nine’s 60 Minutes took a different approach, sending a cheeky Karl Stefanovic to trot around Scott and Jenny’s Kirribilli House kitchen, margarita in hand, for a “behind the scenes” look as “Scott Morrison fights back”. “Can Jenny Morrison save the election?” the promo asks. Viewers are also in line for something special with the PM’s ukulele rendition of the 1977 hit April in the Sun in Cuba. We are yet to learn whether the uke was a souvenir from Morrison’s ill-fated January 2020 in the sun in Hawaii. How it started … A day earlier, Laura Tingle, ABC 7.30’s political editor, reminded everyone of where the feminist insurgency being played out in the media began, with a shout-out to Four Corners reporter Louise Milligan, whose Inside the Canberra Bubble story was instrumental in persuading Higgins to speak to news.com.au political editor Samantha Maiden. Maiden’s story is up for scoop of the year at the 66th Walkley Awards on 25 February, a gala dinner in Sydney that has been rescheduled twice due to Covid. Lisa Wilkinson and Ten’s Project team, who did the first television interview with Higgins, have been nominated in the public service journalism category for a series of three stories. Interestingly, the three journalists are competing against each other in another category, coverage of a major news event or issue. Maiden for the Higgins story, Milligan for Inside the Canberra Bubble and Tingle (and James Elton) for her 7.30 coverage. Sales away With Leigh Sales stepping down from 7.30 in late June after the federal election, speculation is rife about who will replace her. Sales has anchored the key show for 12 years and her decision to walk away was a well kept secret at Aunty until she revealed it at the end of the show. “There’s nothing wrong, other than I just feel a strong sense of it being time to pass the baton to the next runner in the race and to take a break,” a teary Sales said. “The end of an election cycle feels like a good time to move on to something new at the ABC. “I’ve tried to shut down wafflers, call out bullshit, hold powerful people to account, expose lies, incompetence and exaggeration in all political parties and on all issues, and present facts even when they’re unpopular or inconvenient. I have truly tried my absolute hardest on behalf of you at home to do that every single time I’ve sat at the desk.” There are a several moving parts at ABC news at the moment. The job of news director is yet to be filled after the departure of Gaven Morris, Fran Kelly hasn’t revealed what she will do now she’s out of RN Breakfast, and now Sales has to find a suitable berth too. How many spare roles are there for senior ABC journalists? Although Sales said she was staying with Aunty, it wouldn’t be a stretch to imagine her taking over from Channel Nine political editor Chris Uhlmann. Uhlmann, Nine’s political editor, has said he’ll retire at the end of the year. Red top Two of the Australian’s “exclusive” stories this week were questionable, but for entirely different reasons. Reporters from the Age and the Guardian say there was a midnight embargo on a report from the Climate Council that was published several hours earlier at 6.34pm by the Australian. The Australian’s bureau chief, Joe Kelly, told Weekly Beast the report by Sarah Ison “was published ahead of embargo by accident”. He didn’t say how it ended up with a big red exclusive tag on top of the story though. Breaking … from 1991 It took the Australian’s Sharri Markson more than 30 years to dig up some dirt on the leader of the opposition, Anthony Albanese, but she is nothing if not tenacious. The investigations editor’s “exclusive” story on page one of the Oz on Thursday was about Albo’s dark past as a “radical leftie”. His crime was to argue for an inheritance tax at a Labor conference in Tasmania – five years before he even entered parliament as an MP. At the time he was assistant general secretary of NSW Labor, having graduated from activist youth, a period now referred to as the “Hot Albo” era. (The Oz even used the famous “Hot Albo” photo to illustrate the article.) The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, whose office might have been the source of the ancient speech, was at hand for the killer quote. “Mr Albanese posed a ‘significant threat to Australia’s economic future with his socialist ideals and lack of economic experience, having never held a Treasury portfolio’,” the story quoted him as saying. Twitter was fierce, with one chap saying: “Looking forward to your deep dive ‘exclusive’ into what Albo said in primary school too, Sharri”. The wrong guy With Australia’s longest-running drama set to end in June if a new broadcaster isn’t found, the future of Neighbours was a hot topic this week. Even the Victorian opposition leader, Matthew Guy, was prompted into talking about it. Unfortunately Guy got his soapies mixed up, telling reporters he remembers “Alf’s white house” on the show back in the 1980s. Alf Stewart is of course one of the original characters from our other long-running soapie, Home and Away.Ben Roberts-Smith told a fellow soldier he had shot an unarmed and captive Afghan teenager in the head with a pistol, and that killing him was “the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen”, the former comrade has told the federal court. Asked what had happened to a young man “shaking like a leaf” after being taken from a Toyota Hilux found with bomb-making equipment inside, the witness claimed Roberts-Smith replied: “I shot that cunt in the head. [Person 15] told me not to kill anyone on the last job. So I pulled out my 9mm, shot the cunt in the side of the head, blew his brains out. It was the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen.” Giving evidence, the army medic, anonymised in court as Person 16, identified the body of the young Afghan in several pictures shown to him in court. The body was photographed with an AK-47 rifle. Person 16 said the young man was not carrying any weapons when he was taken captive and handcuffed. Roberts-Smith, a recipient of Australia’s highest military honour, the Victoria Cross, is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies all wrongdoing. The court has heard Person 16 and Roberts-Smith served together on an SAS rotation to Afghanistan in 2012. In November that year, on the last operation of that rotation, SAS troops were helicoptered into Fasil, in southern Uruzgan province. Person 16 gave evidence that, manning either side of a road checkpoint, Person 16 and another soldier trained their weapons on a Toyota Hilux ute that approached and waved it to a stop. Person 16 took into custody and handcuffed two of the four men inside the vehicle: an older man with a full beard and a younger man: “I made him out to be late teens … not a fully beard, a bit chubby, and shaking in terror.” “He appeared extremely nervous and trembling uncontrollably.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Neither man was armed, but, according to Person 16, the other soldier on the checkpoint reported he found components for an improvised explosive device inside the vehicle. Both were handcuffed and taken to a nearby compound for tactical questioning. Person 16 handed both prisoners over to Roberts-Smith, he told the court. He did not see the two men again. Person 16 said about 15 minutes after handing over the two men – described as PUCs, ‘persons under constraint’ – to Roberts-Smith, Roberts-Smith said over the troops’ radio “two EKIA”. EKIA is an initialism for “enemy killed in action”. In the days after the mission, Person 16 said he crossed paths with Roberts-Smith in the accommodation lines at the SAS’s Camp Russell within Australia’s Tarin Kot base. He told the court he asked Roberts-Smith: “What happened to that young fella who was shaking like a leaf?” Roberts-Smith allegedly replied: “I shot that cunt in the head. Person 15 told me not to kill anyone on the last job. So I pulled out my 9mm, shot the cunt in the side of the head, blew his brains out. It was the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen.” Person 16 said he could not recall what he said in reply to Roberts-Smith “because I was shocked at what he’d said”. He said he did not report Roberts-Smith’s actions or comments to superiors. “Because there was a code of silence within the regiment with these things occurring, a fear of retribution. It would have been a career-ending move. I would have been ostracised. I also think that my personal safety ... I would have been in danger by making such allegations against some so influential, so I thought I’d just best keep quiet and move on with life.” In court on Friday, Person 16 was shown pictures of a dead Afghan male who he identified as the teenager he had taken into custody and constrained. The body was photographed with an AK-47 variant beside it. Person 16 was asked: “Did the young Afghan that you detained from the Hilux have an AK-47 variant weapon on him?” “No.” In his evidence to the court last year, Roberts-Smith was asked about the alleged killing of the Afghan teenager. He said the account was “baseless”, that he never said those words, and that the event could not have happened, because he never fired his pistol in combat while on deployment in Afghanistan. “I never had to engage with my pistol,” he told the court. Roberts-Smith also rejected assertions that he ever engaged in the practice of using “throw-downs”, a piece of compromising equipment, such as a radio or weapon, carried by soldiers and placed on the bodies of victims as a post-facto justification for their killing. Roberts-Smith has maintained all of his actions in Afghanistan abided with the Australian troops’ rules of engagement, and the Geneva Conventions. The allegation of the murder of the teenager at Fasil was first claimed in the newspapers defence as occurring on 21 October 2012. Australian War Memorial documents show that on that date, Roberts-Smith was leading a reconnaissance patrol in Char-Chineh, an action for which he would receive a commendation for distinguished service. The date of the alleged defence has been amended in the newspapers’ defence to 5 November of the same year. In his opening address to the court, Roberts-Smith’s barrister, Bruce McClintock, said the allegation was “beyond ridiculous … it’s insane”. “It’s the sort of thing that would be said by an ostentatious psychopath … my client is not that.” McClintock told the court that after the Hilux was intercepted, adults within the vehicle were detained, while the adolescent was released. In court on Friday morning, Person 16 was asked about Roberts-Smith’s wider reputation within the SAS. Person 16 said he knew of Roberts-Smith before he was posted to the SAS and said he had a “reputation as being a no-nonsense individual, a pretty straight, hard-hitting individual who didn’t suffer fools”. “He had a formidable reputation.” Person 16 said within the SAS, opinion was divided about Roberts-Smith. “There were two camps: those for and those against. Those against saw him as someone who was belligerent, a bully, would trash and tarnish others’ reputations.” Arthur Moses SC, acting for Roberts-Smith, asked in cross-examination whether Person 16 could confidently identify the body in the photographs he’d been shown as the teenager he had taken into custody. “In time to reflect and ruminate on detaining this young man, the more I think about it, the more I’m confident this was the person that was in the Toyota Hilux.” Challenged by Moses that the later barrack-room conversation with Roberts-Smith about the alleged murder was “something you have imagined”, Person 16 was resolute in his answer. “I am 100% certain beyond any doubt that that conversation took place. That conversation 100% happened, and his reply shocked me to the core, and that’s why I remembered it.” Person 16 sought, and was granted by the judge, a certificate under section 128 of the Evidence Act, protecting him against self-incrimination. He told the court he had spoken with journalist Nick McKenzie in 2018 about events in Afghanistan. McKenzie already knew details of the “Hilux job”, Person 16 said. The soldier said he did not report the meeting to his defence superiors, despite acknowledging he was obliged to by defence rules. The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.US president Joe Biden has warned that “things could go crazy quickly” in Ukraine and again urged American citizens to leave immediately, as the UK’s defence secretary headed to Moscow in the latest round of diplomacy. “American citizens should leave, should leave now,” Biden said in an interview with NBC News. “We’re dealing with one of the largest armies in the world. This is a very different situation and things could go crazy quickly.” On Friday, UK defence secretary Ben Wallace joins foreign secretary Liz Truss in Moscow after she held frosty talks with her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. Lavrov said the meeting was like a conversation of “the mute with the deaf”. Wallace will reportedly tell Sergei Shoigu, the Russian defence minister, that invading Ukraine would be a “lose-lose” situation. The diplomatic manoeuvring came as Russia-Ukraine relations soured further. On Thursday Ukraine’s foreign ministry accused Moscow of showing a “blatant disregard for the rules and principles of international law” by planning missile tests in the Black Sea that Kyiv says will make shipping navigation impossible there and in the Sea of Azov. Russia has just started 10 days of drills with Belarusian forces. In Berlin on Thursday night, Russia and Ukraine said they had failed to reach any breakthrough in a day of related talks with French and German officials aimed at ending an eight-year separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine. It had not been possible to “overcome” Russia and Ukraine’s different interpretations of the 2015 Minsk agreement aimed at ending fighting between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian government forces, said Russian envoy Dmitry Kozak. His Ukrainian counterpart, Andriy Yermak, said both sides agreed to keep talking. “I hope that we will meet again very soon and continue these negotiations. Everyone is determined to achieve a result,” he said. The conflict in the breakaway Donetsk and Luhansk regions, known together as the Donbas, simmers despite a notional ceasefire. Military analysts estimate Moscow has massed more than 135,000 troops on the borders of Ukraine, both in Russia and in Belarus – and some now believe nearly all the necessary elements are in place if Putin wanted to attack. In his interview, Biden reiterated that under no circumstances would he send US troops to Ukraine, even to rescue Americans in case of a Russian invasion. “That’s a world war. When Americans and Russians start shooting one another, we’re in a very different world,” he said. “What I’m hoping is that if [Russian president Vladimir Putin] is foolish enough to go in, he’s smart enough not to in fact do anything that would negatively impact American citizens.” During a visit to Nato’s headquarters on Thursday, Boris Johnson said the Ukraine crisis had entered “the most dangerous moment” as Russian forces continued their military buildup on the borders of its southern neighbour. The UK prime minister said “our intelligence remains grim” but told reporters in Brussels that he didn’t think a decision has yet been taken by Putin to order an invasion. “This is probably the most dangerous moment. I would say that in the course of the next few days, in what is the biggest security crisis that Europe has faced for decades, we’ve got to get it right,” Johnson said. But he made it clear that Britain could not intervene militarily if Ukraine was attacked. Speaking later at a military base in Warsaw, he said: “The UK has been supplying some defensive weaponry in the form of anti-tank missiles, we have been training Ukrainian troops. That is as far as we can go at the moment.” The conclusion of Johnson’s whirlwind European trip took place at Warsaw’s presidential palace, where he was greeted by Polish president Andrzej Duda. They exchanged warm words, with the prime minister repeating that Britain stands “shoulder to shoulder” with Poland and its eastern Nato allies. The UK has put 1,000 troops on standby in case of a humanitarian crisis in the east if the current Russian military buildup leads to war, and 350 Royal Marines arrived in Poland to coincide with Johnson’s visit. With Agence France-Presse, Press Association and ReutersAnthony Albanese says the head of spy agency Asio has not raised any concerns with him about Labor’s federal election candidates, stating Peter Dutton is engaged in “game-playing” with national security issues. The Nine newspapers on Friday reported “multiple security sources” had said a Chinese intelligence service was behind a recently disrupted foreign interference plot that had “attempted to bankroll [New South Wales] Labor candidates in the upcoming federal election”. Guardian Australia has been unable to verify the claim aired on the eve of Saturday’s byelections in four NSW state seats. It comes as the Morrison government is facing internal divisions, damaging cabinet leaks and poor poll numbers ahead of the federal election due by May. NSW Labor said on Friday the Nine report was the first it had heard of the allegations. It said the Asio chief, Mike Burgess, had “never raised these matters” with either the leader of the state party, Chris Minns, or the NSW general secretary, Bob Nanva. The report was published a day after Dutton, the defence minister, levelled an accusation in federal parliament that the Chinese Communist party had “made a decision about who they’re going to back in the next federal election … and they have picked this bloke [Albanese] as that candidate”. According to the Nine newspapers, unnamed security sources confirmed that Dutton was referring to a Chinese plot to interfere with NSW Labor’s preselection process. Albanese hit back on Friday, saying national security was “too important to engage in game-playing, such as what we saw on the floor of the parliament yesterday, however much the government needs a distraction”. The federal Labor leader said he took national security seriously and had regular briefings with the Asio chief. Albanese said he had spoken directly with Burgess on Friday morning. “The Asio director-general has publicly stated that if he had concerns about attempts at foreign interference in political parties he’ll raise them directly with the party leader,” Albanese told reporters in Melbourne. “I have total confidence in all of my candidates, and the director-general of Asio has never raised a concern about any of my candidates.” Albanese said that in Friday’s call Burgess “reaffirmed that he has not raised concern about any of my candidates. I can’t be clearer than that.” But Albanese would not confirm whether or not he had been briefed on the substance of the allegations reported in the media. He said it would be “entirely inappropriate” to discuss national security briefings, as that would endanger security “and the capacity of our agencies to operate clear of political interference”. The Labor leader said the government’s claim that an Albanese government would “appease” China if elected was “desperate”, given the major parties had the same position on Beijing’s trade sanctions, Taiwan, Hong Kong, the South China Sea, human rights concerns, foreign interference and cyber security. Albanese said he was “not going to sit back and cop the sort of nonsense that’s being put forward from a government that sat back” while a Chinese company was given a long-term lease over the Port of Darwin. Earlier, Dutton told ABC radio there was “no doubt in [his] mind” about what he described as a “statement of the obvious” regarding China’s preference of Labor. He claimed he based Thursday’s inflammatory allegation on “open source and other intelligence”. The personal attack on the Labor leader was echoed by Scott Morrison, who claimed in parliament on Thursday that “those who are seeking to coerce Australia” knew that “their candidate” in the election was “the leader of the Labor party”. The political dispute over national security coincides with Australia hosting the foreign ministers of the US, Japan and India for a Quad meeting in Melbourne. Prof Rory Medcalf, the head of the Australian National University’s national security college, said the foreign minister, Marise Payne, should reassure her Quad counterparts that Australia could be trusted on security “no matter who wins government”. Medcalf said the elevation of the Quad and formation of Aukus were “signal achievements of this government”, so it would be “really troubling” if the government cast doubt on Australia’s long-term reliability as a partner in the event of a change of government. In his threat assessment speech on Wednesday evening, Burgess disclosed that Asio had “recently detected and disrupted a foreign interference plot” in the run-up to “an election in Australia”. Burgess was vague when describing the election targeted and did not say which country was responsible. He noted Australia was “seeing attempts at foreign interference at all levels of government – in all states and territories”. Burgess said the case “involved a wealthy individual who maintained direct and deep connections with a foreign government and its intelligence agencies”. Burgess also said attempts at political interference were “not confined to one side of politics”. Asio did not comment on Friday but referred to Burgess’ previous remarks, including: “The other important point to note there is the harm was dealt with. The election was not interfered with. Our elections remain secure.” Medcalf said Burgess had chosen his words “with consummate care and professionalism” and it was appropriate for the Asio chief to “warn that there are very real foreign interference plots in Australia and this is being dealt with effectively by the agencies”. But with alleged details of the foiled plot emerging in the media on Friday, Medcalf said it was time for Australia to introduce clear protocols surrounding the briefing of party leaders and disclosure of allegations of foreign interference. “I think it’s reasonable for the leader of a party against which the allegation is being made to be given a briefing and given an opportunity to be the one to break the news,” Medcalf said. Jason Wood, the federal assistant minister for customs, community safety and multicultural affairs, has already sought to campaign on the issue. He published a post on Facebook on Friday afternoon headlined: “CCP DESPERATE FOR ALBO TO BE ELECTED”. The independent South Australian senator Rex Patrick said intelligence “should never be politicised”. Nanva, the NSW Labor general secretary, said foreign interference was a real and growing threat but no national security agency had ever raised “these alleged matters” with the parliamentary leadership or the organisational wing. “We are concerned about the timing and source of these allegations,” Nanva said on Friday. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, declined to comment on intelligence matters. Comment was also sought from Dutton and the Chinese embassy.The mine at the centre of the decade-long civil war between rebels in Bougainville and Papua New Guinea security forces is set to reopen 30 years after it was forced to close, following an agreement between local landowners. Panguna was once one of the world’s largest and most profitable copper and goldmines and still contains an estimated 5.3m tons of copper and 19.3m ounces of gold, which would make the reserves worth about $60bn at today’s prices. In 1989, amid rising community anger at the environmental damage and the inequitable division of the mine’s profits, locals forced the mine closed, blowing up Panguna’s power lines and sabotaging operations. The PNG government sent in troops against its own citizens to restart the foreign-owned mine, sparking a bloody, decade-long civil war. A peace settlement was brokered in 2001. On Wednesday, five customary landowner groups – the Kurabang, Barapang, Bakoringu, Basikang and Mantaa clans – signed a joint resolution on the mine reopening at a summit in Tunuru, central Bougainville, local media reported. At the gathering, Bougainville president Ishmael Toroama had asked the groups to find an outcome that would support the region’s aspirations for independence. “If we are talking about a new Bougainville, we must reset and refocus our priorities,” he told them. Wednesday’s resolution signified “the beginning of a new chapter, a chapter to realise Bougainville’s independence”, he said. Since his election in September 2020, Toroama has maintained that the reopening of the Panguna mine would be a decision for the land owners but that it is the only option that could provide the economic support for Bougainville’s independence. Specifics of the reopening are to be discussed in separate, follow-up meetings. The autonomous region’s Department of Mineral and Energy Resources is to liaise with the landowners. The national government has yet to comment on the decision. The civil war claimed the lives of about 20,000 people and amplified calls for Bougainvillean independence. The Bougainville Peace Agreement, signed between Bougainvillean leaders and Papua New Guinea in 2001, marked the end of the war and guaranteed a referendum on independence, to be held in 2019. The non-binding results of that referendum showed overwhelming support for independence, with 98% of people voting in favour, but are yet to be ratified in Papua New Guinea’s parliament, which has the final say on the process.The cattle are scattered peacefully across the top of the bank, their winter coats burnished russet by the light. They know this south-facing side receives the fullness of the sun. Below me, a cock pheasant senses disturbance, hunches low and scuttles. I note with apprehension the freshly scratched-up patches where a badger has rummaged through the dung for worms – TB is a constant concern. From the empty ring-feeder comes the scent – redolent of a beach at low tide – of the mineral supplement added to the hay each day. Fed before dawn, the beasts now lie cudding, eyes half closed, contented. A calf from last year stands alone, nibbling bramble leaves, more bored by the idleness than hungry. I move among them familiarly; all born on the farm, they have been handled from an early age. These are heifers and cows at varying stages of pregnancy, the core of our small suckler herd of North Devons. From time to time they will lean back, tilting their bulk of calf-containing belly to the sky, then right themselves again with a great exhalation. I approach one, examining eyes, feet, nascent teats. I move her tail aside and see a thick strand of dark, discoloured membrane hanging from her vulva. Her breathing continues with patient rhythm, but mine catches. She has aborted. I rest my hand on the soft warmth of her haunch, and sit with her for a moment in the stillness of the morning. A blood sample identifies a parasitic organism called neospora. Carried by the canine species and shed in their faeces, this is increasingly an aggravation for farmers who graze their livestock on land with public footpaths. It is without cure; once infected, the animal remains infected and will repeatedly abort. Her breeding life is over. Farming is subject to many variables and, as in life itself, not all exposure to risk can be controlled. There are rich benefits for a herd that is permanently at pasture, but this close cohabitation with nature sometimes has a cost. How we delighted in the summer to see a vixen rearing her cubs in an abandoned badger sett; how we now rue that she chose to make her den there, beneath the tunnelled blackthorn, where the cattle so often sought sanctuary from the tyranny of flies and heat. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryPicks of the week The Trojan Horse Affair This Serial-backed podcast tackles the scandal that saw Birmingham schools accused of an Islamist plot. Given the affair stemmed from authorities being sent an amateurish-looking letter that was supposedly correspondence between Muslims plotting to take control of schools, it asks: who wrote it? The storytelling is as hooky as you’d expect, given it was part created by S-Town’s Brian Reed. Alexi Duggins In Touch With Ruby Rare Sex podcasts can all too often edge towards giggly chats masquerading as insight. That’s not the case with this informed documentary series from sex educator Ruby Rare, which manages to feel light and fun despite bringing a considered critical eye to topics including kink, nudity and Britain’s problem with offering good sex education. AD Shaun Keaveny’s Creative Cul-De-Sac The trademark Keaveny warmth is in full flow in his new podcast about those ideas that may be better left in an abandoned notebook. He has a cracking lineup picking out their forgotten creative gems, including Vic Reeves, Nina Conti and Tim Key, plus there’s a look at his own ideas that didn’t make the cut. Hannah Verdier And Just Like That … The Writers Room “Do you know how hard it is to create a water-cooler moment when no one is even in the office?” Little did writer and director Michael Patrick King know how much debate his Sex and the City sequel would create. In this series, he speaks to co-writers on the show about the divisive decisions they made. Hollie Richardson Chameleon: Wild Boys Journalist Sam Mullins remembers the moment he heard about two emaciated, nigh-on feral “bush boys” who landed in his small Canadian home town of Vernon. “When the boys admitted that they weren’t as ‘bush’ as they originally let on, the media attention fell off a cliff,” he says, unreeling a yarn that becomes more bizarre with every instalment. HV Producer pick: The Socially Distant Sports Bar Chosen by Joel Grove Listeners of the Guardian’s very own Football Weekly podcast will be familiar with the dulcet tones of regular contributor and Gareth Bale enthusiast Elis James. However, Football Weekly only accounts for around a mere 2% of Elis’ prolific podcast output. The best of which (to my mind) is The Socially Distant Sports Bar. Initially launched in the first lockdown, Sports Bar is now approaching it’s 100th episode. The premise is straightforward enough: James and fellow comedian Mike Bubbins, along with presenter and ship steadier Steffan Garrero, each come armed with two clips linked to sport, ranging from the diets of Britain’s strongmen to Kaká turning out for a five-a-side team. When it comes to episode duration the prevailing wisdom in podcasting is that there is some sort of mythical sweet spot somewhere between 40-50 minutes, but this show laughs in the face of convention. While a two hour 30 minute runtime might be daunting for a first-time listener, it somehow never outstays its welcome. A recent tangent about the Gold Blend Nescafe adverts had me doubled over on the train home – it’s in these moments that Sports Bar is at its very best. Come for the sport, stay for the anecdote about gifting a camping stove to an optician. Talking points Modern Love fans will be over the moon to hear that The New York Times has just launched another 10-episode season with new host Anna Martin. Why not try: The Second Circle | The Making of a Swindler Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureMy body is an accordion. Not because it sounds horrible. I mean, it does. It clicks and cracks and honks, and when I try to sing nicely my son screams from the pit of his soul, like I’ve brandished an axe. No, what I mean is, it’s like an accordion because, for 32 years I was squeezing her in. In and in, for a half-life. On a BMI chart, I’ve always been “obese” – technically, ill. So for decades I saw my body as defective, disappointing and disgusting. If I looked at it, I felt the kind of hatred and repulsion I normally reserve for racists or people who say “hashtag justsayin’” out loud. From age nine to 32, I adhered to every type of diet. I didn’t miss out the one you think would shrink me; I did that one, too. Several times. I lived in a cycle of starvation, control and obsession, followed by bingeing and sometimes purging. That’s what serial dieting is: disordered eating lite. Then, bang! An explosion of change. I got pregnant with my son, and my physical metamorphosis cast a spell. Suddenly, my bigness had a purpose and I felt like a king: invincible, glorious. I stripped in swimming pool changing rooms without a single care, like a thin person or a Spanish person, or a man. It felt delicious. It didn’t last, but it had sown a beautiful seed in me. Not of self-love or self-worship – I don’t believe such perfectionistic grandeur is necessary or useful, or sometimes even honest – but of gratitude and acceptance. The possibility of seeing some beauty in my body just as it is, at any given time. Many things happened over the next two years to compound this feeling. Firstly, I discovered weightlifting, which brought me joy and power and had fuck all to do with losing weight. In fact, I grew and continue to grow brilliant muscles. I also discovered a burgeoning, freeing pansexuality smashing its way into my formerly heterosexual life. Lastly, and surely not by complete coincidence, I underwent a complete reeducation about food and eating. I discovered the incredible Intuitive Eating and Health at Every Size movements. I found big, beautiful bodies being proud on Instagram. I had some good therapy. I host a podcast about eating and, fewer than 50 guests in, I realised that virtually every woman I spoke to had, at some point, made themselves sick. To be thinner. The normality of it slapped me; the universality of it as a female experience. I realised that millions of women, like me, were trapped in misery by a lie that has been woven into our DNA for generations: the value of thinness. Because miserable women are quiet and cowed and, best of all, we’ll buy anything you promise will fix us. Well, my eyes are open now. And my wallet is closed. I’ll take this body in a large, bitches. Don’t get me wrong, I’m not immune to the noise that suggests my body is better when it’s smaller, but I am the happiest and the healthiest that I have ever been. I’m really fit and really strong, and I eat many varied and wonderful nutritious foods. I’m slowly, lovingly, filling her back up. This accordion. Hearing her sigh. Stretching her, yes. Growing her. And I cannot believe that, in 2022, it still feels transgressive to glory in that. Jessica Fostekew is a comedian, actor and writerWho, from a safe distance, doesn’t love a grifter? Especially if the grift is on a grand scale and the marks bring it largely upon themselves? Step forward, then, Anna Delvey – born Anna Sorokin, though that never bothered her overmuch. The apparent German heiress parlayed a quick wit, good wardrobe and non-specific Mitteleuropean accent into an entrée into New York high society. She extracted hundreds of thousands of dollars from the elite fooled by her poise, impressed by her connections and unable to imagine that anyone who knew which wine to order could not be everything she claimed to be. Sorokin was charged with various counts of larceny and other crimes, and in April 2019 found guilty of eight of them. But what a wild ride she had, and this new Netflix dramatisation of her story enjoys every last minute of it. Inventing Anna comes from the Shonda Rhimes stable and stays within the Shondaland (her production company) comfort zone – a multilayered tale brilliantly told, at pace and with glee. It may have more heft than it initially appears, but it is played essentially as a modern soap opera – and God, is it fun. This is a show for those mainly looking to marvel – at the effrontery, the style, the steel nerves of the twentysomething weaving webs from inside a house of cards built on thin ice. Those who are looking for an in-depth, analytical take on the Delvey phenomenon, her pathology or motivations – which the handful of previous documentaries about her have lacked – will have to wait a little longer. “This whole story that you’re about to sit on your fat ass and watch, like a big lump of nothing, is about me. You know me. Everyone knows me. I’m an icon. A legend.” Thus, in the opening seconds of Inventing Anna, do we meet our antiheroine in all her ice-cold, brutal, contemptuous, compelling glory. Who doesn’t immediately want to follow that ravening, barely containable ego and see where it ends up? Julia Garner is mesmerising as Anna. She keeps her human enough that – like her marks, perhaps – we never lose interest or emotional investment in her, even as we watch her embark on another round of clear-eyed criminality as she works rooms, finds the next pawn in her game, moves to the next stage of her con. If, indeed, con is the right word. For her, it seems to be just a way of being – you get the impression that, like a shark who stops swimming, if she did not live a life of purloined luxury she would die. Garner’s Anna is a kaleidoscopic mixture of fury and defensiveness (when challenged or crossed), sweetness, charm, fierce intelligence and, at times, simple and ineffable weirdness – and you can’t take your eyes off her. Just as good, in a naturally less showy part, is Anna Chlumsky as journalist Vivian Kent. (She is based on the writer Jessica Pressler, whose article about Delvey in New York magazine after her arrest brought Anna to the world’s attention, much to the chagrin of the defrauded banks, art collectors, gallery owners, fashionistas and socialites who wanted their embarrassing gullibility swept under the carpet.) We move back and forth between Kent’s interviews with Anna in prison (“Why do you dress like that?” asks Anna with a characteristic blend of contempt and concern. “You look poor”), her investigations, and scenes that show how Anna got from there (a working-class town outside Moscow) to here (Rikers Island prison, via London, Paris and New York). Besotted boyfriends, railroaded hoteliers and businesswomen who use her as a maid and don’t check their statements lead to bigger and better frauds. Until, that is, the little giveaways lead to greater suspicions, betrayed friends amass grievances that need expression, and eventually the queen of grifters is unmasked and imprisoned. You cannot, despite yourself, help wishing it could have been otherwise.Following your report about the Net Zero Scrutiny Group of MPs (Tories fighting net zero plans are dragging climate into new culture war, experts say, 8 February), we hope this letter, supported by all-party parliamentary groups, will reassure your readers and the public that parliamentarians who are not fully behind net zero are a small minority. Our groups are supported by hundreds of parliamentarians, from all major parties, representing the full geography of the UK. We recognise that all our 2019 election manifestos committed to net zero emissions by 2050 or sooner. We recognise the environment is now a top concern of the British public. And we recognise the spiralling climate crisis and the urgent need to transition to a more sustainable economy. There are different approaches to reach net zero, but we all support the goal. Delaying action will cost the country more, as the Treasury and the Office for Budget Responsibility have made clear. In the national interest, we will continue to support and promote ambitious environmental leadership in parliament. Anthony Browne MP Environment APPG, Caroline Lucas MP Climate change APPG, Sir Ed Davey MP Sustainable finance APPG, Peter Aldous MP Intelligent energy APPG, Alex Sobel MP Net zero APPG, Geraint Davies MP Clean air APPG, Ben Lake MP Fuel poverty and energy efficiency APPG, Helene Hayman Co-chair, Peers for the Planet • Business Green’s editor, James Murray, is correct that to undermine the claims of the pro-fossil fuel Net Zero Scrutiny Group, it is vital to explain how the enormous upfront costs of the transition to net zero can be met, but not at the expense of the poor (‘It’s all a bit cynical’: the politicians behind the Tory attack on net zero agenda, 8 February). The fact is that a just transition to net zero is easily affordable, and poorer people and the increasingly squeezed middle class won’t have to suffer in the process. Of course, a windfall tax on Shell’s and BP’s present licence to print money is a key first step, but the question is, where will the bulk of the many tens of billions that are required come from? The key to answering this is to realise that the entire cost of tackling the Covid crisis was funded by a £450bn expansion of the quantitative easing programme. This money creation programme now needs to be expanded again to fund a post-Covid recovery that tackles not just the climate emergency, but also the cost-of-living crisis and the inequality of social provision. Also crucial will be the use of government incentivised savings, such as pensions and ISAs, and a fairer taxation system to help achieve these goals. Colin Hines Convener, UK Green New Deal Group • How depressing, but not surprising, to read your articles on the Net Zero Scrutiny Group. I am 80 years old; I have studied many short courses with the Open University and Future Learn on various environmental subjects, especially those examining the causes and effects of manmade climate change. All these courses emphasise that mitigation to reduce the amount of global heating will be financially much cheaper than adapting to it. I have been on many protests against the climate crisis. I try to live as green a life as possible. I and many others feel betrayed by politicians and scientists such as Steve Koonin, who say “there is no climate crisis”. I hope Prof Koonin does not have grandchildren who will look back in 30 years’ time and say: “Grandpa knew what to do, but he didn’t do it.” Rose Harvie Dumbarton, West Dunbartonshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The extremist congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene, who previously alerted the US to the dangers of space lasers, issued a new warning to the American people on Thursday: the speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, has unleashed “gazpacho police” to spy on Greene’s colleagues in Congress. It is, of course, possible that a clandestine network bent on the regulation of cold soup operates deep under the Capitol cafeteria. But Greene was presumably confusing “gazpacho” with the Gestapo, the Nazi secret police. The comments prompted widespread social media mockery, but it’s not the first time soup and fascism have been linked in American popular culture. A 1995 episode of Seinfeld featured the cast visiting a celebrated Manhattan soup spot whose owner was a real stickler for the rules, earning him the nickname the Soup Nazi. Though Greene appears to have limited historical knowledge, she does seem to be aware of the Seinfeld episode, later referencing the character’s catchphrase – “no soup for you” – in a tweeted effort to appear in on the joke. Many others made a similar connection. Could the Soup Nazi have secretly been a member of the gazpacho police? We asked Larry Thomas, who played the character, for his take on the moment as soups and Nazis march back into the headlines. Thomas, no fan of Greene or the ex-president she claims won re-election, says he was floored by the comments. “How in the world can a grown person, who grew up in the 20th century, not know what the word Gestapo is?” he asks. “They say ‘You can’t write this shit.’ It’s beyond you can’t write this shit.” When he heard Greene’s remarks, he knew he’d be dragged into the picture. “If she got the word wrong with a nonsensical word, it would be one thing, but I knew as soon as she actually used the name of a soup that I was in trouble,” Thomas says. “And then she turns around and makes an actual Soup Nazi reference [on Twitter], you know, the ‘no soup for you, and you’re gonna end up in the goulash.’ I’m sure somebody wrote that for her. She can’t possibly be that funny.” A Gazpacho Police TV series, or at least a sketch, now seems inevitable. “Saturday Night Live will jump all over that,” Thomas says, imagining a force that – much like his character – monitors “what kind of soup you’re eating and how you’re eating it”. Though the actor, who also appeared in Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery and Arrested Development, recently retired, he’d love to resurrect the character. “I wish to God they would ask me to be a part of it,” he says. “I’m sure Jerry wouldn’t mind.” The Soup Nazi is based on a real chef, Al Yeganeh, the man behind New York’s Original Soup Man shop, and Thomas is himself a devoted cook and has written a combination memoir-cookbook. “I grew up with a working single mom that never learned to cook, because she was always working full time. And my dad was the cook, but he took off when I was a little kid,” he says. “I just developed this natural sense of knowing how much spice and which spices to use.” He has “about eight really good soup recipes”, he says. “But I did not venture into gazpacho. So I think it’s gonna be my next.”Rick Rubin, founder of Def Jam Records and the most highly regarded music producer of his time, has announced his first book. The Creative Act: A Way of Being is a non-fiction work about creativity. “I set out to write a book about what to do to make a great work of art,” said Rubin in a statement. “Instead, it revealed itself to be a book on how to be.” UK publisher Canongate describes The Creative Act as Rubin’s distillation of “the principles of creativity for creators of all kinds, including people in their everyday lives” and said it gives “revelatory insight into the mysterious process of making stuff great”. Given Rubin’s decades-long and undimmed creative prowess – and going by the proliferation of inspirational Rubin quotes shared online – his advice carries significant weight. He founded Def Jam Records as a teenager, which would become one of the most influential labels of all time after he joined forces with Russell Simmons in the mid 80s and released music by the likes of LL Cool J, the Beastie Boys, Slayer and Public Enemy. That decade, Rubin worked as a producer for the stars of the nascent New York City rap scene as well as for heavy rock acts, and often brought the once-disparate genres together to history-changing effect. In 1986 alone, he produced Run-DMC’s Raising Hell, Slayer’s Reign in Blood, Beastie Boys’ Licensed to Ill and Original Concept’s Can You Feel It. “The punk rock and hip-hop trajectories were somewhat similar: both were being made by young people without virtuoso skill, and both were about ideas more than musicianship,” Rubin told the Guardian last year. “They were edgy and frowned upon by anyone who wasn’t part of the respective scenes.” By the 90s, the Rubin touch spread beyond his already broad church. He worked frequently with the Red Hot Chili Peppers, as well as Mick Jagger, Tom Petty and the Spice Girls’ Mel C, and began a collaboration with Johnny Cash that would revive the ageing country star’s career and continue until his death in 2003. With every decade, Rubin’s influence reached further: to Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Limp Bizkit and the Chicks in the 2000s, to Adele, Lana Del Rey and Ye, formerly known as Kanye West, in the 2010s. “I really like the challenge of working with different kinds of music,” he told Interview magazine in 2010. “I feel like my role is really like a coach, so I feel like I can do my job for different kinds of music that may not necessarily be what I listen to.” In a celebration of the producer’s career published in 2020, the Ringer critic Rob Harvilla described Rubin, who often appears to approach production as a kind of existential state, as “a man with nothing but time, a slovenly mystic who regards time [and producing] as a construct. “Studio footage of this person doing his thing is endlessly rewarding, especially when the thing he is doing is an endless and somehow profound amount of nothing.” From 2007 to 2013, Rubin was co-head of Columbia Records, overseeing its transition into the digital era. He has won nine Grammy awards, encompassing his work with Cash, the Chicks, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Adele and the Strokes, as well as in recognition of his production generally. Last year, he interviewed Paul McCartney for the six-part Hulu mini series McCartney 3, 2, 1. Def Jam recently launched a British imprint, 0207 Def Jam. “I’ve always been hopeful that the UK would breed a British invasion in America for hip-hop, in the way it did with the Beatles and Merseybeat,” Rubin said. “Maybe this can set the stage for that dream to come true.” The Creative Act will be published in early 2023.The clear blue skies of the first lockdown are being crisscrossed by contrails once again. These white lines are caused by ice crystals that form on the huge numbers of tiny, ultrafine particles that come from aircraft engines. Ultrafine particles are far smaller than the wavelength of light, but contrails are a rare example of them being made visible. Ultrafine particles are not just a problem in the skies above us. Airports are a large source, and my latest research has been searching for these tiny particles close to Gatwick. They were not hard to find. The number of ultrafine particles 500 metres downwind of the airport was greater than those at the kerb of London’s busiest roads. They mostly came from aircraft during takeoff and landing, but traffic, car parks and a large catering facility used to cook airline food all added to the problem. In 2021, the Dutch Health Council and the World Health Organization (WHO) highlighted the growing evidence that ultrafine particles are damaging our health. This includes 75 studies; mostly relating to lung inflammation, blood pressure and heart problems, along with risks to foetal growth. However, technical differences between the studies meant that the WHO has not set a standard. We are yet to understand the spread of ultrafine particles from Gatwick, but we do know they can travel a long way. Ultrafine particles from aircraft have been found across the Los Angeles suburbs. We have found ultrafine particles from Heathrow across large areas of west London, and they can be detected more than 12 miles (20km) away in the city centre. It is a similar situation in several European cities, meaning millions of people are exposed. More than 10 years ago I was part of a study that found day to day changes in ultrafine particles in London matched the number of people dying or going to hospital with heart problems. Since then, I have tracked reductions in ultrafine particles in our cities as a side-effect of regulations to tackle other air pollutants. These include removing sulphur impurities from diesel fuel and requiring particle filters on the exhausts of new vehicles. Researchers have suggested that sulphur is removed from aircraft fuel too, to match the tight limits on sulphur in diesel and petrol. This would be a possible solution for ultrafine particles. In the meantime, Bristol airport’s expansion was approved earlier this month and Gatwick is applying to increase capacity by bringing its emergency runway into regular use. Ultrafine particles are not included in the environmental assessments, putting us at risk of increased air pollution for decades to come.It will be “really disappointing” if the Scottish parliament cannot attract more female politicians within the next five years, says Holyrood’s presiding officer, as she launches Holyrood’s first women’s audit to investigate barriers to representation and participation. Alison Johnstone, the former Scottish Green politician who was elected last May to the position of presiding officer – the Holyrood equivalent of the Commons speaker – also suggests that political parties are falling short in selecting female candidates. She signals that the hybrid working arrangements used during lockdown and which suited working women in particular could become permanent. Although last May’s elections returned the most diverse MSP group ever – 58 women, making up 45% of the parliament, including the first two minority-ethnic women – three female MSPs stood down, citing the difficulties of managing family life and their role. Holyrood has no formal pairing system or proxy votes, for example. Launching the audit plans, which will be led by a cross-party board of MSPs and academics, Johnstone pointedly describes the progress as “unexpected” given Holyrood had been sitting at 35% the previous session, and makes it clear political parties must play their part. All parties, she says, “are beginning to realise the absolute necessity of making sure they have fair representation … They are getting better at it but we’re still not seeing it deliver a 50:50 parliament”. She knows “fabulously able women” who have decided not to get involved in party politics because of their caring commitments. “It’s not just about getting to the party meetings,” says Johnstone bluntly. “It’s about hanging about afterwards to mill around in a bar and getting to know activists who will support you when you need their votes to be selected.” All parties currently represented in Holyrood, aside from the Scottish Conservatives, have used all-women shortlists with varying degrees of success. Johnstone, who has been robust in her rebukes of MSPs for rude or disrespectful behaviour – including the first minister – is clearly mindful of the combative tone in the Holyrood chamber, a space originally designed in amphitheatre style to avoid the confrontations of the Commons. She is adamant that MSPs from all backgrounds should “feel comfortable representing their constituents to the best of their ability”, and reveals that the parliament has already started work compiling statistics on contributions in the chamber. “I’m really keen to see who is making the vast majority of interventions, who is more comfortable doing that and why?” As her women’s audit begins, Holyrood’s procedures and public appointment’s committee is carrying out its own review of the remote working practices used during the pandemic, and Johnstone insists the two are “very much connected” and says she expects Holyrood will adopt some hybrid working opportunities permanently. Taking into account caring responsibilities and those candidates representing large rural areas, “travelling into a building might not be the best use of parliamentarian’s time”. The culture around politics has changed significantly, she acknowledges: the “toxic” social media discourse, which women bear the brunt of, puts many off. The mob attack on Keir Starmer earlier this week was “deeply troubling and uncomfortable”, she says, and the direct result of how a politician’s tone plays through into the general culture.MPs not fully behind net zero are “a small minority” and the government should stay committed to its goal, a cross-party group of parliamentarians has said. Chairs of eight all-party parliamentary groups, including on climate change, net zero, clean air and fuel poverty, have written a letter to the Guardian , vowing they will “continue to support and promote ambitious environmental leadership in parliament”. This week, the Guardian reported that the Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG) of 19 Conservatives was accused of attempting to derail the government’s green agenda, linking it to the cost-of-living crisis and leading to fears of a “culture war” campaign around net zero. The signatories to the letter, which include the Conservative MP for South Cambridgeshire, Anthony Browne, chair of the Environment APPG; the leader of the Liberal Democrats, Ed Davey, chair of the Sustainable Finance APPG; and the crossbench peer Lady Hayman, co-chair of Peers for the Planet, write that they hope to “reassure your readers and the public that parliamentarians who are not fully behind net zero are a small minority”. “We recognise the environment is now a top concern of the British public. And we recognise the spiralling climate crisis and the urgent need to transition to a more sustainable economy. “There are different approaches to reach net zero, but we all support the goal. Delaying action will cost the country more,” they write. The NZSG group, which has gained widespread media coverage in the past month despite being small in number, says it does not dispute climate science or the need to decarbonise. It has called for cuts to green taxes and an increase in fossil fuel production to address the energy crisis. Two leading members have links to an organisation often described as “climate-sceptic”, and the group’s chair has been accused by a leading climate institute of using misleading and inaccurate information. Ed Miliband, the shadow climate change and net zero secretary, said he believed the NZSG was “ignoring reality” and that a weak and divided government was unlikely to fight climate change to the best of its ability. He told the Guardian: “The best way to avoid continued exposure to fossil fuel price crises like the one we are currently facing is to go further and faster in the green transition. “Yet a section of the Conservative party questions this reality and the danger is a weak and divided government doesn’t take the action we need. “The problem is that we already have a government of climate delay, which by failing to take the necessary action on everything from energy efficiency to the deployment of onshore wind has left us more vulnerable as a country. “Now it refuses to support a windfall tax on the oil and gas companies who are making record profits during the energy crisis, whilst the British people face rocketing energy bills.” The Green party MP and chair of the Climate Change APPG, Caroline Lucas, cautioned that the NZSG could have undue influence on No 10, especially as Boris Johnson is weakened by scandals. Lucas, who also signed the letter, told the Guardian: “Johnson will do whatever he thinks is necessary to stay in office, including dumping climate pledges if it will buy him support from rightwing Tory MPs. He’s not only sacrificing the climate and the UK’s reputation, he’s also ditching the best way of keeping people warm and getting bills down.” James Murray, an environmental commentator and editor at Business Green, said: “If the Net Zero Scrutiny Group and its supporters are really concerned about climate change the onus is on them to set out a credible alternative plan for tackling it. “The challenge for supporters of the net zero transition is to highlight how decarbonisation is essential for tackling the climate crisis, while also addressing the specific and legitimate concerns around some of the short-term costs associated with transition that its opponents seek to exploit. It’s vital to show, for example, the huge financial and health benefits that come from energy efficiency upgrades and low-cost clean technologies and renewables. Done right, net zero can make MPs’ constituents richer and warmer.”Billie Holiday Café Society, New York City, early 1939 The 23-year-old Billie Holiday was mostly unknown outside the jazz loop when she began her 1939 residency at this liberal New York club. Her understated, delicately implacable debut of Strange Fruit, a terrifying depiction of lynchings in the south, made a unique new vocal sound famous worldwide. John Fordham The birth of bebop Minton’s Playhouse, New York City, 1941 Rising young originals such as Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie and the guitarist Charlie Christian lived off commercial swing gigs in 1941, but they forged the revolutionary modern jazz style called bebop in tumultuous after-hours Harlem jam sessions, where Thelonious Monk and the drums innovator Kenny Clarke were in the house band. JF Buddy Holly and the Crickets UK tour, March 1958 Britain had never seen a rock band before March 1958. Then, for 25 consecutive nights, came the first true rock band – guitar, bass and drums, a revolution in horn-rimmed specs. A schoolboy Keith Richards caught a London show, but many more future stars would see Buddy Holly on TV during his visit, when he appeared on Sunday Night at the London Palladium. Michael Hann Judy Garland Carnegie Hall, New York City, 23 April 1961 Forty years into her career, Garland’s lavish performance to a star-studded audience is often regarded as the greatest night in showbiz history. Through a combination of vocal prowess and self-deprecation, she set the bar for concert orchestra performance. The recording made Garland the first woman to win the Grammy for album of the year. Laura Barton Sister Rosetta Tharpe and Muddy Waters Whalley Range, Manchester, 7 May 1964 It was the brilliant idea of the Granada TV producer Johnnie Hamp to film a selection of blues greats in south Manchester’s derelict Wilbraham Road railway station, mocked up to looked like the deep south, with “wanted” posters, washtubs and even goats and chickens. About 200 people arrived by rail to see the Gospel and Blues Train: Sister Rosetta Tharpe, Muddy Waters, Sonny Boy Williamson, Cousin Joe, Otis Spann and the duo Sonny Terry &amp; Brownie McGhee giving intense performances on the platform. Waters was mobbed by blues-mad youngsters. Tharpe arrived in a pony and trap and seized the opportunity presented by a Mancunian downpour to strap on an electric guitar and launch spontaneously into Didn’t It Rain? Countless musicians, including Mick Jagger, Jimmy Page and John Paul Jones, subsequently told Hamp they were influenced by the show, which broadcast to millions and was instrumental in taking the blues explosion to the mainstream. Dave Simpson Bob Dylan Newport folk festival, Rhode Island, 25 July 1965 It was a Sunburst Fender Stratocaster that stole the show at Newport in 1965. Dylan’s decision to play an electric guitar on a largely acoustic bill stunned the crowd, with many booing and jeering. Audiences for his world tour were similarly polarised, one disgruntled heckler in Manchester yelling: “Judas!” at the former folk hero. Essentially, it was the birth of folk rock – the real-time expansion of a genre. Laura Barton Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons Franklin &amp; Marshall College, Pennsylvania, 1966 A show in a college gym was the breakthrough that made arena rock possible. The PA system supplied by the Clair brothers so impressed Valli that he took them on tour as his personal sound engineers. Other artists noticed the quality and soon they were in demand. Their sound systems spurred rock’s spread to the big halls. MH The Velvet Underground The Dom, New York City, 7 April 1966 A former Polish wedding hall hosted the birth of the Exploding Plastic Inevitable. Andy Warhol showed films and worked the lights, his “superstars” danced and the Velvet Underground played at a volume witnesses tended to describe in terms of violence: rock music as envelopment and sensory assault. AP The Beatles Candlestick Park, San Francisco, 29 August 1966 The Beatles’ final real gig wasn’t a great show. The stadium was half-empty, the band at the end of their tether, struggling to recreate the sound of their latest recordings. But it represented a shift in rock music: no more Beatles gigs meant more time in the studio – and albums that would change everything, again. Laura Snapes The 14 Hour Technicolor Dream Alexandra Palace, London, 29 April 1967 British counterculture’s coming-out ball. Every one of the country’s psychedelic luminaries played – Pink Floyd, Soft Machine, Tomorrow and the Pretty Things among them. Performance art was provided by Yoko Ono, while the sense that the audience was as much part of the spectacle as the artists presaged 80s rave culture. AP Big Brother and the Holding Company Monterey pop festival, California, 17 June 1967 Arriving at Monterey with a lesser-known San Francisco psychedelic bluesy rock band, 24-year-old Janis Joplin gleefully demolished every stereotype of the “demure” female singer. The hard-living, hard-rocking Texan’s raucous, gut-wrenching performance attracted international attention and has been described as one of the greatest ever. DS Terry Riley Philadelphia College of Art, 17 November 1967 Not the birth of minimalism, but certainly its breakthrough. Riley’s eight-hour set of tape manipulation and organ pulses, played to an audience seated on hammocks and cushions, generated an early recording of his classic Poppy Nogood and set the pace for electronic experimentalism in chill-out environments decades ahead. Joe Muggs James Brown Boston Garden, 5 April 1968 The night after the assassination of Martin Luther King, violent protests spread across many US cities. In Boston, Brown’s show was almost cancelled for fear it might become a hotspot for public outcry. Instead, the show was repurposed: broadcast live on TV and radio in an effort to ease the grief and tension. Fans climbed on stage as he sang I Can’t Stand Myself (When You Touch Me); police officers rallied. Brown paused the song. “I’ll be fine,” he told the officers, then turned to the stage invaders: “You’re not being fair to yourselves and me, or your race. Now, I asked the police to step back, because I think I can get some respect from my own people … Are we together or we ain’t?” The crowd cheered. The fans climbed down. Brown turned to the drummer: “Hit that thing, man.” Laura Barton Mahalia Jackson and Mavis Staples Harlem cultural festival, New York City, 13 July 1969 Effectively buried until the 2021 documentary Summer of Soul resurrected its memory, the 1969 Harlem cultural festival was possibly the greatest selection of black talent ever assembled, from Sly Stone and Stevie Wonder to Nina Simone. If you had to pick a highlight, Mahalia Jackson and Mavis Staples’ charged performance of Take My Hand, Precious Lord might be it. AP Jimi Hendrix Woodstock festival, New York, 18 August 1969 Often cited as the gig that defined the 60s, the countercultural festival attracted half a million people to upstate New York. Hendrix’s deconstruction of The Star-Spangled Banner was interpreted as a protest at the Vietnam war, while “three days of peace and love” showed that people power could change history. DS The Who The University of Leeds, 14 February 1970 A Leeds Civic Trust blue plaque outside the university’s refectory now honours the site of the incendiary live performance of the post-Tommy, Keith Moon-era Who captured on Live at Leeds, often cited as the greatest live rock album. DS Elton John The Troubadour, Los Angeles, 25 August 1970 Not quite overnight success, but close: Elton John walked on to the stage of a celebrity-packed Troubadour a largely unknown British singer-songwriter, and walked off it a star. Aside from the music, a backstage decision to wear an outrageous outfit and a burst of energetic showmanship midway through the gig helped: two lessons he has never forgotten. AP BB King Cook County jail, 10 September 1970 Two years after Johnny Cash’s turn at Folsom prison, the blues legend King performed in Chicago to an audience of 2,000 prisoners, mostly young and black. A subsequent live album highlighted the dire conditions at the jail, helping bring about prison reform, which became a lifelong cause for King. Laura Barton Aretha Franklin Fillmore West concert hall, San Francisco, 5-7 March 1971 Franklin’s appearance at Fillmore West wasn’t a star-making performance – she was already very much a star – but it featured the Queen of Soul at the peak of her powers, actively seeking to build a bridge to a post-hippy audience, covering Stephen Stills, Bread and the Beatles. Judging by the crowd’s reaction, it worked. AP David Bowie Hammersmith Odeon, London, 3 July 1973 The moment when David Bowie appears to announce his retirement during this show is astonishing: the crowd’s screams become a vast howl of disappointment, peppered with yells of “No!” Did he mean it? Obviously not: even if he was just announcing the end of the Ziggy Stardust era, why was he on stage at the Marquee Club in London in full Ziggy drag three months later? It didn’t matter. The announcement – before a crowd so febrile that, according to one eyewitness, audience members were pleasuring themselves as he played – wasn’t just a guaranteed headline, but an extraordinary piece of staging, an act that left everyone racing to catch up: very Bowie. It is hard not to wonder if he had it in mind when he was dying, too: the way he seemed to stage-manage his passing was all those things as well. AP Bob Marley &amp; the Wailers The Lyceum, London, 17-18 July 1975 Probably the most dynamic and exhilarating reggae concerts ever. Perhaps more importantly, the presentation was familiar enough to the rock establishment to allow them to feel comfortable with roots reggae. The album recorded at these shows put Marley on the path to global superstardom. Lloyd Bradley The Last Waltz Winterland Ballroom, San Francisco, 25 November 1976 This Thanksgiving Day show was billed as the Band’s “farewell concert appearance”. Across its remarkable five hours, they were joined by many of their contemporaries, including Bob Dylan, Muddy Waters, Van Morrison, Neil Young and Joni Mitchell – jamming, improvising and high-kicking through an astonishing display of musicianship and camaraderie. The show was later released as a seminal documentary by Martin Scorsese. Laura Barton Sex Pistols River Thames, 7 June 1977 Insurrectionary publicity stunts don’t come better than punk’s prime movers playing on a boat sailing past the Houses of Parliament during the Queen’s silver jubilee celebrations. Their manager, Malcolm McLaren, was among those arrested. Moral pandemonium ensued as God Save the Queen shot to No 2. Or was it really No 1? DS Burning Spear The Rainbow theatre, London, 26 October 1977 When Winston Rodney came out on stage, raised his arms and asked: “Do you remember the days of slavery?” the “Yes!” from the 3,000-strong, almost entirely black crowd nearly raised the roof. It set the tone for an evening that reclaimed roots reggae for its primary audience. Lloyd Bradley Black Sabbath/Van Halen Sheffield City Hall, 16 May 1978 No one hails Black Sabbath’s final UK tour with Ozzy Osbourne. What they remember is the support band. An old, tired, bloated Sabbath were destroyed night after night by Van Halen, who showed the future of hard rock – sunny, exciting, glamorous. Here was generational change embodied in the time it took for one gig to unfold. MH Kate Bush Tour of Life, April-May 1979 Notable for being Bush’s only live tour (until 35 years later, when she made her surprise live return with the After the Dawn residency), these dates set in motion a straight line from Bush to Britney Spears and beyond. Intent on singing and dancing (fully choreographed) at the same time, Bush pioneered the invention of the head mic (hers fashioned from a coat hanger) and the modern pop show was born. LS The Specials, Madness and the Selecter 2 Tone tour, autumn 1979 Named after Jerry Dammers’ Coventry label and kicking off in Brighton, the 2 Tone tour unleashed the Specials, Madness and the Selecter on 40 UK dates, a blur of legs, arms and adrenaline. Scenes of euphoric dancing ensued as black and white youth came together to celebrate a chart-conquering, multicultural pop phenomenon. DS Miriam Makeba and Hugh Masekela Lesotho, 28 December 1980 In South Africa’s apartheid era, the tyrannically segregationist laws of the country’s white government forced many black African artists into exile. The singer and campaigner Miriam Makeba and the jazz trumpeter and composer Hugh Masekela were international stars who hadn’t seen family or home for 20 years when the businessman and fan Victor Maloi funded a defiant comeback on their oppressors’ doorstep. In Lesotho, at Christmas time in 1980, a stadium crowd of 75,000 – with thousands more thronging into the tiny country’s streets to share the vibe – attended a historic event. The artists could behold their homeland from the stage – on which Masekela was reunited with his 90-year-old grandmother. A jubilant and political setlist included Makeba’s The Healing Song and Soweto Blues (“Just a little atrocity / Deep in the city”) and the churning, train-mimicking migrant workers’ lament Stimela, a Masekela concert staple for the rest of his life. JF Kraftwerk Computer World tour, 1981 This world tour offered a glimpse into the future, combining purely electronic pop and visual technology. The band synchronised films to their music, played handheld miniature keyboards during Pocket Calculator and performed Robots alongside identically dressed humanoid replicas of themselves. DS Diana Ross Central Park, New York City, 21 July 1983 Sometimes everything going wrong can turn a gig into a memorable event, as when torrential rain broke out just after Ross took the stage here. She battled on for 45 minutes while the audience surged and fought among themselves. Probably better experienced on screen than in person, a rain-lashed Ross belting out Ain’t No Mountain High Enough is quite a sight. AP Whodini The Haçienda, Manchester, 28 October 1983 Four years after Rapper’s Delight, hip-hop was still alien to most UK kids. So, seeing breaking, body-popping rappers Whodini – then superstars, yet barely out of their teens – in the flesh was transformational. Playing at the electro evangelist Greg Wilson’s night, they were true cultural ambassadors. JM Wham! Workers’ gymnasium, Beijing, 7 April 1985 For the Chinese government, the first visit by a western group signalled its willingness to open its commerce to capitalism. But it made a different kind of impact: Rose Tang, who was at Tiananmen Square in 1989, later said that seeing Wham! made young Chinese people realise that rebellion was possible. MH Live Aid Wembley stadium, London, 13 July 1985 Almost every major rock act played Bob Geldof’s “global jukebox”, held simultaneously in Wembley and John F Kennedy stadium in Philadelphia and broadcast to a billion people. Raising millions for famine relief, it created a new generation of superstars as Queen and U2’s epic performances ushered in the era of the mega rock event – and enshrined the white saviour act. DS Public Enemy Hammersmith Odeon, 1 November 1987 Public Enemy weren’t even the headliners of the Def Jam package tour, but when their performance at Hammersmith was played on the BBC’s A Fresh Start to the Week, it was a revelation. Armed paramilitaries on stage? What?! Bring the Noise, played months before it was released, was hip-hop as no one in Britain had heard it. MH The Shamen Synergy tour, 1989-91 Fearless psychotropic explorers, the Shamen turned their tour into an acid house club on wheels. Featuring live sets from Irresistible Force (AKA Mixmaster Morris), Meat Beat Manifesto and newbies Orbital, it was the seed from which 90s arena dance – Leftfield, Underworld et al – grew. JM Madonna Blond Ambition tour, April-August 1990 Touring her fourth album, Like a Prayer, Madonna altered the blueprint for modern pop shows with this combination of narrative, choreography, high production values and fashion. That it was also a taboo-busting exploration of sexuality and religion only solidified its legacy: she nearly got arrested in Toronto for simulating masturbation, while Pope John Paul II called it “one of the most satanic shows in the history of humanity”. Alim Kheraj L7 Reading festival, 30 August 1992 Bands being pelted by objects is common at Reading – less so is bands fighting back, as L7 did in spectacular fashion. Donita Sparks hoicked out her tampon and hurled it at the crowd, proving that long-patronised “women in rock” weren’t going to be underestimated any more. Ben Beaumont-Thomas DMX Woodstock festival, New York, 23 July 1999 This performance to an infinite sea of boiling bros showed how far hip-hop had crossed over into white middle America – and how much the white artists on the bill borrowing from it still had to learn. Even on YouTube footage, DMX’s throaty holler remains singular and gorgeous. BBT Roll Deep Sidewinder, Milton Keynes, 9 November 2002 Although grime wasn’t even accepted as a term in 2002, the sound was fully formed. Dizzee Rascal, Wiley, Flowdan and Jamakabi, plus DJs and the singer Gemma Fox, managed only 20 minutes of their allotted hour before things got too rowdy and the show was cut, but the energy echoed for years. JM The Dixie Chicks Shepherd’s Bush Empire, London, 10 March 2003 Natalie Maines’ onstage criticism of George W Bush’s decision to invade Iraq got country music’s most successful women blacklisted by radio stations, dropped by sponsors and subjected to death threats. Nevertheless, the band – now the Chicks – paved the way for more outspoken female country artists, from Taylor Swift to Miranda Lambert. Laura Barton Céline Dion A New Day residency, Caesars Palace, Las Vegas, 25 March 2003 It was Liberace who invented the Vegas residency and Dion (DiMucci) who revived it, but it was Céline Dion who turned Caesars into the stage for a glorious pop comeback. Her initial five-year run was followed by a further eight years – and prompted copycat turns by Britney Spears, Pink and Katy Perry. Laura Barton Taylor Swift Bluebird Cafe, Nashville, 4 November 2004 Swift played three songs at the bijou Nashville institution aged 14 and was spotted there by her future label boss (and future foe) Scott Borchetta. By no means the only artist to get discovered at the venue, she was the first to blow that coffee-shop intimacy stadium-sized, addressing thousands of fans as if they were friends sharing hot chocolates in between her glittering country-pop hits. LS Daft Punk Coachella festival, California, 29 April 2006 Despite the best efforts of umpteen DJs and performers, dance music remained an underground phenomenon in the US until Daft Punk arrived at Coachella. Their rapturously received audiovisual extravaganza begat the American EDM explosion, a topic on which Daft Punk remained tight-lipped until the end. AP Prince Super Bowl half-time show, Miami, 4 February 2007 Any number of shows from Prince’s later years could make this list – his O2 residency, his Hit and Run guerrilla gigs – but for sheer “I’m back” bravado, his rain-soaked Super Bowl performance wins. His recording career had faltered, but this astonishing display of hits, guitar pyrotechnics and unexpected covers offered a very public reassertion of his genius. AP Jay-Z Glastonbury festival, Somerset, 29 June 2008 Noel Gallagher should have known better than to underestimate the showmanship of rap’s No 1 superstar. He had led a pre-festival chorus of opinion that hip-hop wasn’t meant for Glastonbury; Jay-Z responded with a sarky cover of Wonderwall and an arsenal of anthems, cementing rap in mainstream British culture. BBT Ariana Grande One Love Manchester, Old Trafford cricket ground, 4 June 2017 Has a pop star ever exhibited such fortitude? Less than two weeks after the bombing at the singer’s Manchester Arena show that killed 22 people and injured hundreds more, Grande performed for a 50,000-strong crowd and became a symbol of bravery. She had planned a sombre setlist in respect of the victims, but a conversation with the mother of the 15-year-old victim Olivia Campbell led the singer to scrap it: “She told me that Olivia would have wanted to hear the hits,” Grande said on stage – so that is what she delivered. It transformed a moment of tragedy into an opportunity for defiance. Joined by big names such as Justin Bieber, Katy Perry and Liam Gallagher, Grande and the crowd danced, sang, laughed and cried through their grief. “This evening has been so light and so filled with fun and love and bright energy,” Grande said, summarising what made One Love Manchester a unique act of resistance. AK Lorde Melodrama tour, September 2017-November 2018 The euphoric world tour for Lorde’s second album featured a floating room designed by Es Devlin in which the New Zealand singer and dancers acted out the drama of a house party. Months later, Lorde accused Kanye West and Kid Cudi of stealing her stage design. They denied it; meanwhile Devlin expressed her interest that both acts were “responding to our disjointed times”. A symbol for this era of precarious pop. LS Beyoncé Coachella festival, California, 14 April 2018 This spectacular feat of artistic and musical ingenuity disrupted and decolonised homogenous modern festival culture. Drawing on the traditions of historically black colleges and universities, black feminism and a reverence and sense of restitution for Beyoncé’s black musical forebears, it redefined the festival headline set. AK Stormzy Glastonbury festival, Somerset, 28 June 2019 The most potent moment of this set – a grand production featuring BMX bikers, ticker tape and a ballet interlude – was probably when Stormzy recited a list of 52 British MCs, charting the breadth of homegrown rap. His platforming of the scene was modest and generous, but Stormzy’s statuesque performance was its own form of evangelism. BBT Billie Eilish American Airlines arena, Miami, 9 March 2020 On the first night of her world tour (which was curtailed by the pandemic days later), Eilish unveiled the Not My Responsibility video, in which she rejected the toxic narrative surrounding her body image. It showed gutsy self-assurance to implicate her audience and say: I am not yours. This pointed separation of church and state broke the generations-old contract between teen stars and their spectators and exemplified Eilish’s self-preservation-first interpretation of pop stardom. AK • This article was amended on 11 and 14 February 2022. An earlier version said the blue plaque commemorating the Who’s 1970 performance at the University of Leeds was commissioned by English Heritage. In fact, it was the work of Leeds Civic Trust. And when the Crickets performed in the UK in 1958 they were a trio playing guitar, bass and drums, not “two guitars, bass and drums”. • Please share your legendary concerts below.With laser-guided precision, with the exactitude of a Nobel-winning rocket scientist or a world-class neurosurgeon, this film measures right up to what you’d expect from a movie based on a PlayStation video game. It’s a huge greenscreen action-adventure with a reasonable bang-buck ratio, but a box office algorithm where its heart is supposed to be. It’s all about a couple of ripped guys on the trail of some lost 16th-century gold belonging to legendary explorer Ferdinand Magellan; the film cheerfully rips off Indiana Jones, the National Treasure films with Nicolas Cage, and there’s a touch of The Goonies in there somewhere. Tom Holland has been doing some serious work with his personal trainer for his role as Nathan Drake, a tough kid with serious abs and a talent for parkour that looks like it is only partly faked with a stunt double. He is now making a few bucks as a cocktail waiter but he’s also a pickpocket, ripping off rich people in the bar – and dreaming of finding Magellan’s loot, which his adored older brother once told him about before mysteriously going missing. It’s then that Sully Sullivan (played by a detached Mark Wahlberg, who is maybe not entirely engaged with a second fiddle role) comes up to the light-fingered Nate in his bar with a proposition: a scene pinched from George Clooney meeting Matt Damon for the first time in Ocean’s Eleven. They can team up to search for the gold, and maybe find Nate’s brother, too. But in doing so, they come across some tough customers: gold hunter Chloe (Sophia Ali) and ice-cold martial arts warrior Braddock (Tati Gabrielle) who is in the pay of the smooth-voiced bad guy Moncada (Antonio Banderas). The lovable rogues bop around from glamorous location to glamorous location and the whole thing runs smoothly enough, with some spectacular touches. Holland gives it his all, but the rest of the cast look a little less committed. An efficient, soulless hologram of a film. • Uncharted is released on 11 February in the UK, 17 February in Australia and 18 February in the US.When Robert Mark was appointed commissioner of the Metropolitan police in the 1970s he wryly suggested his ambition was to ensure the service arrested more criminals than it employed. In the five years of his leadership (1972 to 1977) Mark’s success can be measured by the 50 criminal officers he put before a court, and the nearly 500 others who were swept out of the organisation as a result of his ruthless uncovering of the entrenched and institutionalised corruption which had protected them for too long. Last week the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, put the current commissioner Cressida Dick on notice that the behaviour of her officers was a return to the bad old days of the 70s, when corruption went hand in hand with sexism and racism as an unchallenged cultural norm within Scotland Yard. But Dick – appointed the first female commissioner in 2017 and, as our most prominent officer, the symbol for policing nationwide – never had the clarity of vision and purpose to follow Mark’s well documented example of how to effectively cleanse the rot from an organisation. Perhaps this is because to tackle such systemic problems, you have to admit they exist in the first place, something Dick singularly failed to do. Instead as commissioner, she repeatedly employed the excuse that the horrific behaviour of Metropolitan police officers was the work of the odd “bad ’un”. She never saw that the unchecked behaviour of multiple bad ’uns amounted to a culture of impunity, or that the repeated themes of violent misogyny, racism, homophobia and abuse of power in the wrongdoing of officers was a sign of a systemic problem. Dick, who was put on warning by Khan that she had days or weeks to radically alter her stance on the Met’s deep-seated problems, was unable to join the dots. In turbulent times, sound leadership, as Mark displayed, can force through radical change. But where he joined the Met police as an outsider, a senior officer from the Leicestershire constabulary, Dick is Met police through and through. Known affectionately by some as Cress, she rose to senior roles having been one of the Met rank and file, is steeped in its values and sense of exceptionalism, and ultimately imbued with unerring loyalty to her force. Scandal after scandal has rocked her organisation, and the public’s trust in her officers: the abduction, rape and murder of Sarah Everard by serving officer Wayne Couzens; the taking of photos by officers at the murder scene of two sisters; the misogyny and racism exhibited by officers at Charing Cross station, the threats to kill a female colleague made by one of those same officers; the sharing of disgusting pornography between colleagues on armed protection at Downing Street; and the signs of deep-rooted homophobia in the inept investigation into serial killer Stephen Port. But after each one, Dick has simply apologised or retreated, apparently blind to what became glaringly obvious to others: something at the core of her organisation was dark and wrong. Take her words when Couzens pleaded guilty to the kidnap, rape and murder of Everard; they were spoken from the perspective of someone whose greatest concern was the reputational damage to policing rather than a duty to protect the public. “All of us in the Met are sickened, angered and devastated by this man’s truly dreadful crimes. Everyone in policing feels betrayed,” she said. But for those outside the closed ranks of policing, it was the Met who had done the betraying and the public, in particular women, who were the betrayed. Speaking after the revelations that two male officers had taken pictures of the scene where sisters Nicole Smallman and Bibaa Henry lay fatally stabbed, Dick’s apology was so heavily qualified as to be no apology at all. “If those officers’ actions have added to the family’s unimaginable distress then I apologise,” she said. The mayor of London was true to his word, when on Thursday he withdrew his support, and she was forced to resign. Her resignation came after a public statement on Thursday in which she claimed that she led Met “very well”; indeed she believed she had already transformed the force and maintained the trust of the rank and file. As the search begins for her successor, there are lessons to learn in examining what Dick never did in the face of the repeated impropriety, abuse of power and at times criminal wrongdoing of some of her officers. She should have publicly admitted there was a problem with the whole culture of the force, clearly identified the standards her officers must adhere to, and then made sure they were enforced ruthlessly and comprehensively, all the time. Sir Paul Stephenson, commissioner from 2009 to 2011, used to say “intrusive supervision” of his officers was required to ensure they upheld standards and avoided corrupt behaviour. And after the Macpherson report into the murder of Stephen Lawrence, Sir Ian Blair, another former commissioner, said Met police officers needed to show real humility and willingness to change if they were to build new credibility with the public. But that humility and willingness to change never came from Dick, who only recently was spending public money denying there was a systemic problem of prejudice within her organisation Lawyers for the Met argued successfully in December at the inquest into the four young gay men murdered by Port that the issue of homophobic prejudice should not be considered by the jury. The lawyers said the mistakes were explained by “forgetfulness, indolence, lack of training, stress, overwork or inadequate supervision and management” – not prejudice. Nothing in the Met’s behaviour, as it was rocked by more and more shocking revelations, suggested Dick ever understood the need for transparent and honest scrutiny of her force in order to tackle its cultural problems. Instead, Dick’s approach was to play down events and keep things quiet. At gross misconduct disciplinary hearings for two of the Charing Cross officers, the men were given anonymity, even though one of them had been the subject of a criminal conviction for threatening to murder a female colleague. No transparency there. Mark is remembered because he displayed an uncompromising boldness of thought that put the public first in his cleansing of the Met of the 1970s; he did not resort to sticking-plaster solutions when it was abundantly clear the requirement was major surgery. These times called for similar decisiveness. But Dick never rose to the task, and, unendingly loyal to her beloved Met, was not willing to face the turbulence and resentments which would have been provoked by taking on the malign culture within it. Where Dick failed, there is a desperate need now for someone, perhaps an individual with the dispassionate and fearless eye of an outsider, to succeed. Sandra Laville, a former Guardian crime correspondent, is now its environment correspondentHungary’s far-right prime minister Viktor Orbán is hoping Donald Trump will travel to Budapest in the coming weeks to boost his reelection campaign. A thinktank linked to the Orbán government, the Centre for Fundamental Rights, has issued an invitation to Trump, a government source told The Guardian. The invitation comes as Orbán moves into campaigning mode ahead of a closely fought election due on 3 April, when his Fidesz party will face a united opposition coalition, in what is seen as the biggest challenge to his rule since he became prime minister 12 years ago. “People in Fidesz would really like Trump to visit Budapest in March,” said the source, who added that Trump has not yet replied to the invite. If it happens, the visit would be Trump’s first known trip outside the US since he lost the elections in 2020. Orbán was an early Trump supporter, endorsing him as early as summer 2016, and he also publicly backed him in the 2020 vote. The pair spoke by telephone in January, and Trump returned the favour, publicly endorsing Orbán for the April election. An in-person visit by the former US president would be seen as a major campaign boost. “These visits have a huge influence in the Hungarian conservative community, because they see [Trump] as an icon, as someone who spent his presidency in a strong headwind,” said a source close to Fidesz. One former Republican staffer said Trump is known to fear contracting Covid while travelling abroad and may prefer not to travel. Liz Harrington, chief spokesperson for Trump, did not respond to a request for comment. Asked to comment on various aspects of the invite, Orbán’s spokesman Zoltán Kovács responded with one word: “Nope.” It is likely that Trump has been invited to the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), due to be held from 25-26 March in Budapest. It will be the first time a European country hosts the flagship conservative event. Miklos Szanthó, the director of the Center for Fundamental Rights, told the Hungarian news agency MTI that a number of US senators would attend the conference, as well as Santiago Abascal, the leader of Spain’s Vox party and Jair Bolsonaro’s son Eduardo. Fidesz is hoping that Trump will join Orbán as the event’s keynote speaker, the Hungarian government source said. “According to our plans a number of high profile Americans will attend CPAC Hungary, including politicians, as well as prominent thinkers and opinion leaders on the right. We are certain that any fresh information regarding guests and speakers will reach you in due course of time,” said Szanthó. The thinktank’s mission statement says it acts as a “counter against today’s overgrown human rights fundamentalism and political correctness”. It is known for echoing the government’s communications and creating propaganda videos. According to research by the investigative Hungarian news outlet, Átlátszó, almost all of their budget is provided by grants financed from public funds. Trump and Orbán met during a 2019 White House visit, when Trump said the two men were similar: “You’re respected all over Europe. Probably a bit like me, a little bit controversial, but that’s OK”. David Cornstein, a long-time friend who Trump appointed ambassador to Hungary, said Trump admired Orbán for his strongman image and his control of the Hungarian political scene: “He would love to have the situation that Viktor Orbán has,” Cornstein said in 2019. After Trump left office, Orbán’s relations with Washington soured, and Hungary was the only EU nation not invited to Joe Biden’s recent Democracy Summit. Relations with the Trump camp have remained strong. In September, former vice-president Mike Pence spoke to a conference on conservative social values hosted by Orbán. Former attorney general Jeff Sessions was also a recent visitor. Fox News host Tucker Carlson also spent time in Hungary earlier this year, broadcasting several shows from Budapest and making a “documentary” that painted Hungary as a conservative paradise, under constant attack by the Hungarian-born billionaire, George Soros. It was Carlson’s second trip to Hungary in less than a year. Last August he travelled to Budapest to interview Orbán. A few weeks after the Hungarian PM’s appearance on Fox, Trump sent him a letter of congratulations: “Great job on Tucker, proud of you!”Veleno: The Town of Lost Children 9pm, Sky Documentaries In the 90s, 16 children were taken from their families in northern Italy and placed into care. After being accused of running a paedophile ring, the parents have always maintained their innocence. This five-part documentary follows a journalist unpicking the case decades later. Were these children victims of satanic abuse, or did hysteria blur the truth? It’s a slow, sometimes salacious, burn, but everyone involved is treated with respect thanks to director Hugo Berkeley’s forensic approach. Henry Wong Your Garden Made Perfect 8pm, BBC Two More garden design under the cheerful supervision of host Angela Scanlon. Tonight’s biggest challenge for the designers is Andrew and Paolo – Paolo is easy-going enough, but Andrew’s amiable yet persistent control-freakery will need to be overcome. Phil Harrison George Clarke’s Amazing Spaces 8pm, Channel 4 Tonight, a Norfolk dad surprises his camping-crazy kids with a renovated VW van, while an Isle of Wight bomb shelter becomes a bijou bar. Elsewhere, master craftsman Will Hardie checks out a Russian-inspired Grayson Perry creation on an Essex riverbank. Ali Catterall A Discovery of Witches 9pm, Sky Max The penultimate episode gives fans of the fantasy series some of the pay-offs they’ve been waiting for, as Diana (Teresa Palmer) once again causes waves in the Bodleian library, as she did back at the very start. Plus, a big villain is comprehensively whupped. Jack Seale Dating No Filter 10pm, Sky Max Half Gogglebox, half First Dates, this series lets a pair of sofa-bound comedians commentate on date footage. Returning for a second series, the talent roster includes London Hughes, Asim Chaudhry and Joel Dommett, who are on fine, zingy form as they shoot out quips such as: “He’s dressed like he’s going to bundle her in a van!” Alexi Duggins The Graham Norton show 10.35pm, BBC One It’s a line-up of Oscar winners tonight, with Helen Mirren and Jim Broadbent chatting about their new film The Duke. Bridgerton’s Golda Rosheuvel also joins in. ADTop story: Partygate could be hot potato for successor Good morning – Warren Murray bringing you the last but certainly not least consequential briefing of the week. Cressida Dick has been forced out as head of the Metropolitan police after London’s mayor accused her of failing to deal with a culture of misogyny and racism in Britain’s biggest force. Sadiq Khan had previously put Dick “on notice” that she had to rapidly reform Scotland Yard or lose his support for her leadership. His confidence in her was shaken to breaking point by a scandal at Charing Cross police station where officers shared racist, sexist, misogynistic and Islamophobic messages. Dick is currently responsible for the “partygate” investigation, which could decide the fate of Boris Johnson as prime minister. As Peter Walker points out, if the investigation lingers beyond her tenure, it will be the hottest of political potatoes to pass to a successor. Here are some of the possible contenders. Dick will stay in her role for what is described as “a short period” while a new commissioner is appointed. A number of MPs called for Dick to resign in March 2021 after her officers arrested women taking part in a vigil for Sarah Everard, who had been murdered by one of their colleagues. In September the home secretary, Priti Patel, announced she had extended Dick’s five-year term for another 24 months, being unconvinced that any prospective successors were ready. Dick began as a constable in 1983 and became Met commissioner in 2017. Her career in the senior ranks has been battered by several controversies, including the notorious killing of Jean Charles de Menezes by police who thought he was a suicide bomber. * * * ‘Warning time is going down’ – Boris Johnson said he feared Europe stood “on the edge of a precipice” as some experts declared Russia has assembled an invasion-ready force on the borders of Ukraine. After meeting Johnson, Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said: “The number of Russian forces is going up. The warning time for a possible attack is going down.” The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, held frosty discussions with her counterpart in Moscow and announced further sanctions legislation. Sergei Lavrov said it was a conversation of “the mute with the deaf”. Truss challenged Lavrov over his assertion that Russia is not threatening anyone: “I can’t see any other reason for having 100,000 troops stationed on the border,” she said. Keir Starmer also visited Nato’s headquarters and said Labour “is standing by the UK government’s approach”, but accused ministers of not doing enough to tackle Russian “dirty money” flowing into the UK. Starmer rebuked Britain’s Stop the War Coalition, which has Jeremy Corbyn in its leadership, as “naive” and giving “succour to authoritarian leaders who directly threaten democracies”. Overnight, Joe Biden has warned that “things could go crazy quickly” in Ukraine and urged American citizens to leave immediately. In Berlin last night, Russia and Ukraine said they had failed to reach any breakthrough in talks involving French and German officials. The UK’s defence secretary, Ben Wallace, is due to continue the diplomatic round in Moscow today. * * * Net zero critics in small digits – MPs not fully behind net zero are “a small minority” and the government should stay committed to its climate crisis goals, a cross-party group of parliamentarians has said. It comes after the Guardian reported on the Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG) of 19 Conservatives, accused of attempting to derail the government’s green agenda. The chairs of eight all-party parliamentary groups, including on climate change, net zero, clean air and fuel poverty, have written a letter to the Guardian vowing they will “continue to support and promote ambitious environmental leadership in parliament”. * * * Women’s audit at Holyrood – It will be “really disappointing” if the Scottish parliament cannot attract more female politicians within the next five years, says Holyrood’s presiding officer, as she launches a women’s audit to investigate barriers to representation and participation. Alison Johnstone, the equivalent of the Commons speaker, has suggested political parties are falling short in selecting female candidates, and signalled that the hybrid working arrangements used during lockdown and which suited working women in particular could become permanent. Last May’s elections returned the most diverse MSP group ever – 58 women, making up 45% of the parliament. But three female MSPs stood down, citing the difficulties of managing family life and their role. The audit will be led by a cross-party board of MSPs and academics. * * * Better sleep may cut dementia – Researchers in the US have shed light on why Alzheimer’s disease is linked to people having experienced sleep disturbances years beforehand. The disease is related to plaques and tangles of proteins that steadily build up in the brain. Immune cells called microglia seek out and destroy these proteins. Dr Jennifer Hurley, who led the research at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in New York, has described how microglia work on a circadian rhythm which, if disturbed, hampers their work. “Good sleep hygiene” could therefore help to tackle Alzheimer’s. Hurley said it might also be possible to stimulate the clean-up with simple interventions such as exposure to light, or more sophisticated therapies that boost activity of immune cells. Today in Focus podcast: The persecution of witches They were accused of sorcery but they were just ordinary women. Libby Brooks reports on a Scottish campaign to pardon those persecuted in witch trials 300 years ago. Lunchtime read: 50 gigs that changed music Five decades after David Bowie’s seminal tour, our music writers reflect on the concerts that have left a mark, from Billie Holiday to Billie Eilish. Sport At the Winter Olympics, the Great Britain women’s team is starting off against the Republic of Korea. The Team GB men have lost out to the USA in their curling match. Laura Deas was running outside medal contention earlier in the women’s skeleton. Ayumu Hirano has clinched gold for Japan in the men’s snowboard halfpipe, where USA’s Shaun White, the three-time Olympic champion, fell on his last run before retirement and finished off the podium. Keep up with the action at our live blog. The 15-year-old Russian skater Kamila Valieva tested positive for the banned heart medication trimetazidine in a sample collected on Christmas Day, the Independent Testing Agency has confirmed. The sample was analysed by a Swedish laboratory only on Tuesday 8 February, after she led her team to gold in figure-skating. It is still unclear whether the team will lose their medal or if Valieva will be allowed to compete further. In the Premier League, a Diogo Jota double sank goalless Leicester to maintain Liverpool’s title pursuit. Gabriel Martinelli’s first-half tap-in against Wolves was enough to secure Arsenal’s first win in six games, only for him to be sent off in the second half. Scotland have followed the Springboks’ lead and changed their entire front row for their Six Nations clash against Wales; while the odds on what was shaping up to be the most evenly poised match of this Six Nations took a sudden lurch after the Ireland captain, Johnny Sexton, was ruled out of Saturday’s game against France with a hamstring strain. The Aston Martin drivers Sebastian Vettel and Lance Stroll have criticised Formula One for putting entertainment before the sport at last season’s controversial and decisive Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. The drivers accused the FIA and F1 of poor judgment in the decision-making that cost Lewis Hamilton the title. Business The continued rise in US inflation and the threat of more interest rates rises by the US Federal Reserve to combat soaring prices has put markets on edge in Asia overnight. The FTSE100 looks like slipping around 0.4% this morning as a result while the pound is on $1.354 and €1.188. But it’s not just the US where prices are going up, as our writers report here. The papers The departure of Cressida Dick as Britain’s most senior police officer is the main story in most of the papers on Friday – we have a separate roundup and a summary follows. The Guardian leads with “Met police chief forced out over toxic culture failings”. The Times says “Scramble for new Met chief after Dick quits” and reports that her resignation had “blindsided” the home secretary, Priti Patel, who has to find a replacement. The Telegraph’s main story says “Cressida Dick forced out as head of the Met” The Mail’s splash headline is: “Calamity Cressida fired – but what took so long?”. The Express leads with “Fears grow for Queen as Charles gets Covid”, but it has a picture of Dick on its front page and says “Scandal hit Yard chief Cressida Dick FINALLY quits”. The i goes with the line that Dick had announced her intention to stay earlier on Thursday, only to realise Khan was not going to back her: “Defiant Met chief forced out of Yard”. The Metro leads with “Cressida ditched” while the Yorkshire Post has “Dick quits as Metropolitan police chief”. The Mirror leads on “Queen Covid scare” but has a small story on its front and the headline “Top cop Dick forced out”. Ditto the Sun, which leads on the royals but has a secondary story on the Met chief: “Dick axed for scandal at Met”. The FT’s main front-page picture is the outgoing police chief and the headline “Dick forced to quit after report into sexism and racism at Met”. Its main story is “Johnson looks for investment ‘big bang’ with regulatory deal”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe head of Australia’s peak aged care body has linked New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet’s decision to lift Covid restrictions late last year to the deaths of hundreds of aged care residents. Appearing before a NSW parliamentary inquiry into the government’s response to Covid-19 on Friday, the chief executive of Aged and Community Services Australia, Paul Sadler, said his organisation – which represents not-for-profit aged care homes – had in December raised the risks posed to the sector from a widespread lifting of restrictions once cases of Omicron began appearing in the community. “Of course what happened was the premier made the decision to continue down the pathway of opening up and within days the number of outbreaks in residential [facilities] skyrocketed and there are now hundreds of deaths in NSW in aged care since that decision was taken,” Sadler said. But the health minister, Brad Hazzard, told the inquiry he could not recall the advice, saying it “certainly wasn’t on my agenda” in the lead up to 15 December, and that the government had been “constantly weighing up” competing interests before reopening the state. Appearing ahead of Hazzard, Sadler told the committee that after the first case of Omicron was recorded in NSW at the end of November, he had urged the government “to be very careful” because of a lack of supply of rapid antigen tests and the risk of widespread staff shortages in the event of a large outbreak. “We were already flagging with the NSW government that, for goodness sake be very careful, we don’t think we’re prepared sufficiently because there’s not the supply of rapid antigen tests from the federal government yet [and] because there would be other potential consequences on the work force if there was widespread community transmission,” he said. But he said the warning was ignored. The government lifted a number of Covid-19 restrictions on 15 December, including on indoor mask mandates and density limits. The restrictions were reinstated eight days later on 23 December but Sadler said by then cases in the sector had “skyrocketed”. Sadler’s testimony was echoed by the chief executive of aged care provider Warrigal Care, Mark Sewell, who told the inquiry that during discussions with both aged care providers and the business community in the lead up to easing restrictions he witnessed “two worlds that clashed”. “It would be fair to say it is universally accepted now that [the reopening] happened too quickly,” he said. “Inevitably it needed to happen for Australia to get back to work but it should have been delayed until the middle of January.” But appearing before the committee both Hazzard and the health secretary, Elizabeth Koff, said they could not recall being given that advice prior to lifting restrictions, with the minister saying the government had taken advice from both the health department as well as a number of other agencies. “We were certainly looking at all aspects of the community as we always have [but] that information certainly wasn’t something I remember being at the forefront of discussions,” Hazzard said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He pointed to growing community dissatisfaction in the lead up to 15 December, and the need to balance the health advice with the advice of other agencies such as treasury and police, and had taken the “cautious” decision to delay the reopening from the original date of 1 December. “We were constantly weighing up [that advice, and asking] how do we take the community with us,” he said. Despite Covid case numbers exploding across Australia once the Omicron outbreak occurred, the decision by Perrottet to lift restrictions on 15 December has continued to dog the state government. Last month the Guardian revealed health officials in NSW had warned the government that vaccines “may be less effective” against the Omicron variant and could lead to an increase in hospitalisations, just days before Perrottet announced Covid-19 restrictions would be scrapped.Pick of the week Severance “Am I livestock?” It’s a dramatic question being asked by a woman who has just awoken, face down on a conference table with no idea of her own name. This moody thriller takes the issue of work-life balance and goes full Black Mirror with it. The employees who haunt the backlit, featureless corridors of Lumon Industries have undergone a procedure to separate their consciousness of work and personal lives. The result is obliteration but, arguably, a sort of freedom too. It’s a haunting, Kafkaesque affair, with Adam Scott starring as Mark Scout – an employee who finds himself entangled in the mystery at the heart of the company. Apple TV+, from Friday 18 February *** The Marvelous Mrs Maisel Some people felt that season three of this debonair comedy suffered for leaving New York and setting off on tour. But as we rejoin Midge (Rachel Brosnahan), her gig with Shy Baldwin has careered off the rails and she’s back to square one. Possibly worse than square one, in fact, since her manager Susie (Alex Borstein) has gambled away their money. There’s a wonderful set piece on a Coney Island ferris wheel during which Midge’s problems are loudly itemised, but part of the delight of this show is its breezy insouciance: Midge is sufficiently talented and self-possessed to stroll out of the tightest of spots. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 18 February *** Bel-Air Is it possible to imagine anyone other than Will Smith as Will Smith? We’re about to find out as this reboot of the anticipated 90s comedy drops. This time, the tone is radically different; Will’s life is distinctly less happy-go-lucky as we learn why he relocated from Philly to Cali. It is, at heart, a tale of class, racism and systemic inequality as the beefs of Will’s past threaten to cloud his new, gated, pristine life. Decidedly less fun than the original series, then. Newcomer Jabari Banks is the man with the task of bringing Will back to life. Peacock on Sky, from Monday 14 February *** I Am Shauna Rae After chemotherapy for childhood cancer, Shauna Rae went into remission, but it had a side-effect. The treatment disabled her pituitary gland and she stopped growing. Now, she’s a 22-year-old woman stuck in an eight-year-old’s body. This startling series tracks her attempts to navigate young adulthood. It’s hard not to smile at certain incidents – particularly at the double-takes Shauna receives in bars and tattoo parlours. But being taken seriously – professionally and romantically – is a constant battle. Happily, it’s one she seems well-equipped to fight. Discovery+, from Monday 14 February *** Marvel Studios: Assembled – The Making of Eternals The Marvel Cinematic Universe has now extended to the very meta exercise of making documentaries about the film-making process. It’s essentially that DVD staple, the bonus feature, repurposed for the content-hungry world of streaming to help meet fans’ insatiable appetite for extra content. Chloé Zhao’s 2021 film itself was lauded more for its production values than its complexity or nuance, so getting some insight into the behind-the-scenes details of such a gargantuan undertaking is bound to be fascinating. Disney+, from Wednesday 16 February *** Jeen-Yuhs Documentaries about creative lives tend to be at their best during the thrilling formative years; the ascent, the flowering, the will to power. This is doubly the case in a three-part series tracking Kanye West from nerdy, wildly talented college dropout with a backpack full of beats to creatively stalled Maga cap-wearing provocateur. It’s immediately clear that West’s life has been documented exhaustively and there’s a thrilling intimacy to the early stages of the documentary, which are an essential, warts-and-all evocation of the megastar as a young man. Netflix, from Wednesday 16 February *** The Cuphead Show! Based on the video game Cuphead, this animation feels a natural fit for narrative development. It’s probably because the game itself is a curiously retro-styled affair whose aesthetic harks back to the first “golden age” of American animation with its cartoons from the Fleischer and Disney studios. As such, the quirky, sometimes charming stories – which follow the adventures of the mildly volatile Cuphead and his more measured brother Mugman – might very well have as much appeal to nostalgic adults as to their young offspring. Netflix, from Friday 18 FebruaryStart Bowden Bridge car park (£5 in coins) Distance 8¾ miles Time 5 hours Total ascent 662 metres Difficulty Moderate, harder in bad weather Google map of the route We leave the car at Bowden Bridge, a nondescript small car park in a deep forested glade by a rushing stream called the Kinder. There is a pay-and-display machine that accepts money, but gives no tickets. We have the place to ourselves – unsurprisingly, as a relentless shower of sleet is being slung in our faces as we set out. Almost 90 years ago, a much larger crowd left this same car park: more than 400 people were ready to march up on to Kinder Scout, risking prosecution and a battering from the Duke of Devonshire’s hired thugs. This is the spot where the mass trespass of 24 April 1932 began, a day celebrated by honest hillwalkers ever after, and a day groused about by get-orf-my-estate types. It was arguably the day the idea of British national parks and trails changed from a pipe dream to an inevitability, although it did take a further 17 years to achieve. And it was only one battle in a war that continues: a conflict between privileged privacy and everyone else. Our plan had been to emulate those pioneers and head up the ravine known as William Clough, but that route, I know, is slippery and steep and crisscrosses the stream many times, not a pleasant prospect in current conditions. So we take the easier ascent, hoping to come back that way when the weather has relented. We follow a motorable lane that bends to the south, passing stands of pine trees and distant views of cloud-topped fells. There is no one around but down this trail comes, to our astonishment, a Bentley. Then we notice a small fishing lake tucked away behind a high wire fence with a sign saying: “No entry. Guarded by attack dogs.” I peer through the wire, but the hounds of Hooray are not to be seen. We leave the rough road behind and the footpath starts to ascend. There are no more houses, trees or Bentleys. This is what the wage-slaves of Manchester were seeking: the feeling you get when the line is crossed and you enter the wild upper realms of tussock, tup and heather. There is also plenty of snow in deep untrodden drifts as we follow the rough track alongside Oaken Clough and reach the medieval gritstone monument known as Edale Cross, reputedly erected by Cistercian monks in 1157. Carry on eastwards from here and you would pass the Jacob’s Ladder waterfall, but we turn north, taking the ridgeline over Kinder Low and on to Kinder Downfall. The trail is fairly easy to follow, being paved with stone slabs, although large snow drifts do occasionally complicate matters. The Downfall is a 30-metre waterfall tucked into a deep cleft that gathers the westerly wind so efficiently that the water is frequently blown straight back up the rock, a spectacular sight worth seeing. We jump across the stream and continue through a vicious sleet storm to the head of William Clough, the narrow gulch that leads back down. This route is so well-trodden these days that it is hard to imagine it was once off-limits to most people. Hill walking had become a popular pastime by the 1930s and the limited number of public footpaths would get crowded on Sundays, the only free day for most working people. The well-mannered and polite campaigning of some rambling organisations had achieved almost nothing and one 20-year-old hiker, Benny Rothman from Manchester, was determined to break the stalemate. From the quarry car park he and the others – including a “special correspondent from the Manchester Guardian” – walked up William Clough and fought “a brief but vigorous hand-to-hand struggle” with the gamekeepers, pushing their way to the ridge, where they held a victory celebration. At the head of William Clough, I do not feel victorious. The sleet is driving into my face so hard that it hurts. We are soaked through and shivering. The clough is a deep slithery defile and we have to make numerous crossings before we finally reach the Kinder reservoir, regain the road and make it back to the car – with its blessed heater. The trespassers had better weather, but their luck ran out as they walked back into Hayfield village. Six of them were arrested and later charged with unlawful assembly. Rothman was sentenced to four months in Leicester prison, a vindictive sentence that did a lot to gather public support for the right to roam. Whether the mass trespass helped or hindered the campaign is still the subject of debate; it certainly divided opinion at the time. In 1935, Harvey Jackson, an 18-year-old who had marched with the trespass, applied to join Derbyshire police and found himself interviewed by the man who had arrested Benny Rothman, assistant chief constable James Garrow. Reading his application form, Garrow noticed a list of hobbies and frowned. “Jackson,” he said disapprovingly, “we do not like hill walkers in Derbyshire. They are not welcome.” That kind of attitude, thankfully, is long gone. The pub Less than a mile from the car park is the village of Hayfield, which the protest marchers walked through, and it has several pubs. We reach the Pack Horse, which was taken over by Luke Payne and Emma Daniels a few years ago and is making a name for itself with its great food. A delicious cauliflower and Lincolnshire Poacher cheese soup gets me started, followed by mutton merguez sausages with lentils and roots vinaigrette. All the meat comes from the local butcher, with plenty of High Peak lamb on offer. If the food is upmarket, the ambience is still local and friendly, with a quiz night on Wednesdays, two log-burners and local hand-pulled ales – with which we raise a toast to Benny Rothman and his fellow valiant campaigners. thepackhorsehayfield.uk Rooms The Pack Horse does not have rooms, but can recommend several B&amp;Bs and cottages in the area. We stay in one of two cottages at Overlea Farm (seven nights from £578): ours has a hot tub, which is a joy after an icy day. These spacious conversions are done to a high spec – the smart TV is linked to a Sonos sound system and iPad room controls – but best of all they are kept warm and cosy by an air-source heat pump. • This article was amended on 12 February 2022. The waterfall Jacob’s Ladder is east of Edale Cross, not west as an earlier version said.Around 9.30am on 15 January of this year, Michelle Go was waiting for a train at Times Square subway station. Go, 40, a senior manager at Deloitte, was on her way to work. As she was checking her phone, a man shoved her from behind as a train roared into the station. She was hit by the incoming train and killed. Go’s murder prompted shock and outrage. She was of Asian descent, at a time when anti-Asian hate crimes have been surging across New York City, including in the subways. The chief suspect in her killing, Martial Simon, has two violent felonies on his record and a warrant out for allegedly violating his parole. He reportedly had a history of severe mental illness, including schizophrenia, and had cycled between hospitals and jails over the years; the New York Times reported he was unhoused. Although police said there was no indication that Go’s death was an anti-Asian hate crime, prosecutors said they were examining “every piece of evidence to determine if defendant’s actions were motivated by racial bias”. Whoever her alleged killer is, or whatever his motives, Go’s death seemed to crystallize many New Yorkers’ sense of fear that their subway, infamously dangerous decades ago, was once again becoming unsafe – due to random crime or an influx of at-risk persons acting erratically, or both. The new mayor, Eric Adams, has responded forcefully. A former police captain who ran for office on law-and-order talking points, Adams said Go’s death “just really doubled down on our concerns that our system must be safe”. He referred to the way some New Yorkers now “feel as though there’s a total level of disorder in our subway system”. Joe Biden descended on New York City last week to meet Adams and New York’s governor, Kathy Hochul, at the New York police department headquarters, to discuss rising crime across the US. The president’s visit, which focused on curbing gun crime across New York and other major US cities, came after the killings of NYPD officers Jason Rivera and Wilbert Mora, who were shot last month responding to a domestic violence call. “The answer is not to defund the police,” Biden said. “It’s to give you the tools, the training, the funding to be partners, to be protectors – and the community needs you. Know the community.” Adams had already vowed to make police an “omnipresence” in the subway, adding 50,000 citywide subway inspections from 6 January to 26 January and deploying an additional 1,000 extra officers into subways daily. The political response, however, simplifies what is an incredibly complicated story now playing out over safety, not just on the subway but citywide. The subways are statistically quite safe, compared with previous decades – albeit somewhat less safe than a few years ago. Rates of violent crime per million passengers have increased since 2019, according to the New York Times; and while New York remains one of the safest cities in the US, The City reports that in 2021 “the most serious crimes were up 5% from the previous year, including murders that have been on the rise since 2018”. But, overall crime is nowhere near late-1980s and 1990s highs. The definition of safety, however, varies dramatically depending who you talk to. Many female New Yorkers say the statistics don’t tell the whole story. “No, I don’t feel safe,” said Tanya Murphy, a 40-year-old massage therapy student. “Tragedies of people being pushed, you know, these just reinforce feeling unsafe, and … my friends, or people I know, they’re always like, ‘Hey, be careful in the subway.’” Therin Pressley, 55, who was in the Times Square subway station on a recent Wednesday with three dogs, raising money for animals, believed the pandemic’s impact on the economy and mental health had contributed to violent crime on the subways. “I feel safe in a way because, look at me: I’m 6ft 5in, I’m like 200lb. I don’t look like an easy [prey],” he said, but added: “You got guys out here pulling guns on buses, trains … You have cops out here being shot, so you’re not safe anywhere.” Jorge Arteaga, deputy director at the anti-street harassment organization Hollaback!, said that safety in public spaces is often thought of in the context of recorded physical violence, whereas menacing behavior should also be considered. “What are we defining as safety, or making the trains safer – are people still being cursed at? Hit? Spit at?” Arteaga said. Harassment often goes unreported, especially if it doesn’t rise to a criminal level, meaning official metrics don’t always accurately convey experiences – and women, especially women of color, are disproportionately affected by inappropriate encounters, Arteaga said. “On paper, technically, what people are tracking – yeah it looks like it’s safer. In reality, when you go and speak to the people in the community, do they feel safer? Probably not.” Pandemic-fueled declines in ridership have also changed the feeling on the subway, he said. “If something were to happen to me on the train, do I feel like someone will meaningfully step in to support me?” Arteaga said. “Mostly, a lot of people would say ‘no.’” Safety is not just about physical attacks, agreed Manjusha Kulkarni, executive director of the Los Angeles-based AAPI Equity Alliance. “When we think of what it means, especially for women in our community but even just women generally: What are the ways in which we have modified our lives because we feel unsafe?” Neither Kulkarni nor Arteaga believe that ramped-up policing would necessarily solve these problems. Kulkarni said advocates want more discussion about practical ways to address the feeling of safety – such as ensuring adequate lighting in stations, and staff around to help. “Many, many incidents have happened – both women and men in our community, and those who are non-binary – involving threatening behavior on public transit. So how do we essentially stop that?” she said. Christopher Herrmann, a former crime statistics analyst for the New York police department who now teaches at John Jay College of Criminal Justice emphasized that the subways are still very safe, but noted that low ridership can be associated with changes in the types of crimes that occur. “The chances of being a victim in the New York City subway have always been one in a million or higher,” Herrmann said. “The chances of winning the lottery are similar to the chances of being victimized – it’s really that low. “When we see low ridership like we have now, sometimes we see some of the more violent kind of crime because, I think, the bad guys don’t see a lot of people around – they feel kind of more emboldened that no one’s going to kind of step in and be a good Samaritan.” What’s more, the subways have long been home to a large number of unhoused people like the suspect in Go’s murder, a fact that the pandemic – with its effect on the economy and on declining ridership – has brought to the fore. Beanca Beleno, who takes the subway home from her kitchen job late at night, said she sees a lot of erratic people on the train now. There’s the person who smokes. There’s the person who rants. There are people sleeping. “I can tell that it’s been worse, especially now. The Omicron is going on, and then it’s winter,” Beleno said. “They’re just all over on all the subway stations, all the trains.” Subway employees, too, are concerned about the number of people with mental health troubles, whose problems they are not charged with addressing. “Our workforce is scared,” the Metropolitan Transportation Authority chair and CEO, Janno Lieber, told a press conference last month. “In addition to our passengers, our workforce is struggling because they’re feeling vulnerable – because when they go to clean and they turn a corner, they’re coming upon … people with conditions that are unpredictable.” For many of the unhoused persons who seek shelter in the subways, treatment for mental health and substance abuse remains out of reach. “The reason that people are seeing folks on the subway who don’t have an obvious destination is because they don’t have a place to live – it’s that simple,” said Joshua Goldfein, staff attorney with the Legal Aid Society’s homeless rights project. “I think every New Yorker would tell you that they see more unhoused people on the subway than they used to. That doesn’t mean there are more people,” Goldfein said. “It seems safe to say that the problem has become more visible – and the reason for that, again, is that we have not provided enough alternative places for those people to live or to stay.” Advocates stress that they don’t think being unhoused, or having mental illness and substance abuse issues, makes you inherently dangerous, but that vulnerable people living without support in bustling, open spaces was of concern for everyone. “Anytime that you have somebody who is in need of a higher level of care than they’re getting – who’s in a stressful environment where they can’t get any rest, and they’re not able to regularly access their medication – there’s certainly going to be a heightened risk of negative interaction with other people,” Goldfein said. Asked about their strategy for helping unhoused people on subways, New York City social and homeless services officials said the agency had ramped up outreach and intensified their efforts at end-of-line and high-traffic subway stations. City-canvassing outreach staff had tripled in recent years, to 600, they said; Hochul recently announced the state would send in behavioral health specialists to help on the subways, who will help connect unhoused persons with social services and shelter. There is some cautious optimism that the measures could help. “We’re excited that this is happening,” Lieber said recently. “We know where a lot of these chronically homeless people who are experiencing mental health issues are – we just need to keep creating a system that gets them, first of all, off the platforms and off the trains [and then] into a long-term, supportive situation … But most of all, protect our riders from these experiences that are happening. That’s our focus,” Lieber said. “The issue is not the number of outreach workers. It’s what resources they have behind them.”The police officer who made a plan to arrest Kumanjayi Walker has denied the main reason she wanted the operation to start in the morning was so she could have a sleep, a court has heard. Yuendumu’s Sgt Julie Frost also denied she deliberately withheld evidence, during heated cross-examination in the trial of constable Zachary Rolfe on Friday. Rolfe, 30, is charged with murdering Walker, 19, in the remote community of Yuendumu on 9 November 2019. He has pleaded not guilty to murder and to two alternate charges. Frost was the officer in charge of Yuendumu station, about 300km north-west of Alice Springs, when Walker was shot dead. The Northern Territory supreme court has previously heard Frost requested officers from the immediate response team (IRT) to travel to Yuendumu on 9 November 2019 because of a series of issues within the community, and to assist in the arrest of Walker the following day. Rolfe, three colleagues in the IRT, which handles high-risk arrests, and an officer trained to handle police dogs, arrived in Yuendumu from Alice Springs later that day. Frost said she briefed the officers that they were to conduct high-visibility patrols of the community, familiarise themselves with the town, and gather intelligence on Walker, with a view to arresting him the following morning. Little more than 15 minutes after the briefing, Walker had been located by the officers and shot three times by Rolfe. He died about an hour later. Under cross-examination by David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, Frost denied that in a conversation with Rolfe immediately before the briefing she told him the plan to arrest Walker the following day would allow her to have a sleep. She agreed she wanted to rest after a busy period in the town, but that the morning arrest was a tactical decision designed to reduce the risk of a confrontation with Walker, who had threatened two police with an axe three days earlier. When Edwardson asked if she had told Rolfe that she had spent much of the past three days locked in the police station, and therefore had no intelligence on where Walker could be, she said she had never told him that. She also denied a suggestion by Edwardson that she had not printed copies of the operational plans for Rolfe and her colleagues, as she had said in evidence on Thursday. Supt Jody Nobbs, who oversees policing in 11 remote communities in the southern desert region, including Yuendumu, also gave evidence on Friday. He said that in a phone call with Frost on the morning of 9 November 2019, she told him she suspected Walker was responsible for a series of break-ins in Yuendumu, including at the house of the nurse in charge of the local clinic. The break-ins, which had not previously been reported to police, had prompted local medical staff to contact Frost telling her they planned to evacuate Yuendumu that day. The evacuation of medical staff, a large funeral scheduled to take place, the spate of break-ins, and the need to arrest Walker were all mentioned by Frost to Nobbs as reasons for the request for more resources, including the IRT. The funeral had been for a relative of Walker, and the court has previously heard that he had escaped from an alcohol rehabilitation facility in Alice Springs and removed an electronic monitoring bracelet as he wanted to attend. Nobbs said he and Frost discussed arresting Walker at the funeral, but decided against it. The court has previously heard Walker was shot by Rolfe after he pulled a pair of medical scissors from his pocket and brought them down in a stabbing motion into Rolfe’s left shoulder. A colleague of Rolfe, constable Adam Eberl, then struggled with Walker, who was shot soon after by Rolfe. The first shot is not subject to any charges but the second and third shots, which the prosecution alleges were fired several seconds later from close range by Rolfe when Eberl had control of Walker, are the basis for the murder charge. Edwardson has previously told the court Rolfe would defend his actions as being reasonable and justifiable in the context of the danger faced by him and Eberl. Edwardson said Rolfe was acting in self-defence, and to defend the life of Eberl, when he fired the second and third shots and his training emphasised that “edged weapon equals gun”. The defence also disputes that Eberl had control of Walker when the second and third shots were fired. The trial before Justice John Burns continues.Finding the right host for 7.30 will be no easy task. Just ask the ABC executives who stumbled momentarily when they replaced the towering figure of Kerry O’Brien with not one, but two, journalists in 2010. They also decided to change the name of “The 7.30 Report” to just “7.30”, something that still irks viewers. It’s a distant memory now, but Leigh Sales was not given the job of solo host initially. She was one half of a double-header with Chris Uhlmann, then an ABC political reporter. At the time, the Age called it “an unwieldy hosting policy that looked like a plot from Australian newsroom satire Frontline”. It didn’t last. Uhlmann eventually returned to being political editor while Sales hosted alone and a new executive producer, Sally Neighbour, was brought on at the end of 2012. A footnote to this is that Sales is being talked about as a replacement for Uhlmann, who has indicated he will retire after the election as Nine’s political editor. But given she wants to spend evenings at home with her two boys, 10 and 8, and she would have to live in Canberra, it seems unlikely. Successors While it is too early to say who will succeed Sales, the ABC only has to look internally to find a rich list of contenders. She’s new to television, but viewers seem to love political editor Laura Tingle. The show requires a Sydney or Melbourne host and Tingle is based in Canberra. Another one to watch is investigative reporter Sarah Ferguson, who returns from the US this year. She has been reporting from the States since her posting to China was aborted when she couldn’t get a visa. Ferguson hosted while Sales was on maternity leave, and has established herself as a tough political interviewer. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While she seems to prefer radio, Fran Kelly, who stood down from RN Breakfast very recently, can’t be ruled out. Kelly was once the show’s political editor. Virginia Trioli seems to be thriving in the morning radio shift at ABC Melbourne. But she is a formidable interviewer and could also be a good fit. Then there is David Speers, Insiders host, and Stan Grant, the ABC’s international affairs analyst and presenter of China Tonight. Highlights Sales says interviewing Paul McCartney and getting a hug from him was “one of the best days of my life”, and viewers certainly shared in her joy. “In all the years I’ve anchored, I’ve never had more viewers come up to me in public than after that interview to say how much joy it gave them, and it was so beautiful that people felt as if they had shared in that experience with me.” Her interview with John Laws in 2012 was another standout, although she left it out of her list of memorable moments when announcing her decision to leave on Thursday. The legendary radio broadcaster agreed to come on 7.30 and talk about his old rival Alan Jones, but ended up flirting with Sales as he nursed a glass of whisky. “I did enjoy it. Did you?” said Sales at the end of the interview. “Yeah, I loved every minute,” Laws said. Sales had big shoes to fill, taking over from O’Brien on 7.30, and then five years later taking on panel and hosting duties for the ABC’s 2016 federal election broadcast. Election hosting was a role which had been O’Brien’s domain for decades. At 1am, after a record-breaking seven-plus hours of anchoring the live broadcast, Sales said: “Yeah, we’ve broken the record. Suck on that, Kerry O’Brien,” dissolving the panel, which included Scott Morrison, into fits of laughter and creating a memorable television moment. Lowlights ABC colleague Virginia Trioli congratulated Sales for surviving “the toughest gig in the toughest of partisan times”, and even Sales’ harshest critics would have to give her that. While she wasn’t targeted by the Murdoch press like some other ABC presenters, she was relentlessly trolled on Twitter. She says she had one goal, “and that is to ask frank questions of people in power, without fear or favour”. But some armchair critics on Twitter repeatedly accuse her of going soft on conservatives and too hard on Labor. Last year, in a piece for ABC Online, she wrote: “Anyone who can stomach wading into mentions of @leighsales will find that virtually hourly, I am abused for doing my job, with a stream of tweets goading me to quit, demanding the ABC sack me, telling me I’m useless, stupid, biased and incompetent.” Sales is not alone. ABC News Breakfast co-host Lisa Millar has abandoned Twitter after a torrent of abuse about everything from her interview style to whether she smiles. Sales has also, quite literally, had missiles lobbed at her. She showed her characteristic toughness when she ducked a flying yoghurt pot aimed at her while she was speaking at an event in Perth in 2019. Covered in splashes of blueberry yoghurt, Sales told the audience “If everyone else is alright, I’m quite happy to go on. That was a waste of some perfectly good yoghurt, I’m afraid.”With that, we’ll wrap up the live blog for today. Here were the day’s major developments: Anthony Albanese says the head of spy agency Asio has not raised any concerns with him about Labor’s federal election candidates, stating Peter Dutton is engaged in “game-playing” with national security issues. The telco Optus has appointed the former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian, who is under investigation by the state’s corruption watchdog, to a senior executive role. The Australian government has officially listed the koala as endangered after a decline in its numbers due to land clearing and catastrophic bushfires shrinking its habitat. Ben Roberts-Smith told a fellow soldier he had shot an unarmed and captive Afghan teenager in the head with a pistol, and that killing him was “the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen”, the former comrade has told the federal court. The head of Australia’s peak aged care body has linked NSW premier Dominic Perrottet’s decision to lift Covid restrictions late last year to the deaths of hundreds of aged care residents. Religious groups have expressed disappointment at the federal government’s decision to shelve controversial religious discrimination laws, claiming parliament lost sight of the original intent of the legislation. Thanks for following along. Have a great evening. The police officer who made a plan to arrest Kumanjayi Walker has denied the main reason she wanted the operation to start in the morning was so she could have a sleep, a court has heard. Yuendumu’s Sgt Julie Frost also denied she deliberately withheld evidence, during heated cross-examination in the trial of constable Zachary Rolfe on Friday. Rolfe, 30, is charged with murdering Walker, 19, in the remote community of Yuendumu on 9 November 2019. He has pleaded not guilty to murder and to two alternate charges. Frost was the officer in charge of Yuendumu station, about 300km north-west of Alice Springs, when Walker was shot dead. The Northern Territory supreme court has previously heard Frost requested officers from the immediate response team (IRT) to travel to Yuendumu on 9 November 2019 because of a series of issues within the community, and to assist in the arrest of Walker the following day. Read more: Ben Roberts-Smith told a fellow soldier he had shot an unarmed and captive Afghan teenager in the head with a pistol, and that killing him was “the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen”, the former comrade has told the federal court. Asked what had happened to a young man “shaking like a leaf” after being taken from a Toyota Hilux found with bomb-making equipment inside, the witness claimed Roberts-Smith replied: “I shot that cunt in the head. [Person 15] told me not to kill anyone on the last job. So I pulled out my 9mm, shot the cunt in the side of the head, blew his brains out. It was the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen.” Giving evidence, the army medic, anonymised in court as Person 16, identified the body of the young Afghan in several pictures shown to him in court. The body was photographed with an AK-47 rifle. Person 16 said the young man was not carrying any weapons when he was taken captive and handcuffed. Roberts-Smith, a recipient of Australia’s highest military honour, the Victoria Cross, is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies all wrongdoing. Read more: One issue that is likely to get more attention, particularly as the federal election draws near, will be the transition to a low carbon economy, particularly in the electricity sector. There’ll be some irony in this focus. The Morrison government has been desperate to avoid a repeat of its national energy guarantee schmozzle – which arguably felled Malcolm Turnbull as prime minister – and so the commonwealth has largely avoided having any national plan for electricity. As we saw yesterday, AGL is accelerating the closure of two of the three coal-fired power stations, and its only other one – Liddell – starts shutting its remaining units later this year before being turned off entirely in April next year. In a separate analysis, I argue here that those two closures may come a lot quicker than AGL is currently stating, and we’re not very ready for those changes. AGL’s announcement, though, has also prompted Trevor St Baker, part owner of the Vales Point coal-fired power plant in NSW, to question the trends. Firms such as AGL – which will split into separate retailer and generator arms by June 30 – are “iconic” businesses that “have delivered, and still deliver, reliable and low-cost electricity that has been the mainstay of the Australian economic boom”, St Baker says. Not holding back, he goes on, telling Guardian Australia: Australian electricity consumers and workers in businesses made internationally uncompetitive as electricity supply becomes scarcer and 24/7 electricity unavailable, will rue the day that they voted for vacuous calls ‘for more action on climate change’ by political opportunists who have no idea how this could possibly be delivered any quicker than the existing stellar businesses are trying to achieve. Instead, they risk being “defeated by government intervention to placate the media-driven ‘climate-change frenzy’.” St Baker says. Others, of course, might argue government action has tended to lag the market, and in any case we need to get our skates on since we’ve already warmed at least 1C (Australia 1.44C) over the past century, and we don’t have a lot of time to linger if we want to avoid even more catastrophic impacts from a warming world. Former British prime minister Theresa May has called on Australia to ramp up its efforts to tackle climate change and to treat gender equality in politics as more than a box-ticking exercise. May told a Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry event in Melbourne on Friday that it was possible for nations to reduce emissions while also growing their economies. May said: I passionately believe that the arguments that we’ve seen all too often in the past, that either you can deal with climate change or you have an increasing economy but these cannot be done together, is absolutely wrong, You can do well by your economy and deal with climate change but it just means you have to do this in a different way … some of the innovations we’re seeing around climate change for the future, I think, are hugely exciting. She said Britain was the first major economy in 2019 to enshrine in law a commitment to reach net zero carbon emissions by 2050. Last year, Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison announced a plan for net zero emissions by the same year, though it is not legislated and at at least 15% of the reductions required relies on as-yet unknown “technology breakthroughs” in the future. May said: I recognise some of the issues around major elements of the Australian economy. But this really is the way of the future, and for younger generations it is so important. The future of the planet is their future and if we don’t do something about this, then sadly that future will be a rather different one from the prosperous and exciting future that we want it to be for them. May is in Melbourne at the invitation of the Victorian Liberal party and will hold several talks on getting more women in business and politics. The Quad countries want to provide options to nations in the Pacific without forcing them to choose, according to a readout of one of the meetings in Melbourne held today. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, met with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and the foreign ministers of Australia, Japan and India this afternoon. Morrison thanked the ministers for their support of the Aukus deal. A readout suggests Blinken reinforced that US president Joe Biden had underscored the importance of the Indo-Pacific, but the events in Ukraine challenged basic principles that all Quad partners wanted to see upheld. The meeting is understood to have been in agreement that the Quad’s engagement with south-east Asia should be broad, including vaccine distribution, infrastructure and financing, security cooperation and critical minerals and technologies. Amid concerns about debt-trap diplomacy in the Pacific, attendees at the meeting also agreed on the importance of the Quad providing options for countries in the region, but not forcing nations to choose. As mentioned in an earlier post, the RBA governor Philip Lowe was up before the House of Representatives economics committee for his half-yearly grilling (along with other RBA deputy chiefs). Lowe stressed not having a crystal ball and gave little away about the timing of a prospective rise in the official cash rate, other than one was “plausible” this year. As the CBA said in a summary: “The RBA continues to note it is too early to conclude inflation is sustainably within the [2-3%] target band. Where the inflation debate will heat up is how long the RBA will tolerate inflation above 3%.” “Lowe did comment it would be good to see a couple of more CPI points from here,” it said, implying he might not move for a couple more quarters. CBA, though, continues to expect inflation to accelerate and wages to rise, prompting the first rate increase in August. (Investors are betting it’s in June.) Rival big four bank, Westpac, also picks August as the starting point, with the cash rate to rise from its record low 0.1% to “a peak” of 1.75% by March. That shift “brings forward the timing of an anticipated correction phase for housing markets and means it will extend into 2024”, Westpac said in a note. “Despite some further gains near term, Westpac expects declines later in the year to see dwelling prices post a net gain of just 2% over 2022. Prices are then forecast to fall 7% in 2023 and a further 5% in 2024, stabilising towards the end of that year.” After rising about 25% in the past year, a plateauing this year for house prices and then a drop for two years – if that’s what transpires – would be a blessing for those anxious to buy. For those up to their eyeballs in debt, though, the prospect of falling home values at a time of rising borrowing costs will be a less welcomed change. Anthony Albanese says the head of spy agency Asio has not raised any concerns with him about Labor’s federal election candidates, stating Peter Dutton is engaged in “game-playing” with national security issues. The Nine newspapers on Friday reported “multiple security sources” had said a Chinese intelligence service was behind a recently disrupted foreign interference plot that had “attempted to bankroll NSW Labor candidates in the upcoming federal election”. Guardian Australia has been unable to verify the claim aired on the eve of Saturday’s by-elections in four NSW state seats. It comes as the Morrison government is facing internal divisions, damaging cabinet leaks and poor poll numbers ahead of the federal election due by May. NSW Labor said on Friday the Nine report was the first it had heard of the allegations. It said the Asio chief, Mike Burgess, had “never raised these matters” with either the leader of the state party, Chris Minns, or the NSW general secretary, Bob Nanva. The report was published a day after Dutton, the defence minister, levelled an accusation in federal parliament that the Chinese Communist party had “made a decision about who they’re going to back in the next federal election … and they have picked this bloke [Albanese] as that candidate”. According to the Nine newspapers, unnamed security sources confirmed that Dutton was referring to a Chinese plot to interfere with NSW Labor’s preselection process. Albanese hit back on Friday, saying national security was “too important to engage in game-playing, such as what we saw on the floor of the parliament yesterday, however much the government needs a distraction”. He said: The Asio director-general has publicly stated that if he had concerns about attempts at foreign interference in political parties he’ll raise them directly with the party leader. The federal Labor leader said he took national security seriously and had regular briefings with the Asio chief. Albanese said he had spoken directly with Burgess on Friday morning. Read more: Former multi-millionaire racehorse owner Damion Flower has been jailed for at least 17 years for smuggling significant amounts of pure cocaine into Australia, AAP reports. Flower, 49, and Qantas baggage-handler To’Oto’O Mafiti, 53 were arrested in May 2019. They later pleaded guilty to commercial drug importation and dealing with money believed to be the proceeds of crime greater than $100,000. Best-known for his stake in one of Australia’s most in-demand stallions, Snitzel, and buying an inaugural slot in Australia’s richest horse race, Flower relied on his knowledge of airports to import more than 200 kilograms of cocaine. The former baggage handler used his connections at Sydney Airport to get bags of cocaine, weighing 19kg, through side doors after they were flown in on commercial flights from South Africa. In sentencing the pair in the NSW district court on Friday, judge Sarah Huggett said the offending was “an extremely serious example” of drug importing which took place over a number of years. She jailed Flower for 28 years with a non-parole period of 17 years. Mafiti was jailed for 23 years with a non-parole period of 14 years. Victoria’s Covid-19 quarantine hotels will close within weeks as a purpose-built quarantine centre at Mickleham begins operations, reports AAP. The state’s quarantine agency Covid-19 Quarantine Victoria (CQV) says medi-hotels to quarantine sick people will cease operations by the end of this month and hotels will not be used at all by the end of March. More than 70,000 people have undergone quarantine in the hotel system since December 2020, enabling travellers to enter Victoria from interstate and overseas without spreading the coronavirus. But leaks from the hotels sparked the state’s second wave of coronavirus in 2020, which resulted in more than 18,000 new infections and 800 deaths. The minister for police, Lisa Neville, said the hotels were built for tourists, not quarantine. “A purpose-built quarantine facility ensures we have the resources we need to see through the coronavirus pandemic and any pandemics in the future,” she said in a statement. The new Mickleham facility is the first of its kind in Australia to be built since the start of the pandemic and will open 250 beds later this month, scaling up operations until the end of April. The site, which will initially have 500 beds, has been built with federal government money but will be operated by state authorities. It will house unvaccinated arrivals, people who test positive but can’t isolate at home, and could also be used as emergency accommodation for natural disasters such as bushfires. CQV has begun on-site training and orientation for 500 staff, with hundreds transitioning across from the hotel system. The program included some of Melbourne’s biggest hotels, including the Mantra Tullamarine, Four Points Hotel, Holiday Inn Airport, Novotel South Wharf and Intercontinental Hotel, Novotel on Collins and the Stamford Plaza. A Sydney nurse who stole $1,000 from the account of an elderly cancer patient after forcibly obtaining her PIN has been deregistered for at least four years, reports AAP. Percy McCarthy’s misconduct was premeditated and of “a most egregious kind”, the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal said on Friday. “She took advantage of an elderly, vulnerable patient who was under her care and whose health and safety she was required to protect,” it said. “She caused physical harm to that patient in engaging in conduct which is the antithesis of the characteristics and traits of a professional nurse. “She destroyed the confidence the public is entitled to expect of a professional nurse that patients will be safe whilst in their care and their property will also be safe.” The tribunal in December upheld four complaints against McCarthy, including professional misconduct. In June 2019, she was found guilty in the district court of dishonestly obtaining, and of attempting to obtain, a financial advantage by deception. She had tried to withdraw $1,000 from one account and succeeded in doing so with a second card. McCarthy was sentenced to a two-year community correction order which included a requirement for 500 hours of community work. Western Australia has recorded 51 new locally-acquired Covid cases. Premier Mark McGowan also announced the death of a man with Covid-19. He said he was in his 70s, died in hospital, and that there is no record of him receiving a Covid-19 vaccine. McGowan said he is the second person to have died after contracting Covid in Western Australia. McGowan said: Omicron is well and truly here in Western Australia. Religious groups have expressed disappointment at the federal government’s decision to shelve controversial religious discrimination laws, claiming parliament lost sight of the original intent of the legislation. Groups such as the Australian National Imams Council (ANIC) have urged the government to return their focus to the initial purpose of the bill, which was to protect religious minorities. ANIC spokesperson Bilal Rauf told Guardian Australia it was “disappointing” to see the bill delayed, saying there was a “significant gap” in protective laws. “I think the primary focus of this bill was always those protective provisions to bring it in line with the protections based on other attributes – that was always the primary provision and there was no dispute or question about those proposed provisions,” he said. “The rest was secondary, and sadly the secondary provisions became the subject of debate. “It’s disappointing that it has been shelved, and we hope that it’s something that will quickly be revived and pursued.” Read more: At his press conference this morning, the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, backed Atagi’s shift in the definition of Covid vaccinations away from “fully vaccinated” to “up to date”, but would not say where the state stands on vaccine mandates for essential workers. Released by Atagi yesterday, the new definition means Australians will need three Covid doses to be considered “up to date” with their vaccination, but it will be left to individual states to set their own rules on booster mandates. In NSW, the state has chopped and changed its position on mandatory booster shots for essential workers. On 7 January the health minister Brad Hazzard said that “anybody for whom vaccination was mandatory already, will now have boosters mandated”. The government has also said teachers would be required to receive a booster shot. Last week Hazzard told the Guardian the government would not go ahead with the mandate for health workers after concerns had been raised by both the Health Services Union and the Nurses and Midwives Association. He said at the time: “We’ve decided to take essentially a more encouraging and nurturing approach to getting them all [boosted], rather than forcing the issue and jumping in with mandates.” But earlier this week the Sydney Morning Herald suggested the position could again change if Atagi changed the definition of a fully vaccinated person to include a third shot. On Friday though, Perrottet still didn’t have an answer on where the state stood, other than on aged care workers, where the mandate was agreed to in national cabinet yesterday. Perrottet said the government would “work through” the other areas of essential workers, adding that he preferred the term “up to date” to fully vaccinated. He said: That’s the narrative we get, it’s something that parents are very familiar with when we’re vaccinating our children, ‘are you up to date?’ I think that’s important. Scott Morrison is meeting with Quad foreign ministers in Melbourne. The prime minister began by specifically thanking US secretary of state Antony Blinken for making the longest trip of any foreign minister present “particularly with the other matters you’re dealing with at the moment”. Morrison said: We live in a very fragile, fragmented and contested world and that is no more accentuated that are here in our Indo-Pacific. And the like-minded partners we see gathered together in this Quad I always find so incredibly reassuring. I’m reassured by our perspective, I’m reassured by the understanding that is shared between each of us. I’m reassured by the incredible, strong support that Australia has received by our Quad partners and I don’t just mean in a security context, I mean that in terms of our economic partnership and co-operation, I mean that in our humanitarian partnership, I mean that in terms of how each of us stands for a world order that favours freedom and particularly here in a free and open Indo-Pacific and I want to thank you for all of that. He goes on: The things we discuss today are principally how we’ll continue to always stand up for our values, that unites us most. I think in doing so we stand up to those who would seek to coerce us, and I understand from our Quad partners, none of you understand better than we do, and that is a great comfort to us, that the coercion and the pressure that Australia has been placed under, we greatly appreciate your support. But we also share a vision for a strong economy, not just regional stability and security, and our engagement in this region of which we’re so passionate about, because that gives all nations in the region options and choices and opportunities. And enables their sovereignty to be strengthened and respected. I will now pass you on to Elias Visontay who will be with you for the rest of the day. Back to May’s address: The (S)Quad meeting is underway. Health minister Greg Hunt has slammed as “wildly inaccurate” reports of a federal cabinet blow-up on Monday. The Australian reported late Thursday that Scott Morrison had been rolled in a cabinet meeting over a proposal to try to win over moderate MPs and save his religious discrimination bill by introducing a beefed-up version of the government’s integrity commission. My colleagues Sarah Martin and Katharine Murphy reported that sources confirmed a discussion on such a proposal took place. Other media outlets have also confirmed the original reporting. Asked at his press conference, Hunt – who is retiring ahead of the next election – shot down the reports: It struck me, as somebody who was there, that it was utterly inaccurate in what was seen. I don’t believe it came from somebody who was there. I don’t care if somebody is off on the side with differing reports ... the report is wildly inaccurate and would not have been given by anyone who was there. Hunt described Morrison’s cabinet as “deeply united”. Classic banter. The Novavax Covid vaccine is available for Australians to receive, with the first person in the country getting the jab today. Health minister Greg Hunt, giving a press conference at a medical centre in Melbourne, said with the new availability of Novavax there were “no excuses for anybody” not to get a Covid jab – alluding to people who had chosen to wait for this vaccine. Novavax uses a more traditional protein technology, rather than the cutting-edge mRNA base of the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines. Some Australians who had resisted or declined taking the other vaccines on offer had claimed they were more willing to take Novavax due to the different underpinning medical technology. Hunt said the government expected “hundreds of thousands” of people would take up Novavax and that “hopefully” the vaccine would be approved for booster shots. There are those that, for their own personal circumstances, have awaited or been unable to take the other vaccines. This is a new choice. It’s a protein vaccine ... a tried and tested vaccine platform. Hunt said Novavax doses were being sent to 3,500 clinics nationwide, with bookings available from Monday. Joining Hunt at the press conference was Angela Luttick, a woman who received Novavax today. She said she was a “virologist by training”, and had chosen to wait for Novavax over other vaccines: I have preferred a traditional vaccine to be introduced into myself. I’m not anti-vax, I’m pro-choice, and this was my choice. She also noted that she was co-owner of a company called 360biolabs, which she said had “supported the Novavax vaccine, we’ve done the specialty lab testing for the vaccine”. The company had worked with Novavax on sample analysis for clinical trials of the vaccine in Australia. In a statement, Novavax said it was conducting trials on both booster shots and a combined Covid-flu vaccine in Australia. The Capital Region Farmers Market has cancelled its event which was due to go ahead in the ACT tomorrow due to safety concerns. Over 80 stalls were set to appear. The market has released a statement confirming with “great sadness” the event would not be going ahead as planned: Due to the existing safety concerns onsite and logistics for customers attending the market the decision was made to cancel the market. It is a devastating result for our farmers and producers following on from the last two years. Please check back here for any updates as we share any information from stallholders on alternative arrangements for selling their produce. Erhan Akincio runs Dilliro Vegetables. He was just sent an SMS notification informing him the market was cancelled and not to attend the showground due to safety concerns. Akincio says protests in the ACT have “ruined” income for sellers: What are we going to do with all our vegetables now? ... our business, and [our] only income? In WA, there is a hazmat incident at Timber Treaters in the Shire of Bridgetown-Greenbushes. Authorities say it was caused by bushfire damage to the treated timber on-site. NSW Labor general secretary Bob Nanva has released a statement in response to reports published in SMH and The Age alleging a Chinese spy ring attempted to bankroll candidates in the upcoming federal election in an attempt to get MPs elected to parliament. Nanva says it is the “first time” NSW Labor has heard of such matters and no national security agency has ever raised the alleged matters with the NSW branch of Labor or parliamentary leadership. Read the full statement here: The RBA has been briefing the House of Reps committee members about inflation, rates and so on. No big reveals, as you might expect, from these cautious central bankers. Anyway, as they’ve been speaking the ABS has released details of how Covid is affecting businesses – and indirectly pointing to the challenges of forecasting economic trends during a pandemic. In a survey taken between 27 January and 4 February, the ABS found just over one in five businesses had staff unavailable to work because of Covid quarantines, isolation, illnesses and so forth. Perhaps as a result of those absences, 47% of businesses reported supply chain disruptions in January. ABS head of industry statistics John Shepherd: In January 2022, more businesses were impacted by supply chain disruptions compared to April 2021, where 30% of businesses experienced supply chain issues. And how did firms respond? Half of them changed their ordering processes and 42% responded by lifting the price of their goods or services. Sadly, the ABS did not seem to have asked what proportion of them responded by raising wages. It did, though, find that 18% of employing businesses did not have enough employees based on current operations, compared with 19% in June 2021 and 12% in March 2021. That suggests the challenges of finding staff may not have become that much worse over the past half year, at least. RBA governor Philip Lowe, meanwhile, told the committee the “vast” bulk of Australians were still seeing wage increases of “no more than two-point-something per cent”. And that’s despite the economy missing more than 200,000 workers on short-term visas (eg backpackers). Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 49 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 489 In hospital: 50 (with 3 people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 19 Cases: 8,950 In hospital: 1,716 (with 108 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 14 Cases: 5,977 In hospital: 584 (with 45 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 2 Cases: 1,445 In hospital: 210 (with 16 people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 13 Cases: 8,521 In hospital: 553 (with 82 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 1 Cases: 51 South Australia’s Covid-19 case numbers are in. Sadly, there have been two deaths reported overnight. There have been 1,445 new cases. Hospitalisations have remained relatively stable, with 210 people being treated with the virus including 16 people requiring intensive care. With that, I shall pass you over to the always wonderful Caitlin Cassidy. Many thanks to Matilda Boseley for guiding us through this morning’s news. I’ll be with you for the next little while. The telco Optus has appointed the former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian, who is under investigation by the state’s corruption watchdog, to a senior executive role. In a statement, the Singapore-owned company said Berejiklian had been appointed to the newly created role of managing director, enterprise, business and institutional. Berejiklian resigned as premier in October after the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption announced it was investigating whether she broke the law by failing to report matters that she “suspected on reasonable grounds concerned or may concern corrupt conduct” by her ex-lover, the former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. You can read the full report below: During his brief press conference, Albanese was asked about Dutton, who made claims in parliament yesterday that China was backing Labor as its candidate. The Sydney Morning Herald and the Age have today published a story stating, based on unnamed sources, that the alleged interference plot foiled by Asio involved a Chinese intelligence service and related to NSW Labor. This is unconfirmed at this stage, at the Asio chief Mike Burgess went out of his way on Wednesday to say all sides of politics were targeted by foreign interference attempts, and this plot was stopped and the harm was avoided. Albanese dismissed this, stating that Burgess “never raised the sort of reports that are there”. I understand the government is desperate for distractions. The RBA has been briefing the House of Reps committee members about inflation, rates and so on. No big reveals, as you might expect, from these cautious central bankers. Anyway, as they’ve been speaking the ABS has released details of how Covid is affecting businesses – and indirectly pointing to the challenges of forecasting economic trends during a pandemic. In a survey taken between 27 January and 4 February, the ABS found that just over one in five businesses had staff unavailable to work because of Covid quarantines, isolation, illnesses and so forth. Perhaps as a result of those absences, 47% of businesses reported supply chain disruptions in January. ABS head of industry statistics John Shepherd said: In January 2022, more businesses were impacted by supply chain disruptions compared to April 2021, where 30% of businesses experienced supply chain issues And how did firms respond? Half of them changed their ordering processes, and 42% responded by lifting the price of their goods or services. Sadly, the ABS did not seem to have asked what proportion of them responded by raising wages. It did, though, find that 18% of employing businesses did not have enough employees based on current operations, compared with 19% in June 2021 and 12% in March 2021. That suggests the challenges of finding staff may not have become that much worse over the past half year, at least. RBA governor Philip Lowe, meanwhile, told the committee the “vast” bulk of Australians were still seeing wage increases of “no more than two-point-something per cent”. And that’s despite the economy missing more than 200,000 workers on short-term visas (eg backpackers). There are now 584 Covid positive people hospitalised in Queensland with 45 in the ICU. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese states that Asio has not raised concerns about any of his candidates in relation to foreign interference from China (following Dutton’s accusatory comments in parliament yesterday). Can I say this? I also met just this week, with the head of Asio, I have regular security briefings. I don’t talk about the detail of those security briefings, because we shouldn’t talk about [it]. That is the nature of it. But I say this, I have total confidence in all of my candidates, and the director general of Asio has never raised a concern about any of my candidates. And I have spoken and I asked him ... today and he has reaffirmed that he has not raised concern [about] any of my candidates, I can’t be clearer than that. Anthony Albanese is speaking now from Melbourne, where he has been in talks with Quad leaders this morning. I reflected of course on Labor’s concerns about the change posture of China and the need to stand firm in Australia’s interests in the interests of all of those who hold democratic values dear. I look forward to continuing to strengthen Australia’s engagement through the Quad, but also through direct relations that we will have, and I have indicated that if we are successful in the election, I look forward to reacquainting myself with [US] President Biden, who I’ve met on a couple of occasions through the Australia-US leadership dialogue. Victorian health minister Martin Foley also touched on national cabinet endorsing the expert immunisation panel’s advice that Australians will need a third Covid-19 vaccine dose to be deemed “up to date” on their vaccination status: We will now work out, with public health advice, what that means, how that relates to the vaccinated economy, how we can make sure that the interests of the soon-to-return international tourist market and international students works into that. It’s complex, but we’ll do it and we’ll do it properly. But we will make sure that the benefits of the vaccinated economy to drive up vaccination rates are maintained. Atagi has replaced fully vaccinated with the phrase ‘now up to date’ and ‘up to date’ will mean different things depending on which age category you’re in. Scott Morrison bringing a real “2014 hipster” vibe to this 60 Minutes interview. Former Victorian premier Jeff Kennett is speaking now and has reflected on the infamous leaked “car phone call” conversation, which was one of the great scandals of Australian politics in the 80s. It would be remiss of me, I think, not to refer to the phone conversation for which we became infamous. It was a phone call that was recalled by a scandal in those days, which was released to the media in all its detail, in fact, released the next day, and it is true to say, of course, caused Andrew and I and our families a fair bit of embarrassment. But received in Canberra by the then leader of the opposition John Howard, his response was to sack or remove Andrew from his role of shadow foreign affairs minister at the time. I think that was unfair because Andrew was just trying to advise me, to calm me down, from what I was indicating might be my intentions the next day. But I’ll never forget him saying a couple of days afterwards, he said, ‘I still can’t believe it. I was at my own home in my own bed with my wife. I got a phone call. I lost my job but you kept yours.’ It is a story, sadly, in terms of private conversations continually being released, prime minister. Ours happened 37 years ago. And still people take some pleasure in trying to embarrass those who are the subject of these things. And I’m sure Andrew would have responded in the same way you have, prime minister. That is, to disregard and not to involve themselves in any form of retaliation. That is the real test of a leader that doesn’t get down to that level of retribution. Scott Morrison: [Peacock was] the first of a new generation of Liberals, preparing Australia for the cultural transformation that occurred in the late 1960s and the 1970s. Charm, intellect, capacity, curiosity, an openness in the world, a willingness to engage. He dominated the landscape. The most influential opposition leader to not have never become prime minister. Although he went so close, the record does tell the story: 28 years as the member for Kooyong, 20 years on the frontbench, a decade as a minister ... I know the people of Papua New Guinea will be mourning his loss today, and honouring his memory. Leading his party to two general elections and in those elections, he faced Labor’s most successful ever political leader. The prime minister is speaking now from Andrew Peacock’s memorial. Can I thank Andrew’s family for allowing me to come and share with you here today. It’s a great honour and a great privilege. I vow to thee, my country, all earthly things above, entire and whole and perfect, the service of my love. Andrew Peacock was a man of great loves. His country, his party, his beloved Essendon, the track, and above all, his family. The Victorian health minister Martin Foley has confirmed the state’s code brown declaration will end on Monday. A further resumption for elective surgery will begin on Monday, with private hospitals able to perform 50% of procedures in metropolitan Melbourne and 75% in regional areas. Foley also announced that the state had recruited 1,000 surge staff to assist the state’s vaccination program over the coming weeks, many with prior healthcare backgrounds: With those numbers already on the job we’re able to free up nurses and other health professionals to return to our public health services. Bill Shorten was on ABC radio this morning, renewing calls for the government to come clean on what the opposition has called “stealth cuts” to the national disability insurance scheme in the lead-up to the federal election. As Guardian Australia revealed in December, the number of people challenging cuts to their funding packages or denials of support had increased by 324% in the first five months of this financial year. In some cases, funding has been cut, reinstated after legal challenges, and then cut again. Some NDIS providers report that up to half of their clients have had their funding cut, and some participants are being told that their requests for support are not “value for money” or that there isn’t enough evidence that the support will be beneficial. Sustainability reforms to the NDIS proposed by the government last year were scrapped after the states rejected them, but internal documents obtained by Guardian Australia earlier in 2021 suggested the agency was attempting to tighten spending through operational changes that do not require legislation. You can read more about that background here. Responding to concerns the cuts appeared to be targeting those with autism and intellectual disabilities, Shorten, the opposition’s NDIS spokesperson, today said the government was effectively creating two classes of disability. I do think that this government is almost creating a two-class disability system. Certain disabilities they think pass the so-called Morrison pub test. But other disabilities, which are more awkward or more challenging or less easy to define, well they’re second-class disabilities. The government maintains it is fully funding the scheme. The memorial service for former Liberal party leader Andrew Peacock has begun, with many major party members in attendance. Peter Dutton has doubled down on his controversial claims that China would like Labor to defeat the Morrison government at the upcoming federal election, prompting Malcolm Turnbull to warn that such “reckless” comments had “no basis in fact” and harmed Australia’s national security. The defence minister said on Friday there was “no doubt in [his] mind” about what he described as a “statement of the obvious” regarding China’s preference for Labor. He claimed he based Thursday’s inflammatory allegation on “open source and other intelligence”. The Morrison government, struggling in the polls, is increasingly seeking to weaponise its perceived advantage on national security issues before this year’s election, despite Labor’s bipartisan cooperation against China’s aggressive stance in the Asia-Pacific region. You can read the full report from Paul Karp and Daniel Hurst below: Just in case you forgot, the Quad meetings are going on today. Federal opposition frontbencher Tanya Plibersek has been diagnosed with Covid-19 overnight, after appearing on Q&amp;A remotely last night from home isolation. Plibersek’s children previously tested positive, with the politician getting her positive PRC result this morning. Optus has announced this morning that it has hired former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian to its executive team in the “newly created” role of “managing director, enterprise, business and institutional”. In the statement Berejiklian said: I am excited and proud to join an organisation that impacts the lives of millions of Australians every day and prides itself in providing outstanding customer service. I look forward to working with [CEO] Kelly [Bayer Rosmarin] and the executive team of Optus who are providing inspiring and innovative leadership in the telco sector. The RBA governor Philip Lowe is up before the House of Representatives’ economics committee this morning, talking about interest rates, among other things. It’s a timely meeting not least because his US counterparts at the Federal Reserve are poised to lift their main lending rate next month, perhaps by a half a percentage point. Overnight, the US January consumer price index came in at a higher than expected 7.5% annual pace, the highest in 40 years. Excluding food and energy, prices were up 6% on the year, also a 39‑year high. Lowe noted that UK, Germany and New Zealand inflation rates are also at a multi-decade high. (By contrast, as noted here, the underlying rate in Australia in the December quarter was 2.6%, a mere seven-year high.) Anyway, so far, Lowe says that at the current inflation rate and a jobless rate of 4.2% (but headed below 4% this year and next) “there is no evidence that things in Australia are over-stimulated”. He’s also sticking to his previous language of being prepared to be “patient” when it comes to lifting the record-low cash rate of 0.1%. “It’s too early to conclude that inflation is sustainably within [the bank’s] target range” of between 2-3%, Lowe said. “We have scope to wait”, unlike some of our trading partners, he added. Lowe did, though, note that if inflation did start to take off internationally and central banks did have to ramp up lending rates, there is a risk of “an abrupt adjustment in financial conditions around the world”, including for Australia. A hint, perhaps of that came in the US overnight. After the inflation figures came in worse than expected, with Wall Street’s main indicies were all down. The ASX is just opening now, and has a strong down arrow to get going. Investigations are under way and three people are being questioned after a man died at Kallangur, north of Brisbane, overnight, reports AAP. Paramedics assessed the patient with critical injuries following an alleged assault on Anzac Avenue just after midnight, the Queensland Ambulance Service said. A second, uninjured patient was assessed and did not require transport to hospital. A crime scene has been established and two men and a woman are currently assisting with inquiries. Queensland police are expected to provide further details later on Friday. Some good news out of Queensland this morning: 60% of the eligible population have now received their third dose of a Covid vaccine. Ralph Cordingley had three great loves – his family, golf and music. In his final months he asked for his favourite sheet music to be brought to his nursing home because he couldn’t bear the songs they were singing. He was 85 when he died, and his daughter, Deborah Clarke, is sure if it weren’t for acquiring Covid-19, he’d still be alive today. “There was no reason to believe he wouldn’t have lived longer … he was fully cognitive and smart,” Deborah says. At the same time, though, it’s not about that, not really. “It’s about celebrating them, not just being a statistic,” Deborah says. “These people had lives.” You can read the full story below: Doctors say giving pharmacists the power to diagnose and treat a wider range of conditions is not the answer to health shortages in regional Queensland, reports AAP. A trial proposed for north Queensland would allow pharmacists to prescribe medicine for serious conditions and chronic illnesses, AMA Queensland says. The 23 conditions include asthma, type 2 diabetes, heart failure and middle ear infections, and it would mean patients could access medicine without a GP consultation. It has been proposed for 37 local government areas in north Queensland that have “significant indigenous populations and serious doctor shortages”, the AMA says. Speaking ahead of a state parliamentary inquiry on Friday, president Chris Perry says medical association members “overwhelmingly” oppose the proposed pilot: It’s fundamentally flawed and will deliver second-rate health care to people in north Queensland. While pharmacists are a vital part of healthcare, they do not have the training to diagnose serious health conditions, AMA Queensland council of general practice chair Maria Boulton said: GPs on average have 12 years of training under their belts before they start diagnosing and treating these conditions. Boulton is expected to speak at Friday’s wide-ranging inquiry into the public health system. The AMA has written to the Therapeutic Goods Administration seeking advice on the trial’s potential impact on Australia’s health system. For example, the trial will allow pharmacists to prescribe the oral contraceptive pill – a move expressly outlawed by the TGA late last year given the health risks for patients ... We are seriously concerned that this trial will lead to significant misdiagnosis of potentially serious conditions plus undermine attempts to manage antimicrobial resistance. The AMA initially agreed to take part in a steering committee for the pilot, but now says it fundamentally rejects the proposal. The National Council of Primary Care Doctors has also written to Queensland and federal health ministers recommending that the pilot be stopped. Queensland Health has been contacted for comment. In terms of hospitalisations, in NSW there are 1,716 Covid-19-positive people in wards, 108 in the ICU. In Victoria, the total hospitalisation number now sits at 553, with 82 in ICU. We shall be hearing from the leader of the opposition at 11am (AEDT). The gap between what men and women earn has narrowed but persists, with research showing men are twice as likely to earn more than $120,000 a year than women. Data from the Workplace Gender Equality Agency released on Friday shows women typically earn about $25,000 less than men. The overall gender pay gap continued its downward trend for the 2020-21 financial year, pegged at 22.8%, meaning that for every $10 a man earned a woman made about $7.72. That’s down by half a percentage point from the previous year, but the WGEA says it understates the true extent of the problem. You can read the full report below: Important Wordle update: (I know my demographic.) Malcolm Turnbull has attacked Peter Dutton’s “reckless” claim the Chinese government wants Labor to win the next federal election. Turnbull told Radio National: I think it’s really reckless. I think it undermines Australian security. It uses matters of grave national security purely for crass political advantage ... Dutton does it to wedge the Labor party and wedge Morrison, he rushes off to the right … and then wedges whoever he’s targeting. We should not be turning the debate about China national security into some kind of ‘reds under the beds’ scare. The proposition that Albanese is under influence of the CCP [Chinese Communist party] is ludicrous … it’s just a sign of desperation. Asked how ugly he thinks the election campaign will get, Turnbull replied: I’m worried it’s going to get uglier. The ‘reds under the beds’ China scare sledge against Labor is really bad. Morrison should try to pull Dutton back in on that. It has no basis in fact, and all that will do is undermine our prospects of being united in face of pressure from other countries. An electric scooter rider has died after a collision with a station wagon south-east of Melbourne, AAP reports. Police said a white Volkswagen station wagon was driving on the Princes Highway in Narre Warren on Thursday afternoon when it collided with the e-scooter. The rider, who has not been formally identified, died at the scene. The station wagon driver was not injured and stopped to help the rider. Major collision investigation unit detectives are investigating the crash. Opinion: Peter Dutton’s incendiary question time intervention suggesting China has picked Anthony Albanese as its election candidate plumbed new – and dangerous – depths. For weeks Scott Morrison and his defence minister have been suggesting voters must not be lulled into a false sense of national security bipartisanship. Only the Coalition, their argument goes, can be trusted not to “appease” China. At the tail end of question time on Thursday, Dutton dialled the scare campaign up to 11. With Morrison watching on, the defence minister declared he wanted to scotch the idea that both of Australia’s mainstream political parties were equally committed to “defending our nation”. Nothing, claimed Dutton, could be further from the truth. You can read the full piece below: Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull was far less positive about Peter Dutton’s comments (not wildly shocking given what went down in 2018), saying the comments about Labor’s relationship with China have “no basis in fact”. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne has also adopted the “just being incredibly vauge” approach when it comes to justifying Peter Dutton’s suggestion that China has picked Labor leader Anthony Albanese as its preferred prime minister. Here’s what she said when asked about it on ABC radio earlier this morning: It does require a consistent and measured approach at all times. I think the point the prime minister and defence minister were making is that that hasn’t always been demonstrated by the opposition. But we will be absolutely focused on Australia’s national interests and delivering that. Host Sabra Lane: You say it hasn’t been demonstrated, where is the evidence? Payne: There are a number of aspects which I think the defence minister was referring to yesterday. But ultimately making these tough decisions [is] a focus on national security and a focus on what our priorities are more broadly. Peter Dutton: I think in certain circumstances if one goes in you lose five* and you lose a vote by one you can lose about five it’s the same outcome. Patricia Karvelas: [Liberal MP Trent] Zimmerman had reserved his right, right. And he said that to the party rooms. So who was doing the misleading? Dutton: Well, we had very clear statements from a number of people, including beyond the five, and I’m not going into individual commitments or undertakings, that that’s the basis you asked me about the prime minister’s situation. The prime minister based his judgment, his actions, his decisions on a perfectly reasonable basis following discussions, and it’s difficult when you get to the floor of the parliament and those undertakings aren’t honoured. So that’s the situation and again, I’m happy to speak frankly about it. Because that is just the facts of what happened. *This is not common in politics FYI, five MPs crossing the floor is a HUGE deal. Defence minister Peter Dutton has said a number of the Liberal MPs who crossed the floor over the religious discrimination bill misled the government about their intentions, confirming speculation that their leaders were blindsided by the way the vote went: [Scott Morrison] was frankly misled ... There are undertakings that were given. The undertaking wasn’t honoured ... The government doesn’t go into a vote like that unless assurances have been given. I’m not sure how you want to describe it, depending on your perspective of the situation, but there are undertakings that were given. Those undertakings weren’t honoured. Patricia Karvelas: There’s no doubt that there’s been political interference. We know that but to actually make that claim that the leader of the opposition is China’s pick is a pretty inflammatory thing to say. Peter Dutton: I think you’ve got to stick to the facts, Patricia, and if you look at the facts, in this case, I think certainly, from what I see, both open source and other intelligence that I see it’s a statement of the obvious*. And there were relationships going back to Sam Dastyari and Bob Carr is obviously is very close still to Beijing, and there are many others that are alive. Karvelas: But Sam Dastyari and Bob Carr are not Anthony Albanese, as you know. You can pair Liberal MPs to that, you know, different relationships with China too, but they’re not Peter Dutton, right? Or they’re not Scott Morrison. I mean, to actually put this on the opposition leader is an incredibly inflammatory and politicised thing to say. Dutton: I have, as I said, Patricia on what’s openly available to us, and when I say otherwise, there’s no doubt in my mind about the statement that I made yesterday. And I think there needs to be a greater awareness, frankly, particularly from the Labor party about the engagement of people who, who don’t have our national interests. At its heart, that’s the reality of the situation. We’re dealing with a very different China, the Chinese government or the Communist party now than they were five or 10 years ago. *Sorry to use internet slang, but “receipts or it didn’t happen”, minister. Radio host Patricia Karvelas has asked Peter Dutton what evidence there is to suggest that China has chosen Anthony Albanese as its preferred Australian prime minister. Dutton doesn’t actually provide any evidence at all: I think there’s open-source information reported over a long period of time, both in terms, quite frankly, of China and Russia exerting political influence, not just here. I mean, it’s long been established in the United States and in the United Kingdom and other democracies around the world, that we’re seeing this where people are seeking to influence members, influential members, young members who are on the rise. They pick somebody who will be influential within that party in years to come. Defence minister Peter Dutton comments in parliament have been questioned this week after he accused Anthony Albanese of being China’s pick to be the next prime minister. Many viewed the accusation as an attempt to shift focus away from the Coalition’s damaging defeat in passing its contentious religious discrimination bill through the upper house but Dutton has doubled down on it when speaking to ABC radio this morning. He said he agreed with US secretary of state Anthony Blinken: He believes that the Chinese government’s strategic ambition has expanded so that it now aims to dominate the entire world in military, economic, diplomatic and political power ... I think it’s important not just to look at secretary Blinken’s words, but to look at the words of President Xi and the spokesman for the regime. That’s the reality and we need to deal with that from Australia’s perspective. We want to a reliable partner in China, we want human rights to be respected and we want to build the relationship, but that’s two-way process and many other countries have said same … China has moved quite dramatically away from principles that we thought were being adopted over a period of time. Hello everyone, after a wild week of politics in Canberra, it’s Matilda Boseley back here on the blog to take you through the (thankfully) parliament-free day. Let’s kick things off in Victoria where the state’s parliament has passed laws to decriminalise sex work, to the applause of MPs and advocates. It is now the third Australian jurisdiction to do this after NSW (1995) and the NT (2019). There were cheers and applause in the chamber when the final vote tally was read out, with the Labor government garnering the support of 10 crossbenchers. The Sex Work Decriminalisation Act 2021 will partially abolish street-based sex work offences and associated public health offences, remove a licensing system and regulate the industry through existing agencies – essentially the reforms aim to have the law treat sex work like any other industry. It will also strengthen anti-discrimination protections, making it unlawful to deny sex workers accommodation. Reason Party leader Fiona Patten, a former sex worker who led Victoria’s review into decriminalising the industry, said the reforms were long overdue: This bill is for everyone who has been working under these draconian laws that have not protected us. The bill will now return to the lower house (where the government has an overwhelming majority), before being sent to the Victorian governor, and will come into effect between May and December next year. With that, why don’t we jump right into the day?For the past three months, Ugandan forces have been bombarding Islamist rebels in its border region with the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The offensive, in the Rwenzori mountain range that straddles both countries, has forced many Congolese to leave their homes and move to the cities for shelter. Sarah Kasanga* is one. The Allied Democratic Force (ADF) militia stormed Kalingathe, her village north of Beni, in December 2019. People were made to lie on the floor while rebels searched homes for food, pots, money or clothes. DRC soldiers overlook Virunga national park at a military base on the outskirts of Beni “They said they would take me and my younger sister and brother,” says Kasanga. “My mother started crying. They told her to be quiet and we’d be back after carrying their haul to the base.” But that was a lie. Taking three boys and two girls, the group of 20 ADF fighters spent two months weaving through the forest to their camp. Uganda is now fighting alongside the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s armed forces (FARDC) in efforts to root out the rebels. Attacks in Kampala last year added urgency to plans already under way for joint operations to prop up the chaotic and underfunded Congolese forces. Houses abandoned after ADF attacks north of Beni. A DRC military Land Cruiser in Beni and a helicopter flying over the restive territory Reports suggest between 1,500 and 5,000 Ugandan troops could eventually be involved. There are about 120 rebel groups operating in eastern DRC, but the ADF, with an estimated 1,500 fighters, is a particular threat. Formed by groups opposed to Uganda’s autocratic president, Yoweri Museveni, in the late 1990s, their camps are in dense forest from where they carry out brutal raids on villages, abducting recruits. “When we got to the ADF base we were separated by gender; they forced you to convert to Islam, pray, learn Arabic; women have to completely cover themselves,” says Kasanga. “They would also force people to be violent and kill – if you refused they said they would kill you.” Men pick captured women and girls as wives. A UN report found that the ADF raped abductees to use the stigma to deter escape. “They were finding me a husband just before I escaped,” says Kasanga. With dozens of overlapping armed groups operating in North Kivu and Ituri provinces, accurate figures are hard to come by, but the ADF is believed to have killed at least 2,238 people and abducted 896 people since April 2017, according to Kivu Security Tracker, which monitors violence in the region. People recently displaced by ADF attacks, sheltering around a school near Mbau, just south of Oicha Oicha, like many towns in North Kivu and Ituri provinces, has had an influx of thousands of people displaced by the violence, who are still subject to attacks. A bomb exploded in a market hours before the Guardian arrived. A bag thrown over the device dampened the blast and no one was killed. Désiré Kilongo, Oicha’s community leader, talks to displaced people Désiré Kilongo, a community leader, says that since the joint operation the number of displaced people in Oicha has tripled to 21,300, putting pressure on locals. “You’ll now find two or three extra families staying with friends or relatives in a two-room family home.” In surrounding villages, families sleep in schools overnight. In the day, pupils work with heaps of belongings stacked at the back of classrooms. Meals are cooked in playgrounds and teachers lament the poor hygiene in school toilets. When subsistence farmers have to flee, they are left with nothing, risking their lives to return to their farms to harvest what they can. The Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) says 1,166,200 people have been displaced by armed groups around Oicha. It has built shelters for displaced Mbuti, formerly known as Pygmies, and given money to Bantu communities to rent small houses and start businesses. “The proliferation of armies and armed groups is expected to escalate the conflict, leading to more displacement and hardship for civilians. These communities are already at breaking point, says Caitlin Brady, the charity’s DRC director. Displaced members of the Mbuti community, formerly known as Pygmies, in Kelekele camp near Mbau, north of Beni In Kelekele camp, women have their heads shaved in mourning for their dead children. David Jalamuke, an elderly Mbuti man from Matiba, says the ADF killed all but one of his six children last May. His remaining daughter, standing next to him, lost her five children and husband, murdered in the same attack. Jalamuke hid but saw rebels kill his friend. “They stood on his chest, cut his throat in two places and went with his neck,” he says. Others talk of the ADF cutting people into pieces. Raids often involve women and children made to steal food and belongings. One man described seeing “women killing women and children killing children”. David Jalamuke, who has lost all but one of his six children. Mbuti women with their heads shaved in mourning for their murdered children DRC’s president, Félix Tshisekedi, announced a “state of siege” in Ituri and North Kivu in May 2021. Military authorities replaced civilian counterparts, and security personnel were given extra powers but violence continues. With its huge reserves of minerals vital for smartphones and electric car batteries, DRC should be a wealthy country, but the legacy of colonialism and endemic corruption keeps its people among the poorest in the world. Kasanga escaped from ADF in 2020. “We were sent to look for food near Oicha. The lady I was with decided to escape and told me to come with her.” Terrified of leaving her siblings with the ADF, she also feared returning to the base alone. “I’ve heard they are OK, but I worry about them,” she says, now reunited with her mother. “If the ADF sees me, they will kill me. I live in fear.” DRC’s forces are supported by the 15,000-strong UN peacekeeping mission, Monusco. Although effective in targeting another rebel group, M23, in 2013, Monusco has faced criticism over its record of protecting people from ADF, despite $1bn (£740m) of annual funding. Last August saw anti-Monusco protests across eastern DRC. “The FARDC starts operations, the ADF retaliates against the population and the angry population turns against Monusco for failing to protect them,” says Nelleke van de Walle at the International Crisis Group. A Monusco armoured personnel carrier drives through Beni, with Tanzanian UN soldiers onboard. A convoy of blue-helmeted UN peacekeepers escort construction workers back to their base near Beni The joint FARDC-Ugandan operation presents challenges for Monusco, which only has a mandate to support the Congolese forces, says Cecilia Piazza, head of its Beni office. But, she says, coordination is key for “an understanding of what is going on, particularly … when you have various forces in the same theatre”. Piazza says Monusco is listening to criticisms and deploying “quick reaction forces” that are “mobile and robust in nature” to deal with ADF. But she acknowledges fears that attacks on ADF strongholds are just pushing rebels elsewhere. “We have seen incidents north [and] south of the area where the operation is taking place,” says Piazza. Van de Walle says there are concerns too that the FARDC is benefiting from deals with criminal gangs. “FARDC soldiers are underpaid and sometimes worse equipped than the rebel groups,” she says. The DRC state’s failure to protect communities promotes self-defence militias, known as Mai-Mai. In Beni, Patrick Mwenda*, 20, explains how young “patriots” are lured in. In 2016, a man came to his village with three guns. “He said the ADF is killing civilians and the FARDC won’t protect us as they are working with the ADF. He said to protect our land and our families, the village needed to form its own group, attack FARDC bases and take their weapons,” says Mwenda. People bought military-style outfits from the markets and made bows and arrows. Mwenda says he would sometimes get to carry a gun but mostly used a catapult, raiding FARDC bases to steal uniforms and weapons after drinking alcohol made from sorghum and banana. “The fighting was tough. We launched four attacks and the FARDC would stage counterattacks. We’d drink a small amount of the magic liquid that the leader said would protect us from bullets,” he says. “It felt amazing to be a member of the movement, knowing we were saving our land.” Then a new militia, the Union of Patriots for the Liberation of Congo (UPLC), came to the village, offering to train Mwenda’s group. But they did not leave, and ended up taking control of the village and collaborating with the ADF. Mwenda ran away to Beni. Five-year-old Maskia Mukone Chanele at Beni hospital, in a Red Cross tent for victims of a blast in the town on Christmas Day Last year, on Christmas Eve, the Ugandans captured a major ADF camp known as Kambi Ya Yua. On Christmas Day, an ADF suicide bomber retaliated, targeting a restaurant, killing eight and wounding 20 more. In Beni hospital, victims are still recovering. A five-year-old girl, Maskia Mukone Chanele, is lying in a Red Cross tent with facial injuries and after nearly losing an eye. Her 13-year-old sister was killed. “I was astonished when I heard about my daughter and her children,” says Anto Kahambu Kaghoma, Maskia’s grandmother. “This wouldn’t happen somewhere where there is a serious government.” In the garden of a Beni hotel, Tommy Tambwe, who leads North Kivu’s disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration programme, is holding a community meeting. As a former rebel, his appointment to a government role was criticised by many for signalling there was a route to power for criminals. But Tambwe claims that the joint military operation and the community-engagement programmes will soon ensure peace for the region. Tommy Tambwe meets community members to discuss disarming Mai-Mai militias and engaging young people. Alphonse Kambale Mubalya in his office At the meeting, Alphonse Kambale Mubalya, who runs a peacebuilding organisation AMIP, blames DRC’s neighbouring countries for the violence. “It’s not like other insurgencies,” he says. “We have farming communities and we wouldn’t need jobs or to take up arms if there was no insecurity. Rebel fighters from Uganda and Rwanda came here in the 1990s and that was the start of the problem.” President Tshisekedi wants to build ties in the region, but people here are suspicious. Dr Denis Mukwege, a gynaecologist and human rights activist who was awarded the Nobel peace for his work against rape as a weapon of war, tweeted that military cooperation was unacceptable after Uganda’s “25 years of mass crimes and plundering of our resources”. Van de Walle says Ugandan investment in DRC’s roads has raised suggestions of ulterior motives over better transport links. Improved security for oil companies is a priority for Kampala – Total and the Chinese-owned CNOOC have confirmed they will begin work on a controversial multibillion-dollar oil pipeline from western Uganda to Tanzania. Meanwhile, thousands of displaced Congolese remain in limbo. Mwenda regrets his past. “The leaders took advantage of us and lied to us to stop us escaping, saying we needed documents to enter Beni or we’d be killed.” He says many rebels want to be reintegrated into their communities but believes their leaders want government money, and are forcing them to fight to keep up pressure on the authorities. Jalamuke says people just want the Ugandan-FARDC forces to bring peace: “We’ll accept anything to stop the massacres.” * Names have been changed Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Diesel fumes and marijuana smoke filled the air outside the Canadian parliament as a “Freedom Convoy” protest against vaccine mandates headed into a third week. Columns of big-rig trucks, pickups and RVs have blockaded the heart of the Canadian capital since 28 January. Camped out in the vehicles are several hundred protesters – including many children – who have driven thousands of kilometres to be here. Protesters have also blocked the international Ambassador Bridge between Detroit and Windsor, and two smaller border crossings with the US, prompting growing fears of serious economic impact. Justin Trudeau, the White House and even the US Teamsters union have called for an end to the protest. But those camped out in downtown Ottawa insist they will not leave until their demands are met: an end to Covid lockdowns and vaccine mandates. What began as a protest against vaccine requirements for truck drivers entering Canada has grown into a widening protest movement against all Covid public health measures, with copycat demonstrations in the US, France, Belgium, Australia and New Zealand. On a bone-chilling night this week, protesters gathered around open fires and propane stoves as police officers looked on, seemingly unwilling to enforce an order against bringing fuel into the city centre. It was quieter than in the earlier days of the protest when truckers infuriated residents by honking their horns late into the night; on Monday, a court injunction was handed down banning air horns for 10 days after a class-action lawsuit by sleepless locals. Instead, a semi driver loudly gunned his engine, launching thick black plumes of exhaust into the night sky. “It was definitely time to take a stand,” says Spencer Bautz, a 24-year-old who drove his truck here from Saskatchewan on day one. Dressed in a black cowboy hat, Bautz described vaccine mandates as “medical segregation” and argued that exclusions for the unvaccinated were an infringement of their freedoms. His views, he said, had been greatly informed by the thinking of the psychology professor and culture war provocateur Jordan Peterson. “I’m not going to pretend like I know what goes on in upper management or big government. I’m just a farm kid from Saskatchewan,” said Bautz. “But I know that anytime you talk about silencing people, anytime you talk about taking away people’s freedoms … it’s to be taken seriously.” Such good-versus-evil posturing is apparent in the hundreds of handmade signs that line the fence around parliament – little jabs of resistance against Covid policies that the prime minister himself said have “sucked for all Canadians”. Lurking below the surface, though, is the same undercurrent of populism that powered the January 6 Capitol insurrection and the yellow vests movement: a powerful current fed by disinformation, conspiratorial thinking and deepening social divides. “Wake up Canada! You are being lied to. Take the red pill and roll on!” reads a sign attached to the front grille of a parked semi. The concept of the “red pill” – which originated in The Matrix films – has become a token for incels and the far-righters who hold that they are “awake” to the way the world really works. “Populist movements are notoriously distrustful of government,” said the Queens University assistant professor Amarnath Amarasingam, who specialises in extremism and social movements. “They don’t trust politicians, they don’t trust the media, they don’t trust academics, they don’t trust scientists because they believe that historically, this ‘elite class’ of society has always harmed those at the bottom, the underdogs,” Amarasingam adds. As men and women dressed in flannel hunker down in the cold with their Tim Hortons coffee cups and Canadian flags draped over their shoulders it is clear that the Freedom Convoy’s movement has crystallised. They are here to wake the rest of Canada up to the tyranny of the Liberal government and its “oppressive” vaccine mandates. “Freedom!” bellows one man wearing the flag as a cape. “Freedom! Freedom! Freedom!” comes the response from others outside the parliament building – where earlier in the week Trudeau described the same protests as “unacceptable”. The Freedom Convoy is quickly becoming a defining moment in Trudeau’s leadership. The prime minister has refused to lend legitimacy to this movement by engaging with the protesters’ demands – a decision that led two Liberal party members to break rank. Meanwhile, the failure to take decisive action to break up the protest has exposed Trudeau to criticism from all other party leaders. The discord in parliament has allowed protest organisers to become further emboldened in their demands, with some of them openly call for Trudeau to be forced from office. The opposition Conservative party and People’s Party of Canada have both cheered the protesters on, even encouraging donations to their million-dollar crowdfunding efforts. Similarly US Republicans, including Donald Trump and Ted Cruz, have praised the convoy, with some of the protest’s funding believed to have come from south of the border. Such support has given fresh momentum to the truckers as they launched additional protests at the Canada-US border, and tightened their grip on the capital. On Thursday, trucks circled the Ottawa airport, clogging traffic. People flooded the local 911 number with fake calls, and some tossed around the idea of parading outside schools. Elsewhere, some journalists have reported being followed, particularly at secondary staging camps outside of the downtown core. Amarasingam outlined several ways the standoff could end: in tragedy, in violence or because of potential in-fighting. A negotiation, at this point, seems unlikely. “If this ended in some sort of mass arrest or violence, or some sort of tragedy – someone dies or one of these propane tanks explodes – I think it’s that kind of turning point that will change the conversation,” he said. As the protests stretch on, many local residents have become increasingly fed up with their temporary neighbours. Violent confrontations have broken out as protesters harass and insult people wearing masks. A counter-protest is planned for Saturday. The protesters are deeply aware of the negative coverage they have earned, and now espouse peace and love to an almost aggressive degree. One trucker uses a megaphone to loudly proclaim “I love you” to anyone who walks by. A few blocks away, Gurtek Singh – one of the few people of colour at an overwhelmingly white protest – said he was the only breadwinner in a household of six, but that the financial hit from staying off work was worth it. As he spoke, at least a dozen protester supporters stopped to thank Singh. He smiled politely and accepted the effusive praise. Snowflakes glistened in his bushy salt-and-pepper beard as he said that he had joined the convoy for the sake of his children, who he had kept home from school because of mandatory mask and vaccine mandates. “No government, no other human being can tell me what’s good for my kids, other than me,” he said.A union organizing drive among workers at corporate run Starbucks stores, the largest coffeehouse chain in the world, has surged in recent weeks throughout the US, organizers and workers say. The development comes in the wake of union election victories at two of three stores in the Buffalo, New York, area that held union votes with the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) in December. It also comes amid allegations that seven Starbucks workers in Memphis were fired in retaliation for union organizing. More than 70 stores in at least 20 US states have now filed for union elections since those wins, representing more than 1,300 workers at Starbucks, which previously had no union representation among its corporate-run locations in the US. “We were inspired by the partners in Buffalo that managed to do something many of us have dreamed of for a long time. It’s something we didn’t think was possible, but they really pushed through and showed the rest of us across the nation that we could use our voices and actually unionize,” said Hannah McCown, a Starbucks barista in Overland, Kansas, whose store has recently filed to hold a union election. McCown said their district manager had held aggressive conversations with workers since the organizing campaign went public and that the store was hiring new employees rather than fix the scheduling issues and short staffing that workers have been experiencing. “We are just looking to have our voices heard at a company that we really put everything into,” added McCown. “We are the backbone of this company and while we do believe this is a great company to work for, we do believe things could be done better.” Maddie Levans, a barista for over four years at one of the first Starbucks stores in Philadelphia to file for a union election, explained the union victories in Buffalo inspired her and her co-workers to start the unionizing campaign with Starbucks Workers United. She said her co-workers had already been discussing issues they were having with Covid regulations, accountability for management that needed attention and the disconnect between baristas and corporate. “It’s so reassuring to see so many stores across the country do this and to be part of that wave as one of the first two stores in Philadelphia, let alone Pennsylvania, was phenomenal,” said Levans. “It’s time for Starbucks to actually treat us like partners. They call us partners, but when we’re concerned about different business practices and different problems with how Starbucks is run, we get shut down.” Workers at Starbucks in Buffalo and around the US have criticized Starbucks for aggressively opposing the unionization efforts at their stores. Alleged actions include reports of union avoidance meetings with workers, texts encouraging workers to vote no to the union, an influx of corporate management at stores holding union elections, allegations of unfair labor practice charges made by workers with the National Labor Relations Board and the Memphis firings. Starbucks has retained at least 30 different attorneys with the union avoidance firm Littler Mendelson to represent the company through NLRB proceedings. “This is a national movement that partners across the US are joining and getting involved in. It’s organic in the way it’s grown and it will continue its trajectory to be massive in the coming weeks,” said Richard A Minter, director of organizing and vice-president of Workers United. Minter criticized Starbucks’ response to the union organizing efforts, as the company has continued to encourage workers to vote against unionizing. “It’s something that Starbucks needs to reconsider and immediately stop the anti-union behavior, stop this anti-union rhetoric, allow these partners to be true partners and allow their voices to be heard,” Minter said, “rather than tell them ‘we hear you’, yet they don’t see them or hear them. So a reckoning is coming.” Cathy Creighton, director of Cornell University Institute Industrial Labor Relations Buffalo Co-Lab, explained vast wealth and racial inequality worsened by the pandemic has driven young workers at Starbucks to unionize. Starbucks reported $4.2bn in net earnings in 2021 and the CEO, Kevin Johnson, received more than $20m in compensation in 2021, up 39% from 2020 and 6% from 2019. “Starbucks employees are front-facing the public and took their life in their hands by going to work and did not see the same largesse come their way,” said Creighton. She said that labor law in the US was outdated and strongly favored employers, as only 6.1% of the private US workforce is unionized, yet a strong majority of the population supports unions. “That is not happenstance. It’s an intentional national labor policy which allows employers to crush worker movements and not agree to first contracts with employees,” said Creighton. “Despite the deck being stacked against them, workers are fed up and are taking matters into their own hands by seeking a voice in their workplace and a seat at the table.” A spokesperson for Starbucks denied all allegations of union busting and retaliation, citing labor shortages around the US have created short staffing at stores in some markets, with new hiring needed at some stores. The spokesperson also argued meetings with partners are to educate workers on the union election process and are within the company’s legal rights. In regards to firings of workers in Memphis, Starbucks disputed allegations of retaliation and characterized the firings as responses to safety and security violations, though workers have argued those violations were selectively enforced and refer to a TV news interview they did in the store after hours about the union drive. The spokesperson deferred comment to two letters written in December 2021 by Johnson before the union election in Buffalo and the executive vice-president of North America, Rossann Williams, after the election. “From the beginning, we’ve been clear in our belief that we do not want a union between us as partners, and that conviction has not changed. However, we have also said that we respect the legal process,” wrote Williams.The third season of Netflix’s abstinence-in-bikinis reality show, Too Hot to Handle, launched on the platform in late January with a surprising twist. At the beginning of the first episode, the show’s narrator, Desiree Burch, explained to viewers that one day after wrapping up the filming of season two last year, an entirely new cast was introduced to the show’s villa in the Turks and Caicos Islands. As with the second season’s brigade of contestants, season three’s group were not informed that they would be appearing on Too Hot to Handle, whose agonising reputation precedes it. Instead, the programme-makers told their band of singles that this was a sexy show called Pleasure Island, complete with a fake host and its own in-show lingo. The participants in Too Hot to Handle’s third season had no idea this trick had also been used on their predecessors. They seemed dejected, if still slightly knowing, when they were told. But it’s not surprising that the show’s producers were keen to pull the rug out from under them in pursuit of “authenticity”. Reality TV is now self-consciously commercial, with contestants increasingly seeing its shows as a fast track to brand partnerships and sponsorship deals in a TV-to-Instagram-influencer pipeline. Contestants take part with the intention of growing their social media followings and signing lucrative promotional deals when they leave. Over the years, even the format and production values of reality TV have become predictably staged: we get scene transitions with establishing shots, musical interludes and stock character tropes that become even more pronounced during the edit. Many reality TV fans are old enough to remember that things were not always this way. Recently, I’ve noticed internet users sharing grainy, boisterous clips from the UK’s original reality juggernaut, Big Brother (during lockdown, three “superfans” even launched a podcast devoted to analysing each episode). Despite the scandal this show courted during its 18-year run and the fact its early contestants were forced to contend with a savage, pre-Leveson tabloid culture, clips from the series now seem like a raw counterpoint to current reality TV. The first series, which launched on Channel 4 in 2000, was billed as a “social experiment”. Contestants included a bricklayer from Liverpool and an Irish ex-nun. To begin with, there was no expectation that contestants would do anything but come as they were, to a house where their every action would be filmed for two months. People arrived from all walks of life, and top-percentile hotness was not necessarily a prerequisite for selection. Of course, Big Brother was not without controversies: it was accused of shamefully showcasing public prejudice, exploiting vulnerable contestants and stigmatising welfare issues. In 2020, season six contestant Makosi Musambasi told Grazia magazine that she believed she had been treated differently to other contestants by the audience because of her skin colour. And the press reaction to the show was cruel: the late Jade Goody, during her appearance on Big Brother season three in 2002, was branded a “pig” on the pages of the Sun. While Big Brother exposed often ugly truths about the UK, it is the show’s bizarre but simple format and often dishevelled contestants that are remembered with a peculiar fondness by millennials like me. Big Brother and its long-running celebrity iteration were remarkably unpolished. Many shows, such as Strictly and The Masked Singer now consist of heavily formatted celebrity competitions that couldn’t be further from the deeply real magic of a Welsh teenager making up a song about “cooking an egg for the very first time” to a rapt audience of millions. It was six years, last month, since one of the greatest British TV moments in recent history: when Celebrity Big Brother season 17 contestant Tiffany “New York” Pollard mistakenly believed her fellow housemate David Gest was dead. (Gest, in a tragic coincidence, actually died only a couple of months after leaving the Big Brother house.) Even though this happened in 2016 (only a year after Love Island, as we now know it, began), the video footage of the moment – which is poorly lit, and features the housemates looking as unkempt as you’d expect of people who have not left home for over a week – feels worlds away from the glossy, preened appearance of Too Hot to Handle. Reality TV is partly an oxymoron – the nature of editing something into a piece of entertainment has always meant removing at least some of its likeness to real life. It’s important to note that this creation of distance between viewers and contestants can also be a useful corrective to the strong, unfair and deeply personal attacks that many fans, now armed with social media accounts, frequently aim at reality TV recruits. But as the genre has evolved, the “reality” aspect has become more jumbled. Where Big Brother might have been a funhouse mirror held up to daily life, our current formats feel more like a phone camera with Instagram filters. So it’s no surprise that those of us who can recall the first decade of Big Brother are finding enjoyment in revisiting its pure “please do not swear” chaos. Lauren O’Neill is a culture writer for Vice UKBen Wallace, Britain’s defence secretary, heads to Moscow on Friday riding high: ranked by Conservative members as the best performer in cabinet, his name is being whispered as a possible future secretary general of Nato. It marks a peak for the 51-year-old, who once observed he had “never had an accelerated path through the Tory party” but who has, unlike most members of Boris Johnson’s cabinet, come through crises with his reputation enhanced. Allies put this down in part to sheer diligence – Wallace admitted last week on a ministerial visit to Croatia that he had only had four days off in the past 18 months – and he gets by on little sleep, frequently at his desk, one said, at 7am or earlier. This time, Wallace has attempted to prepare thoroughly for his meeting with Sergei Shoigu, the first bilateral between UK and Russian defence ministers since 2013, even reaching out across party lines. The minister contacted Lord Robertson, a former Labour defence secretary and Nato secretary general, for advice, because the peer is one of the few British politicians to have met Shoigu (the inscrutable Russian once gave him an ice pick as a present). Insiders praise his ability to make “cold decisions on things like tanks” and argue that, unlike Dominic Raab’s Foreign Office, he had made preparations in case the Taliban took over, by drawing up lists of Afghan interpreters who would be eligible for resettlement ahead of time. But there are flashes of emotion too. Relations with Raab were often difficult, colleagues said, with Wallace complaining about him, sometimes at length, in private during the Afghanistan crisis. Raab had stayed on holiday at first, and the Foreign Office struggled to handle emergency asylum claims – errors that eventually led to his demotion. A long-term supporter of Johnson’s leadership credentials, he was also enraged when Michael Gove capsized the 2016 leadership bid. “Michael seems to have an emotional need to gossip, particularly when drink is taken, as it all too often seemed to be,” Wallace, Johnson’s campaign manager, wrote in the Telegraph at the time. Unlike most politicians, Wallace did not go to university, opting instead for Sandhurst, the officers training academy, before serving in the Scots Guards for seven years until 1998. He reached the rank of captain, and service included two tours of Northern Ireland. At one point, when he was aged 21 or so, he had caught up with members of an IRA active service unit, and found a bag containing “a semtex bomb in a sweetie jar”. Recalling the episode in a BBC podcast interview, Wallace said that the police man standing next to him had shouted “it’s the effing real thing”. The bomb would have gone off if the glass was broken, but he was able to hand it on for safe disposal. Politics came along in 1999, when he served a term as a Conservative in the Scottish parliament, before getting elected to Westminster in 2005, winning the Lancaster and Wyre seat from Labour. Ministerial progress was slow, and after a stint as a PPS to Ken Clarke, he became security minister in 2016. But his military background runs deep. One person who knows him well said he was capable of being “very proud and very critical of the military,” arguing he is perfectly cast in his current job. When Wallace broke down during an LBC interview last August at the height of the Afghanistan crisis, admitting that “some people won’t get back,” he said he felt it so personally “because I’m a soldier”. Others may wonder if he can go further, although Nato, looking for a new secretary general after October, may be a better fit than Downing Sreet ever would be. Even supporters say “he hasn’t been tested on a personal level” in a way prime ministers are routinely in the modern era. “The qualities he has are those that might have got him to the top 50 years ago,” one added.QAnon, the extremist conspiracy movement whose followers believe Donald Trump is waging war against the “deep state”, appears to have instigated a nationwide effort to take control of the US election process in critical battleground states ahead of America’s 2024 presidential election. In recent months concern has risen over the coordinated efforts of at least 15 candidates – committed to Trump’s “big lie” that the 2020 election was stolen from him – who are now running to serve as chief election officials in key swing states. At least eight of the candidates standing for secretary of state positions have formed an alliance in which they share tactics and tips for success, details of which the Guardian revealed last month. Should any of the candidates be elected, they would be in prime position to distort or even overturn election results in favor of Trump or another preferred presidential candidate in ways that could have a profound impact on or even determine the national outcome. All the big lie candidates vying to gain control of election counts at state level present themselves as Republicans. It is now emerging that QAnon played a critical role in steering far-right candidates towards the secretary of state races as part of what appears to be a calculated nationwide assault on American democracy. “This is the way that QAnon could trigger a constitutional crisis,” said Alex Kaplan, senior researcher at the watchdog Media Matters for America who is a close observer of the conspiracy theory. “QAnon is linked to an effort to recruit and elect candidates to positions directly controlling election administrations, and given their ties to harming democracy, that is very concerning.” QAnon emerged in 2017 when an unknown figure, “Q”, began to post on the 4chan message board that Trump, then in the White House, was secretly preparing to destroy a cabal of Satan-worshipping child traffickers. The conspiracy has become more overtly political in recent months, helping to spread baseless claims that the 2020 election was rigged for Joe Biden. It was also implicated in the January 6 insurrection at the US Capitol. The FBI has arrested more than 20 QAnon followers for violent acts on that day. Last June the agency released a threat assessment that warned that other adherents of the conspiracy could begin “accepting the legitimacy of violent action”. The links between QAnon and the coordinated push to control election counts was revealed by one of the big lie candidates himself. Jim Marchant, a former Republican lawmaker who is running to become chief election official in Nevada, disclosed the connection at “Patriot Double Down”, a QAnon-linked convention held in Las Vegas in October. Marchant told the convention that the idea that he should run for secretary of state was not his own. It was given to him by a prominent QAnon-influencer who goes by the alias Juan O Savin. The name is a phonetic play on the number 1-0-7. Q is the 17th letter of the alphabet. Marchant told the audience of QAnon advocates that he was approached by Savin the day after the presidential election on 3 November. Savin came to him in a suite he had rented in the Las Vegas Venetian hotel accompanied by “other President Trump allies” and told him that instead of running for Congress, which he was considering, Marchant should stand for the post of top election administrator in Nevada. “I said, ‘Absolutely’,” Marchant said in a recorded video of his speech to the convention. “I knew right then that they had figured out that we need to take back the secretary of state offices around the country. Not only did they ask me to run, they asked me to put together a coalition of other like-minded secretary of state candidates. I got to work, Juan O Savin helped, and we formed a coalition.” In an interview with the Guardian last month, Marchant confirmed that he had set up an alliance of at least eight far-right secretary of state candidates in states that are likely to determine the outcome of the 2024 presidential election. They include Arizona, Georgia and Michigan – states which were critical in the 2020 presidential election and which all now have big lie candidates running for secretary of state posts who have been endorsed by Trump. The Guardian contacted Marchant about the QAnon connection, but he did not respond. Marchant’s disclosure of the formative role played by Juan O Savin in the secretary of state candidates alliance, which was first reported by the Daily Beast and by Kaplan for Media Matters, has in turn been corroborated by Savin himself. Kaplan has monitored several recent instances where the QAnon-influencer has spoken about having backed the alliance. In January he told a QAnon show that “we have a project that we are doing helping candidates across the country that we started here in Nevada that has prospered pretty well, with a number of Trump endorsements”. In May he said in a video conversation that he had recently organized a meeting of about 50 people to look at “how we are going to get to a lawful election this time around and get to the right result. How we are going to coordinate between the different states to get to the right outcome.” In the most recent comment, on Sunday, he talked about “the secretary of state stuff”, boasting that “across the country we are gaining strength rapidly to get back into this game in an effective way. A lot of those offices that they thought they held and weren’t going to matter, we are going to flip those.” QAnon watchers say that Savin has been rising rapidly within the conspiracy theory in recent months. “He used to be a fringe figure, but has become a lot more prominent,” said Al Jones, founder of the Q Origins Project, a group of analysts who track the QAnon movement. Savin made a rare open public appearance at the Patriot Double Down convention. Normally, though, he hides his identity. He is often interviewed by QAnon followers as he is driving, showing only his hands on the steering wheel or his cowboy boots. He brags about having high-up contacts in the US intelligence services, though in fact he is believed to be a private insurance investigator living in the Seattle area. He claims to be friends with the actor Roseanne Barr, and in one of the wilder aspects of his influence, is believed by many QAnon followers to be John F Kennedy Jr. Savin’s recent efforts have been focused on spreading falsehoods about mass fraud in the 2020 election. He has also amplified apocalyptic conspiracy theories including that President Biden’s public appearances are broadcast with the use of a green screen to disguise his disabilities. Travis View, a leading QAnon watcher and host of the QAnon Anonymous podcast, told the Guardian that it would be “ruinous for democracy if people involved with QAnon got into positions of power where they have actual influence in determining the results or legitimacy of elections. QAnon is such an anti-reality way of thinking that it is entirely incompatible with the conventions that sustain democracy.” Several people close to Trump are known to have deep ties with the QAnon movement. Michael Flynn, a former national security adviser to Trump, spoke at a previous QAnon conference in Dallas and is thought to also have pushed a strategy of standing for local election among QAnon followers. Sidney Powell, who advocated for overturning the 2020 election result and who Trump at one point verbally agreed to appoint as special counsel on election fraud, also has ties to QAnon. Before Trump was removed from Twitter, he frequently disseminated comments from QAnon followers.The prosecution: Paolo Ray has become a bit intolerant since I’ve gone vegetarian Ray is generally a good person to live with, but since I’ve gone vegetarian I think he’s become a bit intolerant. I was never a big meat-eater before I met my girlfriend; I was always trying to up my protein intake with unhealthy shakes and supplements. My girlfriend, who is vegan, taught me that I don’t need all that. Ray could take a leaf out of my book, as cutting animal products out of my diet has made me feel amazing. Surely he should want that, too. Since then, I’ve bought new kitchenware as I don’t want Ray’s cooking to contaminate our food. I have asked him a few times to stop using my pots and pans but he still does it – I think he gets a slight kick out of seeing me panic. Once, when I smelled pork on my pan, I told him he was selfish and that I don’t want meat in my veggie meals. He did apologise and said he got them mixed up, but he also told me to calm down in a silly voice, as if it were a joke. He needs to be more considerate. Ray points out that while I have become a vegetarian, I still smoke. He thinks it means I’m a hypocrite, but that’s a false equivalence. It’s a way to silence me when I start telling him about the problems with eating meat. I believe it’s a good idea to be more conscientious with regard to the impact we are leaving on the planet. My girlfriend doesn’t come around that much, but when she does we try to cook at different times to Ray so we don’t have to smell or touch meat. She doesn’t want to use utensils covered in animal products either. We’ve tried to devise a schedule, and I always tell Ray in advance when she’s coming, but he gets sulky and complains. He says, “I can’t live how I want to in my own home,” but that’s not true. Ray needs to adapt to my lifestyle changes as I would do the same for him. He needs to realise we aren’t the same selfish twentysomethings we were when we met. I want to be healthier, live longer, and reduce my carbon footprint. If Ray did the same, it would benefit him and everyone else, too. The defence: Ray Paolo once told me I was killing myself because I’d made a tuna sandwich I moved into this flat with Paolo a couple of years ago. Paolo was a big meat-eater, which worked, as I am too. We ordered pepperoni pizzas for our hangovers and occasionally cooked the odd fry-up or curry in the week. But Paolo recently went vegetarian and now he wants to control how I cook meat in our kitchen, which is not fair. It all started when he began dating his new girlfriend. She sends him Netflix documentaries about vegan athletes and the ills of the meat and fish industries. After their first month of dating, Paolo was converted. He threw out all the bacon and burgers in our house, including some of mine. Paolo bought himself a separate fridge and lectures me on the dangers of eating animal products. Once he told me I was “killing myself” when I made a tuna sandwich. That was a bit intense. I care about my health, but I’m not going to change my diet based on his views. He’s too forceful with his opinions. Paolo tries to get me to eat chickpea burgers, salad and stuffed peppers as it’s “better” for my health. His girlfriend visits often and they cook vegan meals together. It means I can’t be in the kitchen at the same time as them. They say the smell and sight of meat makes them sick. I do compromise by letting them cook alone, but it’s annoying having to sneak a Nando’s up to my room. When Paolo first went vegetarian, cooking in our flat was fine; we just did everything separately. Then he bought new pans as he didn’t want the “meat juice” contaminating his food. One time he said I was poisoning him. However, he still smokes. Paolo needs to relax and mind his own business if he wants me to stay in this house. He can’t expect me to change my lifestyle overnight to suit him. We don’t socialise together as much now, because he’s always with his girlfriend and prefers vegan beer and bland meals to the stuff we used to like. Paolo could also stop banning me from the shared spaces when we both need to cook, and remember that he once loved a good steak. The jury of Guardian readers Should Paolo back off and let Ray cook meat in their shared space? My housemate of seven years turned vegan a few years ago. I remain a meat eater. However, we respect each other – she has specific pans, and I air out the kitchen if I’m cooking something smelly. Paolo is within his rights to want separate cooking equipment, but he needs to understand that he doesn’t have the right to lecture Ray on his lifestyle. Ben, 37 Paolo has good reasons for becoming vegetarian, but it’s not up to him to lecture Ray on changing his lifestyle – it’s his choice. Ray shouldn’t use Paolo’s pots but they need to compromise and share cooking space and time equally. Sally, 69 Paolo is being unreasonable: he’s made a major (and positive) change but the houseshare started on the basis that neither minded what the other cooked. He should win Ray over by upping his vegan cooking game. Sara, 46 Do I detect a hint of jealousy about the new girlfriend in Ray? The previous status quo was clearly a meaty one. But now Ray needs to move in Paolo’s direction, and show sensitivity by respecting the veggie saucepans. Paul, 58 While Paolo’s life choices are admirable, he’s not being fair to Ray and the ethos of communal living. Separate pans are fine but segregated kitchen time is a step too far. Paolo needs to establish a better balance between his new life choices and his housemate. Mark, 34 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Ray stop cooking meat in the kitchen? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Regina should ditch her multiple morning alarm clocks, because it annoys her boyfriend Harry. 62% of you said no – Regina is innocent 38% of you said yes – Regina is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereMagnus Carlsen’s vintage performance at Wijk aan Zee gained the world champion three rating points in his quest for a world record 2900. A week later the Norwegian, 31, gave them all back with interest on a Saturday night in Oslo to Tallaksen Ostmoe, rated 399 points lower than the No 1. The very first meeting 22 years earlier between the then nine-year-old Carlsen, rated under 1000, and the 15-year-old Ostmoe, rated over 2200, had also been a draw and a rating upset, but this was the other way round. In Saturday night’s game Carlsen, White in a Caro-Kann 1 e4 c6, provoked a very early queen exchange, gained a slight edge … then missed a one-move winner. Can you do better? Carlsen’s progress towards 2900 has been handicapped by his lack of 2800-plus opponents, meaning that his rating gain from a victory is small while a draw is guaranteed to lose him rating points. There has also probably been some deflation at top level in the rating system since 2014, when Fide’s March rating list showed 50 players rated 2700 and above, contrasting with only 38 players over 2700 in the current live ratings. It would be bizarre for the world champion to abandon his 2900 target so soon after announcing it as a preferred alternative to meeting anyone from his own generation in a title match, and the indications are that he will look towards the St Louis-organised Grand Chess Tour this spring for his next major tournament, before returning to home territory at Stavanger in June. He also starts next Saturday, 19 February, in the Airthings Masters, the first event of the year in the online Meltwater Champions Tour which Carlsen won in 2021. Yuri Averbakh became the first ever centenarian grandmaster on Tuesday, when the 1954 USSR champion and famous endgame writer celebrated his 100th birthday. Last week’s column marked the veteran’s achievement with an elegant Averbakh puzzle whose brief answer is well worth solving if you missed it. Averbakh has written a dozen books, but the one which stands out for would-be improving players is Chess Endings: Essential Knowledge, around 120 pages and still freely available online for around £10. US grandmasters have dominated their Russian rivals in the group stage of the first leg (of three) of the Fide Grand Prix, which qualifies its top two to the eight-player Candidates at Madrid in June. Hikaru Nakamura and Levon Aronian are through to this weekend’s semi-finals, while Wesley So and Leinier Dominguez meet in a speed tie-break on Friday (2pm start). In contrast, Alexander Grischuk, Andrey Esipenko, Vladimir Fedoseev and Daniil Dubov have all been eliminated. In Friday’s tie-breaks (best of two rapidplay games) Richard Rapport (Hungary) beat Radoslaw Wojtaszek (Poland) and Dominguez (US) beat So (US), both by 1.5-0.5. Semi-final pairings on Saturday and Sunday (2 pm start) are Nakamura v Rapport and Aronian v Dominguez. Aronian has been the standout player so far. The former Armenian not only impressively won his group with a round to spare, but is now neck and neck with Fabiano Caruana in the ratings in a race to become established as US No 1. Nakamura sparked controversy when the Fide president, Arkady Dvorkovich, chose him as his personal wildcard when it was expected that he would prefer Esipenko, 19. As it turned out, Esipenko got in anyway via another withdrawal, and when they met Nakamura played what he called a “statement game” as a response to the criticisms of his inclusion. White’s 24 b4-b5! led to some well calculated tactics. Nakamura’s strong performance in Berlin confounded those who called him just an online streamer who did not merit his Grand Prix wildcard. The five-time US champion believes that online is still the same game as over-the-board chess. He said: “It’s nice to win games, and to prove to people that there is really no difference. Just look at who won most of those online tournaments. It was this guy called Magnus, and he seems to be pretty decent at over-the-board chess too!” Thursday’s return Esipenko v Nakamura game was in the final round of the group stage. The Russian needed a win with the white pieces, the American only a draw to top the group. Too much tension? The game proved chaotic and error-strewn as both GMs made numerous mistakes until Nakamura managed to reach a drawn queen ending. China’s world No 3, Ding Liren, who was thought to be out of the current world championship cycle after his journey to Berlin was stopped by visa difficulties, could yet have another opportunity. If Ding reaches the semi-finals or better in the second Grand Prix leg at Belgrade, he would then be eligible to fill a vacancy if one occurred in the third and final leg back in Berlin. One possible scenario would be if the second Chinese player, Yu Yangyi, did badly in Belgrade and then dropped out. The rules appear to say that in case of a withdrawal, Dvorkovich decides who will be the replacement. The politically savvy Dvorkovich will be well aware of the importance of keeping friendly relations between Fide and China, and that in some circumstances Ding might get a chance for a direct match with Carlsen should the world champion refuse to meet Fide’s designated candidate. 3802: 1 Bg2! Ke3 (Kxg2? 2 h4 wins) 2 h4 Kxf4 3 Bf3! Ke5 4 h5 Ke6 5 Bd5+! (stops Kf7) Ke7 6 h6 Kf8 7 Kd2! and wins. The BK is kept away from g7/h8, while the WK eats the black pawns after which the BK is in zugzwang and must move away from f8, allowing the h6 pawn to queen. Carlsen v Ostmoe: 1 Bb6! wins. If 1…Bxb6 2 Ra8+ and 3 Rxh8. If 1…Bb8 2 Rxg7. If 1…Bd8 2 Bxd8 Rxd8 3 Rxg7, all with a hopeless ending for Black. Instead 1 Ra8+? Bb8 2 Ba7 Kb7 leads to an equal pawn ending. • This article was amended on 17 February 2022. A typographical error in an earlier version meant Ding Liren’s given name was misspelled as “Liten”.“It means something brand new, never before seen, hasn’t been put on a map yet,” says Mark Wahlberg to his co-star Tom Holland in a promo clip explaining the title of their new movie, Uncharted. “And that’s what this movie is,” Holland agrees. Well … even without seeing Uncharted, we all know that’s not quite true. For one thing, it is adapted from a popular video game series, but also, let’s admit, in movie terms, this territory is actually pretty well charted. The treasure-hunt movie is now a genre, usually involving a couple of adventurers thrown into a globe-trotting quest for a highly valuable artefact, pursued by dangerous rivals, hostile natives and so on. This terrain has been mapped over the past 40 years by the likes of Indiana Jones, Romancing the Stone, The Mummy, National Treasure, Tomb Raider, the other Tomb Raider. Just last summer we had Disney’s Jungle Cruise – with Dwayne Johnson and Emily Blunt questing up the Amazon. Next month we will be getting The Lost City, with Sandra Bullock and Channing Tatum questing in Central America. A fifth instalment of Indiana Jones is halfway through shooting. Clearly, this is a formula that works. But it is also a narrative with a legacy. There’s no way round it: these are stories of white people travelling to lands populated by non-white people and stealing their stuff. As anyone who has visited a European or American museum in the past century will know, this is not pure fiction. In real life, however, the direction of travel is now more in the opposite direction. Institutions in Europe and the US have begun returning looted artefacts, such as the Benin Bronzes, which were taken from Nigeria by the British in 1897. Last year, the Belgian government agreed to return some 2,000 “stolen” artefacts to Congo, and Unesco urged the British Museum to return the Parthenon (AKA Elgin) marbles to Greece. Uncharted is primarily unchallenging popcorn fare, but as with so many treasure-hunt movies, its connections to the real history of colonial plunder are barely disguised. The treasure in question here is that of Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan, who led an expedition that circumnavigated the globe in the name of the Spanish empire 500 years ago. According to the film, his booty-laden ships are still out there, somewhere in the Philippines. (There is little discussion about where Magellan might have acquired such riches, or who its rightful owners might be.) Holland’s character is Nathan Drake, son of an American archaeologist and self-proclaimed descendent of Francis Drake, England’s own 16th-century imperialist plunderer. His arch-rival in the race to find Magellan’s treasure is a descendant of the Spanish family that originally funded Magellan. So not such a “brand new” story after all. So many of these movies refer to history for their myths and MacGuffins, particularly the British empire. In Jungle Cruise, Emily Blunt is a posh, surprisingly athletic English botanist in the 1910s. Tomb Raider’s Lara Croft is of a similar pedigree: the well-educated daughter of a wealthy, aristocratic British archaeologist. In The Mummy movies, Rachel Weisz plays a bookish (but surprisingly athletic) 1920s Egyptologist named Evelyn Carnahan. She was modelled on Evelyn Beauchamp, daughter of Lord Carnarvon, financier of Howard Carter’s Egypt excavations that discovered Tutankhamun’s tomb. Rather than actual history, though, the real origins of this genre lie in movie history, and in particular, that Magellan of archaeological adventuring, Indiana Jones. As notes from a 1981 brainstorming session between George Lucas, Steven Spielberg and Lawrence Kasdan revealed, they were chiefly inspired by the movies they grew up on, such as King Kong, The Treasure of the Sierra Madre and the thrilling Republic serials of the 1940s and 50s. Also mentioned are Ripley’s Believe It Or Not, Disneyland rides and pseudoscientific books such as Erich von Daniken’s Chariots of the Gods. “I don’t think they even knew the name of a single real-life historical archaeologist,” says Justin Jacobs, history professor at American University and author of Indiana Jones in History. “It’s all recycling of previous pop culture. There’s zero historical research in there.” Looking at the anachronisms and casual racism of the Indiana Jones movies, this comes as no surprise. In 1984’s Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, for example, the film-makers took the 1930s Indian setting as licence to lay out an all-you-can eat buffet of Orientalist stereotypes. Literally so in the maharajah’s feast scene, where live snakes, eyeball soup, giant beetles and chilled monkey brains are on the menu (none of which have anything to do with Indian cuisine). Further afield, the movie peddles a brown-skinned death cult that rips out people’s hearts, kidnaps white women and enslaves children – until Indy turns up to white-saviour everyone. Consciously or not, these movies mirror Europe’s real-life colonial enterprises. Lucas initially imagined Jones as a kind of “outlaw archeologist”, for example, but quickly realised his hero would need a veneer of academic legitimacy to justify his looting, hence his catchphrase, “That belongs in a museum!” The real-life European looters of the 19th century used similar justifications, says Jacobs: “Basically, it was: ‘We’re going out in the name of science. We’re going to rescue evidence of grand, glorious civilisations that once existed in the distant past. You guys don’t care about this stuff any more. We’re rescuing it, preserving it, we’ll study it, put it on display, and then educate the world.’” The whole exercise was underpinned by essentially racist assumptions. Foreign artefacts were often valued solely in terms of their relevance to European history. Superior non-white craftsmanship was invariably taken as evidence of some hidden European influence. Or even extraterrestrial influence in the case of Von Daniken’s theories about central American civilisations (Indiana Jones part four, The Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, agreed). The decline of formerly great civilisations was often attributed to racial intermixing diluting some original white, empire-building ancestry. The colonial powers of Europe were often in competition. Italian explorer Giovanni Belzoni, for example, became a national celebrity when he shipped a huge bust of Ramesses II from Egypt to London in 1818, succeeding where Napoleon’s troops had failed (it is still on display in the British Museum). “It wasn’t so much a case of: ‘That belongs in a museum’ as, ‘That belongs inourmuseum.’” says Jacobs. You don’t have to look far to explain how Indiana Jones spawned a whole genre. Raiders of the Lost Ark was the highest-grossing movie worldwide in 1981. Its three sequels were equally huge. Joining Temple of Doom in the box office top 10 in 1984 was another treasure-hunt smash: Romancing the Stone, which at least charted some new territory, in that neither Kathleen Turner nor Michael Douglas were posh, British, or even interested in archaeology. Still, they had a map and were on the hunt for a fabled emerald. When they eventually found it, did they donate it to a responsible Colombian cultural institution? Of course not. Douglas sold it and bought a yacht. As well as replicating Indiana Jones’s profitability and casual stereotyping, Romancing the Stone and its sequel, The Jewel of the Nile, cemented another trope of the treasure-hunt genre: white women find these kinds of adventures rather liberating and transformative. Turner’s literary urbanite is initially squeamish at Colombia’s people, animals, weather etc. Then Douglas chops off her high heels with a machete and she’s free! Many others have followed in her flat-heeled footsteps. By the looks of it, that includes Sandra Bullock in The Lost City: she plays another lonely writer “thrust into an epic jungle adventure” – along with Channing Tatum’s equally useless male model. There have been a few attempts to take this kind of explorer material seriously. Werner Herzog’s Fitzcarraldo and Aguirre, the Wrath Of God, say. Or, more recently, James Gray’s The Lost City of Z, based on real-life British explorer Percy Fawcett, who spent nearly 20 years searching for a mythical Amazonian city (coincidentally co-starring Tom Holland). Ciro Guerra’s Embrace of The Serpent offered a more bracing counter-narrative, viewing two different white men’s Amazon expeditions through the eyes of their indigenous guide. Also noteworthy is the scene in Marvel’s Black Panther where Michael B Jordan’s Killmonger forcibly repossesses an African artefact from a British museum. “How do you think your ancestors got these?” he asks. Is it possible to retool these creaky narratives for our more culturally enlightened age? Possibly. Disney’s Jungle Cruise managed partially to disguise its own problematic origins. The original Disneyland ride took passengers on a mock British colonial vessel through a mash-up of “exotic” Asian, African and South American landscapes, complete with racist caricatures such as “Trader Sam”, a grass-skirted animatronic cannibal holding up a shrunken head. Sam was quietly removed from the ride in preparation for the movie. In Jungle Cruise, the sought-after treasure is not an indigenous artefact but a medicinal tree at the heart of the Amazon, first sought by Spanish conquistadors. Blunt’s liberated heroine (she even wears trousers) seeks the tree in order to help treat first world war soldiers. Rather than faceless enemies, the indigenous jungle-dwellers are treated respectfully (Trader Sam is a woman, and not a cannibal), and the villains of the piece are the ghosts of the Spanish conquistadors, in league with the Germans. Uncharted navigates its own clumsy course through these waters, bizarrely involving two women of colour (and no Filipinos), although its treasure-hunters do not even pretend to have philanthropic or intellectual motivations; they just want the loot. Let’s see how The Lost City and the fifth Indiana Jones fare. The Lost City’s trailer features no discernible locals. Indiana Jones’s story reportedly involves Nazis and the space race, which suggests it also dodges issues of foreign engagement. Almost certainly this will be the last of the series – Harrison Ford turns 80 this year – if not the end of the treasure-hunt movie era, although perhaps it’s time. There’s a moment in The Last Crusade when Indy tells the panama-hatted villain stealing his golden artefact: “That belongs in a museum!” The villain replies: “So do you.” • Uncharted is released in the UK on 18 February. • This article was amended on 11 February 2022 to clarify that Magellan led an expedition that circumnavigated the globe – although he died before the voyage was completed.Machines might seem an antithetical thing to get sentimental about, but in Jean-Pierre Jeunet’s view of them as imperfect, quirk-prone and funny, they’re pretty much human. The film-maker cobbles together off-kilter worlds where everything is mechanized yet nothing works properly, daily life turned into an absurd burlesque of glitches, miscommunications, system errors and sound-the-alarm snafus. In early-career triumphs like Delicatessen or The City of Lost Children, Jeunet assembled Rube Goldberg contraptions with such fastidious personal care that they couldn’t help but be imbued with the idiosyncrasies of their creator. Sometimes, he’ll apply this notion in a more figurative way to satirize the catch-22-clogged French bureaucracy, a giant engine seemingly built to malfunction. He gets in one or two such cracks with his latest film Bigbug, in which fees incur fees that incur fees. Mostly, however, he’s concerned about actual robots. Technology takes the explicit focus of Jeunet’s literally screw-loose new comedy, now landing on Netflix (with a dearth of fanfare, surprising for the director behind one of the highest-grossing foreign-language releases in the history of American moviegoing). The streaming platform is an ironic place for a film so wary of the “internet of things” to end up, though it’s caught between the digital and analog on a few concurrent levels. The action has been confined to a home full of hinky practical-effect androids, wedged in a prefab neighborhood of little-box CGI conformity. A revolution among next-gen automatons raging outside traps a collection of homo sapiens there, mismatched caricatures befitting the broad sex farce inexplicably jammed in the middle of this commentary on AI run amok. Between klutzy ploys to get into each other’s pants, the organic life forms collude with the cruder household bots they have come to consider family to beat back the real menace: the charmless homogeneity of smart-tech. Something’s not right with the ubiquitous off-brand Robocops cheekily dubbed Yonyx (François Levantal), their forehead QR-code tattoos and oversized fake teeth unsettling even before they rise up in a coup d’etat. They are polished to the point of untrustworthiness; fittingly, one of their kind gains traction as a fringe politician. This dash of background color plays on a television in the home of Alice (Elsa Zylberstein), which is kept in order by a short circuit-looking vacuum, a talking bust of Albert Einstein that walks on animatronic spider legs and the bob-haired electro-maid Monique (Claude Perron). They’re three of the good ones, friendly and helpful when not on the fritz, somewhere between nanny and pet for Alice and daughter Nina (Marysole Fertard). Most importantly, they’re cool with servitude, garbling any class-based allegories in favor of a loftier ontological journey to learn what it means to be human. Their joint quest to become a real boy/girl/vacuum often plays like the B-plot to the goings-on with Alice’s many guests. We’ve got a sleazy suitor (Stephane de Groodt) and his surly teen son (Hélie Thonnat), her loutish ex-husband (Youssef Hajdi) and his trophy girlfriend (Claire Chust), her aging neighbor (Isabelle Nanty) and the obsolete hunk (Alban Lenoir) she’s programmed to love her. Locked indoors until the threat level beyond their impregnable walls sinks to an acceptable number, they moon over one another with serviceable bawdy humor that only briefly veers into that distinctly Gallic brand of shrillness. A running gag involving the Kama Sutra provides a helpful reminder that the national perception of the French as highbrow sophisticates does not account for their studio comedies. Thinking beyond the containment of his chamber-piece setup, Jeunet indulges in some universe-building that takes his signature combination of the morbid and silly to a brighter, peppier register. In the teal retro-futurist kitchen, Monique shakes nutritious crickets out of a box like cereal, and on the TV, the show “Homo Ridiculus” subjects humans to humiliating scenarios for the amusement of the Yonyx. Outside the window, roving drones blare advertisements personalized to the rapidly deteriorating state of society. The tone stays light even as the incoming tide of robo-fascism worsens to book-burning, but the bleak details of dystopia are always rapping at the door. Whether it’s the scenery or the cybernetic characters, Jeunet takes far more interest in things than the people he leaves as thin archetypal sketches. Lest this be mistaken for coldness, he locates the film’s soul in those searching for one, the quirkier robots treated with more affection than their mass-produced counterparts goose-stepping out of Silicon Valley. With his work now migrating online and his jerry-rigged methods increasingly outsourced to post-production effects, Jeunet can’t avoid the impending digitization of cinema, nor life. Still, he’s not going down without landing a few good fingers to the ribs first. Bigbug is now available on NetflixHM Revenue &amp; Customs has been accused by an influential group of MPs of “ignorance and inaction” on recouping £6bn of fraudulent Covid-19 support payments, drawing an angry backlash from the tax authority. The public accounts committee (PAC), which monitors state spending, issued a litany of criticisms of HMRC, warning that money surrendered to fraudsters would ultimately add to the cost of living crisis engulfing Britain. In a series of criticisms described as “damning” by shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves, the PAC said: HMRC has effectively “written off” £4bn of Covid-related fraud. Plans to recover fraudulent payments are “unambitious”. This risks “rewarding the unscrupulous”. Customer service at the tax authority has “collapsed”. HMRC is not doing enough to crack down on tax avoidance. PAC chair Dame Meg Hillier highlighted the volume of fraudulent claims made via three HMRC-administered Covid grant schemes, which include furlough, the Self-Employment Income Support Scheme and Rishi Sunak’s Eat Out To Help Out package for hospitality. Citing HMRC’s estimate that it may recover £2bn of £6bn in fraudulent claims, she said: “The level of fraud and error in furlough that employers will get away with is a real concern. “What signal does it send when HMRC rolls over on billions of pounds of fraud and error directly related to Covid support packages?” HMRC said its estimate of what will be recovered did not mean that it has written off the remainder, which it intends to pursue. But the report said HMRC was not doing enough to reclaim the money and was also failing in its wider duties, including ensuring tax compliance and preventing people being lured into avoidance schemes. “With the current parlous state of the public finances we can ill afford to be so cavalier over so much taxpayers’ money,” said Hillier. “Every taxpayers’ pound lost to a fraudster will lead to honest ordinary people feeling the post-pandemic pinch harder and harder.” Criticism of HMRC comes weeks after Treasury minister Lord Agnew resigned over a separate decision by the government to write off £4.3bn of fraudulent business loans. Reeves said: “This is damning. It should be a source of enduring shame to the chancellor that he has so casually written off billions in taxpayers’ money that is now in the hand of criminals and gangs.” HMRC staff are understood to feel that the tax authority is being unfairly singled out and that it is making progress on beefing up its tax collection capacity after a pandemic-affected year when it collected £609bn, down 4.3% on the previous year. A government spokesperson said: “While we acknowledge lessons that need to be learned in this report, we reject many of the statements made by the PAC. “No fraudulent payments have been written off and we’re taking action on multiple fronts to recover overpayments, and our Taxpayer Protection Taskforce is expected to recover up to £1bn from fraudulent or incorrect payments.” The taskforce is made up of nearly 1,300 staff and is expected to recover an additional £1bn of taxpayers’ money. The spokesperson added: “The vast majority of payments in the schemes were made correctly to employers, and most error and fraud was legitimate claimants making mistakes or inflating their claims, often small amounts per case. “Our Covid support schemes were implemented at unprecedented speed to protect millions of jobs and businesses at a time when families needed it the most. “As a result, our economy is back to pre-pandemic levels and growing at the fastest rate in the G7. The cost of inaction would have been far greater than the cost of fraud and error in the support schemes.” HMRC added that the report’s claims of a collapse in customer service, such as call waiting times on the phone, were a “gross distortion”. At a PAC select committee hearing last week, HMRC deputy chief executive Angela McDonald said she expected the authority to clear its backlog of outstanding cases by April.Perth festival is facing calls to drop the orchestral production Become Ocean from this year’s program over a sponsorship arrangement with fossil fuel company Woodside Energy. The production, scheduled for Saturday 5 March, is a performance of John Luther Adams’ Pulitzer prize-winning work – originally written as a reflection about oceanic changes brought on by global heating – by the Western Australian Youth Orchestra (WAYO) and the West Australian Symphony Orchestra (WASO), in a partnership between the orchestras sponsored by Woodside. Fossil Free Arts WA have called for the production to be dropped from the festival lineup over concerns that Woodside’s sponsorship amounts to “arts-washing”. Steven Alyian and Madeleine Antoine, both members of Selfless Orchestra and spokespeople for Fossil Free Arts, said they wanted Perth festival to “take a stand” where WAYO and WASO had not. “As Australian artists and musicians, a lot of us want to see the end of greenwashing and the exploitation of artists for corporate interests,” Alyian said. “This is quite a blatant attempt at arts-washing.” Antoine said that as an important training ground for future generations of musicians, WAYO had an obligation to find alternative sponsorship arrangements. Greenpeace chief executive, David Ritter, said the organisation wanted the sponsorship arrangement with Woodside to end as it was “damaging the festival’s reputation by cynically sponsoring, of all things, an event celebrating the ocean”. “Gas is a fossil fuel that is driving dangerous climate change, which is the greatest threat to our oceans – so for Woodside to be sponsoring this event is grotesque corporate hypocrisy,” Ritter said. In a piece for the Guardian in 2018, Adams, the piece’s composer, wrote about the inspiration behind Become Ocean. “As the polar ice melts and sea levels rise, we humans find ourselves facing the prospect that once again we may literally become ocean … There is no time to waste. I want my art to matter in the deepest possible way.” Amber Fresh, a member of Perth band Rabbit Island, is playing the festival’s Aesoteric event on 25 February. She also called for WASO to drop Woodside as sponsor. “If these companies give up fossil fuels, I’ll be happy to take their money. With pleasure,” Fresh said. “I want to be writing love songs, not worrying whether the kids who come after me will have fresh water.” “[Fossil fuel companies] shouldn’t be asked ‘to sponsor’ and they shouldn’t offer. Linking yourself with beautiful things like the arts is a way to pretend what’s happening is not outrageous.” Other artists calling for the funding arrangement to be dropped include Fringe World performer Noemie Huttner-Koros, Kuruma Maradudhunera woman and Murujuga traditional owner Josie Alec, and Nick Allbrook, lead singer of the band Pond, which allowed their opening night performance on Friday to be interrupted by activists to speak about climate change. It is understood the sponsorship arrangement with Woodside was arranged by the West Australian Symphony Orchestra (WASO). Fossil Free Arts WA had attempted to meet with WASO about the arrangement, but said their approach was refused. Woodside is currently working to develop the $16bn Scarborough gas project off WA’s coast that has been described as a “bet against” efforts to control the worst effects of climate change. The burning of fossil fuels such as gas are a key driver of global heating. Last year the International Energy Agency said limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop in 2021. WAYO was contacted for comment but did not respond by deadline. WASO said it “will not be providing comment at this time”. Woodside sponsors a large number of arts and sporting organisations, some of which have also faced opposition, such as Surf Life Saving WA’s Nippers program. The company has been a longtime WASO sponsor, with Woodside’s chief executive, Meg O’Neill also serving on the orchestra’s board. Woodside has also been the “principal partner” of the Western Australian Youth Orchestra since 1991, with naming rights to some of its programs. The orchestra has regularly played Woodside events, including the company’s annual general meetings. A spokesperson for Woodside said its 2021 partnership deal had “connected WAYO with the [WASO]” and was “helping develop our local talent, creating pathways for the next generation of gifted musicians”. “Through the partnership, WAYO musicians are provided with unique opportunities to learn from Western Australia’s professional state orchestra,” they said. Perth festival itself receives considerable funding from fossil fuel companies. An ongoing arrangement with US oil giant Chevron is among several that have drawn controversy in recent years. Nathan Bennett, Perth festival executive director, said its corporate sponsors “allow us to bring meaningful cultural experiences to hundreds of thousands of people in Western Australia” and bring in acts that “otherwise would not happen”. “Become Ocean is a major work involving two orchestras at the heart of our musical culture in WA. Perth festival is proud to showcase and support local companies in our 2022 program,” Bennett said. “We receive support from a wide range of partners – including corporate sponsors, government supporters and philanthropists – that represent the scope of the Western Australian business sector.” Lucy Manne, CEO of 350.org, described Woodside’s sponsorship of Become Ocean as “farcical” as it was “very similar to what we have seen with cigarette companies and big tobacco”. “When you have a business model based on causing harm, you spend a lot of time and effort to improve your image,” Manne said. “It’s completely farcical for an arts event about the ocean to be sponsored by Woodside, as it is a company that is damaging marine environments and fuelling dangerous climate change.” According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the burning of fossil fuels by humanity contributes to warming oceans, acidification, oxygen depletion and the frequency of marine heatwaves. Manne said arts organisations should be free to refuse fossil fuel sponsorship and follow the example of organisations like the Australian Open, which appeared to have abandoned a multi-year partnership with Santos last year. Though Perth’s fringe arts festival Fringe World appeared to have divested itself from Woodside last year, it instead transitioned the sponsorship to its parent company, Artrage. Woodside is also a sponsor of Perth theatre companies Barking Gecko and Yirra Yaakin. Arts companies elsewhere have been divesting themselves of fossil fuel sponsorship, including the Royal Shakespeare Company and Edinburgh festival, which ended a 34-year relationship with BP in 2016.There were five Liberal MPs who crossed the floor to protect LGBTQ+ students against discrimination but the one who tipped the balance is now being accused of breaching a commitment not to defeat the government. It was the member for Reid, Fiona Martin, who most shocked her colleagues when she crossed the floor shortly before dawn on Thursday to add protections that would result in the entire religious discrimination bill being shelved. The rebel group of five MPs was built on the foundation of Bridget Archer and Trent Zimmerman, who had publicly warned they could not back the bill unamended, but Martin was the decisive third vote that guaranteed the amendment’s success. Dave Sharma honoured his commitment that he would not be the casting vote, but if the dam wall broke and the government lost a third MP, he would be the fourth to cross. Katie Allen’s vote was tied to Sharma’s on the understanding the Liberals could use a rebellious streak to try and hold their under threat blue-ribbon seats of Higgins and Wentworth. On Friday the defence minister, Peter Dutton, said that Scott Morrison was “frankly misled” about how unnamed MPs would vote on amendments during the religious discrimination bill debate. The crucial vote on Thursday forced the government to shelve its religious discrimination bill, as conservatives within the Coalition and Christian lobby groups argued the LGBTQ+ student amendment to the Sex Discrimination Act (SDA) would prevent schools setting their own ethos. Martin, a psychologist for 20 years, had expressed her concerns in the Coalition party room. Martin tipped her hand in a vote at 4.24am, joining Zimmerman and Archer in indicating that she wanted to remove a religious exemption to the SDA. Although Allen and Sharma voted with the government in that division, in the next vote at 4.32am they joined Labor, the crossbench, Martin, Zimmerman and Archer to enact a narrower amendment. Morrison allowed the votes to go ahead because he believed despite their concerns about LGBTQ+ students most Liberal moderates would vote down the amendment in return for improvements in the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) review process and the creation of a new select committee on children’s mental health. When Morrison spoke shortly before 2am on Thursday he announced the review would report six months after the religious bill passed, down from 12, and the creation of the new committee to be chaired by Allen and supported by Martin due to their “great clinical experience”. Liberal MP Warren Entsch told Guardian Australia that he had requested the shorter ALRC review timeframe, and a broadening of its terms of reference to include school staff and other forms of discrimination against LGBTQ+ students. “I was able to read the party room and it was clear to me there was no way I was going to change the minds of the large majority who wanted to pass the religious discrimination bill,” Entsch said. Entsch said it was “no accident but a lot of bloody hard work” on his part to force the government to improve the bill by removing the Folau and conscientious objection clauses. On Wednesday evening, Entsch told parliament he would vote for the bill to “bank the successes” of these changes. But for others the momentum was swinging back the other way. A group of four moderate MPs led by Angie Bell had negotiated for the religious exemption to the Sex Discrimination Act to be removed, only to see Morrison water it down to a commitment only to ban expulsion on the grounds of sexuality, omitting protection on the grounds of gender identity. Labor’s decision on Wednesday to release a letter showing on 1 December Morrison had committed to Anthony Albanese to prevent “any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of sexuality or gender identity” further fuelled momentum to cross the floor. Later that evening, Morrison, Josh Frydenberg and senior moderates Simon Birmingham and Tim Wilson met MPs with concerns about the bill including Entsch, Martin and Sharma. Allen was absent. Senior Liberal sources say Martin committed not to cross the floor before the meeting. Entsch told Guardian Australia he was “very disappointed in the actions” of MPs he chose not to name who crossed the floor without telling the government. “With the exception of Katie [Allen], I was in the room when they made their commitments,” Entsch said. “We all came out of that room, with very, very clear positions on what we were going to do. There was no ambiguity whatsoever.” Entsch’s account is disputed. According to one alternative account, Martin didn’t speak at the meeting, which concluded when Morrison believed the bill would have to be pulled because Allen was not yet on board. Leaders of the government allowed the bill and amendments to go to a vote because they believed they later secured Allen’s vote, but Labor and the government were shocked to see Martin cross the floor, triggering Sharma and Allen to follow. Entsch took aim at MPs on all sides – Labor, the crossbench and his own party – for “political opportunism” and voting “on the spur of the moment and not thinking about the consequences”. Entsch praised Zimmerman and Archer, who he said voted with “the most noble of reasons” and whose integrity “remains 100% intact”. Martin responded to Guardian Australia: “I protected the human rights of our most vulnerable in our parliament. I did what was right. I supported the religious discrimination bill, I supported people of faith and I protected the rights of vulnerable young students. To me, that was the right balance.” Sharma said “my conscience is clear”. On Friday Dutton denied that Morrison’s authority had been eroded by the incident, telling ABC radio the prime minister “was frankly misled”. “There are undertakings that were given. The undertaking wasn’t honoured,” Dutton said. He declined to give details of “private conversations” but noted “the government doesn’t go into a vote like that unless there’s been assurances given”. Dutton appeared to confirm that the government was aware that if the dam broke with a third MP joining Zimmerman and Archer to pass the amendment, that others would follow. “I think in certain circumstances if one goes, then you lose five, and [if] you lose a vote by one, you can lose it by five – it’s the same outcome,” he said. Dutton said the government had “very clear statements from a number of people, including beyond the five” and that was the basis for Morrison allowing the bill to a vote. “The prime minister based his judgement, his actions, his decisions on a perfectly reasonable basis following discussions, and it’s difficult when you get to the floor of the parliament and those undertakings aren’t honoured.” Guardian Australia contacted Allen for comment.The mayor of London’s statement on the resignation of Cressida Dick made it clear: a toxic culture within the police, including a persistent seam of misogyny, played a big role in the Metropolitan police commissioner’s downfall. It is remarkable that the outrage that consumed the force after the murder of Sarah Everard by a serving police officer Wayne Couzens in March last year, was only one scandal among many to have shaken women’s faith that the service was there to protect them. While Dick had little control over the events that engulfed her, she led a series of missteps that further eroded confidence in her leadership, particularly among women. In the days that followed Everard’s death the Met was criticised for banning a peaceful vigil in her honour, and when a vigil went ahead without their blessing, the image of a woman being held down by officers was beamed across television screens. “A rotten culture stems from rotten leadership – so it’s good news that she has finally resigned,” said Anna Birley, of Reclaim These Streets who organised the original vigil. Many who worked with Dick praised her work ethic and intelligence, but she never seemed to fully acknowledge the scale of misogyny that critics insisted ran through her force. In June, on the day that one of her officers pleaded guilty to the kidnapping and rape of Everard, Dick badly missed the mark in a speech to the Women’s Institute, causing anger by seeming to minimise the problem, saying the force had the occasional “bad ’un” within its ranks. In December, she had to apologise again when two Met officers were jailed after taking pictures of two sisters, Nicole Smallman, 27, and Bibaa Henry, 46, found stabbed to death in June 2020. Their mother, Mina Smallman, who said racism was a factor in the Met’s initial bungling of the search for her daughters, described the officers actions as a betrayal of “catastrophic proportion”. “Those police officers felt so safe, so untouchable, that they felt they would take photographs with our murdered daughters,” she said. And then, as a new year started, Dick’s leadership was struck by another blow. A fiercely critical report by the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) unveiled shocking details of officers sharing messages about hitting and raping women, as well as the deaths of black babies and the Holocaust. “You ever slapped your missus? It makes them love you more,” wrote one. “They are biologically programmed to like that shit.” The Met’s response? “We do not believe there is a culture of misogyny in the Met.” The IOPC disagreed, saying: “We believe these incidents are not isolated or simply the behaviour of a few ‘bad apples’.” Dick was the first female and first openly homosexual officer to lead the country’s biggest force, but Khan made it clear that he had no confidence she would be the person to “root out the racism, sexism, homophobia, bullying, discrimination and misogyny that still exist” in the Met. Harriet Wistrich, director of the Centre for Women’s Justice, said: “The problem with Cressida as the first female to rise to the top of the most difficult job in policing, is that in order to do so she had to put loyalty to her officers above all else.” She added that after “mounting evidence of a police service littered with appalling misconduct”, there were too many officers accused of violence and abuse still in their jobs and of whistleblowers victimised instead of listened too. “Cressida Dick’s response to these series of stories has been wholly inadequate.” So, what now? An independent review of culture and standards in the Met by Lady Louise Casey, will focus on the force’s vetting, recruitment and training procedures. At the same time an independent inquiry chaired by Dame Elish Angiolini QC will look at Couzens’ actions during his career, and whether any red flags were missed or allegations made against him mishandled. Whoever takes on this role at a tumultuous time for the Met will know that more apologies are likely to be needed. Ruth Davison, the CEO of the domestic abuse charity Refuge, said on Thursday: “One resignation at the top doesn’t mean the police have solved their misogyny problem.”Heathrow airport has said more than 1.3 million passengers cancelled their travel plans over the Christmas and new year period because of Omicron, with hopes for a summer recovery after a weak start to the year. The airport said travel was down 56% in January compared with 2019 levels, a worse start to the year than it had forecast, as the hangover from the Omicron variant affected traveller confidence. “After a tough Christmas, Omicron has continued to bite, and this has been a weak start to the year,” said John Holland-Kaye, the chief executive of Heathrow airport. “As short-lived as the additional travel restrictions were, they ruined the travel plans of more than 1.3 million passengers in the last two months.” He added that the removal of government restrictions that mean vaccinated travellers arriving in the UK no longer have to take coronavirus tests, which started from 4am on Friday, offered a “ray of hope” for the recovery of the travel industry. Despite the weaker than expected start, the airport is maintaining its forecast of 45 million passengers this year, just over half of pre-pandemic levels, as it banks on a bumper summer of Britons holidaying abroad. “We are working with airlines and ground handlers to increase resources across the airport ahead of the summer peak,” the airport said. “While bookings for outbound tourism are recovering, inbound tourism and business travel remain weak due to Covid-19 levels in the UK and other countries, international testing requirements and the risk of new border closures in the event of a new variant of concern.” Only 19.4 million passengers passed through the airport in 2021 – less than a quarter of 2019 levels and below even 2020, the year the coronavirus was declared a pandemic. “Today’s removal of restrictions for vaccinated passengers in and out of the UK offers a ray of hope,” Holland-Kaye said. “But the Omicron hangover proves demand remains fragile, and at risk to new variants of concern, and government needs to set out a playbook for managing future variants that allows travel and trade to keep flowing.”Pick of the week Booksmart What if you can be an academic high-achiever and have a wild social life at the same time? The horrible realisation that you can dawns on nerdy friends Amy and Molly on the last day of high school in Olivia Wilde’s terrific comedy. Kaitlyn Dever and Beanie Feldstein play the joined-at-the-hip pals who struggle to get to a house party the night before graduation, hoping for the extracurricular experiences they’ve missed out on. With a whip-smart script, a big dose of narrative rug-pulling (the slut-shamed girl is going to Yale; the stoner has been recruited by Google) and even some hallucinatory animation, it’s a film infused with the joys of youthful but enduring friendship. Saturday 12 February, 10pm, BBC Three *** Sicario This tremendously tense, edge-of-your-seat 2015 thriller saw future Dune and Arrival director Denis Villeneuve break out of his “best in Canada” reputation into global recognition. Emily Blunt was an unusual pick to play an FBI special agent in Arizona, but she’s surprisingly convincing as an ethical, if naive, character drawn into a semi-legal, cross-border war against Mexican drug cartels. Josh Brolin brooks no dissent as the murky CIA operative running the show, while Benicio Del Toro is even murkier as a Mexican lawyer with opaque motives. Saturday 12 February, 11.35pm, Channel 4 *** The Most Beautiful Boy in the World He may be familiar currently as the white-haired, bearded old man who had a fall in Midsommar, but Björn Andrésen was once idolised around the world after playing the young Tadzio in Luchino Visconti’s 1971 film Death in Venice. The 15-year-old Swede, as Kristina Lindström and Kristian Petri’s intimate documentary reveals, was pitched into a “living nightmare” of celebrity and dubious male attention due to the role – and it’s a period with which he still seems to be coming to terms. He has a heart-breaking story to tell, which he does with almost painful diffidence. Sunday 13 February, 9pm, BBC Four *** The Innocents Among the many adaptations of Henry James’s horror novella The Turn of the Screw, Jack Clayton’s crisply shot 1961 film deserves its reputation as one of the best. It’s all in the ambiguity, with Deborah Kerr bringing her febrile upper-class energy to the role of governess Miss Giddens. Hired to look after an orphaned boy and girl in a country house, she suspects ghostly forces – the spirits of two dead servants – are at work on the young children, manipulating and corrupting them. Or is the unworldly vicar’s daughter just imagining it? Sunday 13 February, 11.50pm, Talking Pictures TV *** Jerry Maguire A top-notch Valentine’s Day double bill starts with Cameron Crowe’s 1996 romantic drama. Tom Cruise is at peak Cruise – all sharp dressing and slick patter – as sports agent Jerry, whose “mission statement” about caring more and earning less gets him fired. But the NFL-based story of him and his sole remaining client, Rod (an effervescent Cuba Gooding Jr), is a sideline to his relationship with Renée Zellweger’s infatuated employee Dorothy – as he first gets the girl, and then realises he doesn’t deserve her. Monday 14 February, 9pm, Film4 *** Disobedience A subtle choice for a date-night movie, Sebastián Lelio’s even-handed drama set in London’s Orthodox Jewish community, is at heart all about love. Rachel Weisz simmers as Ronit, a New York-based photographer who returns to Britain for her rabbi father’s funeral. Having abandoned her religion, she gets a chilly reception, save for childhood friends – and now-married couple – Esti (Rachel McAdams) and Dovid (Alessandro Nivola). Ronit disrupts their committed but passion-free existence, and Esti finds taboo emotions she had repressed for years becoming unavoidable. Monday 14 February, 11.50pm, Film4 *** Texas Chainsaw Massacre “Try anything and you’re cancelled, bro.” Find out if that threat works on Leatherface in this social media-era reboot of the slasher saga. Ignoring the seven sequels, and taking up 50 years after the events of the 1974 original, it follows Lila (Elsie Fisher, so good in Eighth Grade and here facing terrors of a more visceral nature), her sister Melody (Sarah Yarkin) and other friends. They set up a business in a ghost town in the Lone Star State, only to fall foul of the hitherto dormant killer. So it’s lucky the “final girl” from the first film is still around and tooled up, isn’t it? Friday 18 February, NetflixOki, the performing name of Oki Kano, plays folk of the most urgent kind – music from a critically endangered culture. The language in which he performs and his cultural ancestry is Ainu; both have been suppressed through the centuries by the Japanese. Oki’s instrument is Ainu, too: a five-stringed ancient harp, the tonkori, with a bewitchingly woody, stark, hollow sound. After working in New York in the 1980s, Oki returned to his home island of Hokkaido to plait together threads of Ainu music with international influences like throat singing, dub and African drumming. This compilation of the first 10 years of his music-making sounds thrillingly fresh. Kai Kai As To (Rippling Lake) is supple and lithe, his tonkori lifted by approximations of birdsong and harmonies by singers Yayo Boo and Noda Tin. Oki’s instrument provides an urgent, percussive undertow to Iso Kaari Irekte (Beat Trap Rhythm) as a bass clarinet sighs alongside it like a lovable, lumbering animal. Yaykatekar Dub, a tune by late tonkori player Ume Nishihira, gets a sprightlier update: it sounds like a dazzling offcut from the Ze Records catalogue that brought us Kid Creole and Lizzy Mercier Descloux. Late Ainu singer Umeko Ando leads some of the best tracks. A call-and-response passage between her and younger singers Rekpo and Kapiw drives Iuta Upopo (Pestle Song), a fantastic, strident finger-clicker. Oki’s love for improvisation also shines throughout; there’s even what sounds like an uncredited Hammond organ in Afghan Herbal Garden, complete with a stuttering preset rhythm. This is music from the past with the future on its mind, preserving traditions as it propels them into new places. Also out this week Jacken Elswyth’s cassette label continues to shore up jagged folk jewels. Betwixt and Between 8 is another set of two sides, the first featuring Sullow, Elswyth’s new, explosive free-folk trio, the second psych-folk group the Silver Field, who paint a shivery palette of traditional and modern sounds. The viral sea shanty craze of 2021 began with Bristol band the Longest Johns’ version of Wellerman. Smoke + Oakum (Decca), their first major-label release, is all thigh-slapping, conventional fare, albeit delivered with endearing gusto. Alaw’s Denwyd i’r Goleuni/Drawn to the Light (Taith) is the band’s third album of exploratory Welsh and English traditionals. New singer and harmonium player Nia Lynn hones the mood of soul-cossetting folk-rock.Midway through Odell Beckham Jr’s 50-minute virtual news conference on Monday, amid the usual battery of pre-Super Bowl questions, a disembodied voice chimed in that the 29-year-old Los Angeles Rams receiver initially struggled to place. “I ain’t got no questions, man. But I just wanna start by sayin’, dawg, you’re deserving of this moment,” said the voice, ultimately revealed as that of Jarvis Landry – Beckham’s teammate in Cleveland and at LSU. “You put countless hours to get where you are today. I witnessed it all first-hand. You have scars to show for where you are today. This is a dream that you are actually turning into reality.” Beckham, playing against type, absorbed the adulation with a bashful smile. There are usually hard-and-fast rules against media members, even extraordinarily part-time ‘reporters’ like Landry, cheering on the players they follow. But, really, it’s hard not to break out the pom-poms for Beckham, the (nearly) 6ft blond branded as the embodiment of diva NFL receivers from the moment he was selected 12th in the 2014 draft. But since his famous touchdown grab in his rookie season – a highlight that not only came on a primetime stage (NBC’s Sunday Night Football) against a big-name opponent (Dallas), but also gave receivers of all levels permission to try one-handed catches in games – Beckham went from nuclear-grade NFL weapon to global rock star, as apt to inspire young Black boys to bleach their locks as drive Lena Dunham’s Met Gala sex fantasies. In other words, Beckham was a perfect fit for New York, a Giant in the mould of Frank Gifford, a bona fide A-lister who hobnobs with the in-crowd when he’s not revolutionising NFL offence. On the list of players with at least 6,800 yards and 50 touchdown catches through their first 80 games there is only one name: Beckham. But then just as quickly as Beckham was toasted as Prince of New York, he was taken down several pegs and dismissed as a bellyacher when his chemistry with an ageing Eli Manning declined with the quarterback’s arm strength and some uninspired play-calling in the wake of head coach Tom Coughlin’s departure. With the Giants continuing to struggle in 2019, Beckham and his $95m contract were shipped to Cleveland, where he was reunited with Landry. Together, they looked poised to reverse the Browns’ fortunes and set offensive records with No1 overall pick Baker Mayfield pulling the trigger. They might well have if Beckham had stayed healthy. In the moments Beckham did run patterns for Mayfield &amp; Co, he looked so out of sync – to the point of leaving seasoned observers wondering whether Beckham was still a good receiver, let alone the league’s finest. That Mayfield seemed to flourish whenever Beckham missed time only fueled the idea that he was cooked. His father was quick to push back on that narrative, however; in November, Odell Beckham Sr posted an 11-minute Instagram supercut of Mayfield either not looking in his son’s direction or missing him entirely. “Generally Behind Da Scene,” Beckham Sr wrote. “BUT NOT TODAY.” The video’s release, three days before the trade deadline, all but sealed Beckham’s fate in Cleveland. But instead of getting something for him in return, the Browns simply cut him, which gives some sense of the depths to which the league’s regard for Beckham had plummeted. After clearing waivers Beckham signed a deal with LA for only the balance of the 2021 season. He had considered other teams – the Patriots, his hometown Saints, Aaron Rodgers’s Packers. But ultimately, it was a pitch from pass rusher Von Miller that won over Beckham. Whereas in Cleveland, he was a lone star (go ahead, @-me Mayfield stans), in LA Beckham is one in a constellation that includes telegenic GM Les Snead and NFL ‘It’ coach Sean McVay. Like LeBron’s Lakers, but with more success this season, they’ve assembled their own win-now super team, mortgaging their future to acquire quarterback Matthew Stafford, running back Sony Michel and cornerback Jalen Ramsey. Beckham had one job: to fill in for the injured Robert Woods. Which is to say, he would play a secondary role to Cooper Kupp – who this season made a compelling case to become the league’s first wide receiver MVP before Rodgers took the title. Despite little time to get up to speed Beckham has proven to be an indispensable part of the Rams’ Super Bowl run, catching more touchdowns in his brief time in LA than in any of his seasons in Cleveland. By all accounts he’s been an ideal Rams teammate as well, news that clashes with calcified notions of Beckham as an insufferable spotlight-chaser. After contributing 11 catches for 113 yards in the NFC title clincher against San Francisco, Beckham spread his arms and ran around the field like a caged bird, free at last. “This was about heart,” he told CBS Sports’ Josina Anderson in the glow of the come-from-behind victory. “This was about putting your foot down and saying, No more. We gotta finish the job, but this is a helluva moment.” Certainly, no one will be overlooking Beckham on Sunday against Cincinnati. Only a curmudgeon – or a Browns fan, perhaps – would be hard pressed not to root on his redemption.Gordon Brown has urged rich countries to consider “extraordinary measures” similar to those taken during the global financial crisis to increase developing nations’ access to Covid vaccines, calling on governments to fill a $16bn (£11.8bn) funding gap within weeks. The former British prime minister, who hosted the 2009 G20 summit credited with having staved off a second Great Depression and as chancellor helped unveil a landmark debt relief package at the 2005 G8 summit in Gleneagles, said a similar act of international coordination was urgently required on Covid. “Just as in the way we had to deal with debt relief and then deal with the global financial crisis by taking extraordinary measures to try to overcome these challenges we have to do this even now,” he said. Speaking on the Equals podcast hosted by Oxfam on Friday, Brown said the leaders of wealthy countries had weeks to commit to filling a $16bn funding gap announced by the World Health Organization this week for its plan to accelerate equitable access to Covid vaccines and tests. “Unless the money comes in urgently, we will not be able to fund the next stages of vaccines, treatments, testing, and even the medical oxygen and PPE needed by nurses and doctors [around the world],” he said. Noting that countries such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo had vaccinated fewer than 1% of their populations, Brown reiterated his calls for a vaccine patent waiver and technology transfer. “What’s happened in Africa is as bad as what happened under colonial rule,” he said. “Africa has been deprived of vaccines but also of the ability to manufacture its own vaccines because it does not have the patents to do so.” He added: “The scale of this inequality is so great that I’m not sure the world will ever forgive us for failing to deliver the equity in vaccine distribution that should be possible.”Romance in your 30s is no puppy-love business: youthful idealism ebbs with each passing year, while regrets gradually encroach. Setting sail in the muddy waters of modern relationships, Shakun Batra’s star-studded Hindi drama shows that infidelity is never a simple affair. Haunted by her parents’ unhappy marriage and her mother’s suicide, Alisha (Deepika Padukone) is stuck in a cycle of stagnancy that encompasses her yoga-instructor job and her boyfriend Karan (Dhairya Karwa). On a seaside weekend with her cousin Tia (Ananya Panday) and her fiance Zain (Siddhant Chaturvedi), Alisha is paradoxically attracted to and unnerved by their lavish lifestyle, whose flashy allure starkly contrasts with the modest home she shares with struggling writer Karan. When Zain makes a brazen pass at her, it spirals into a torrid flurry of hotel sex and illicit messages. Promises of commitment are exchanged only to be delayed, as Zain’s real-estate business depends on investment from Tia’s parents. What starts out as a breezy liaison soon warps into a resentful brew of paranoia. While the lurid twists and turns are enjoyable in a 90s erotic thriller kind of way, the sudden shift towards suspense hampers Padukone’s performance. And what a performance it is! Though Alisha is caught up in crisscrossing relationships, in her few solitary moments an aching sense of loneliness emerges as she is let down by every male figure in her life. While Padukone lights up the screen, Gehraiyaan could have used the economical writing of Ijaazat (1987) or Masoom (1983) – two classic and, to be honest, better films about romantic betrayal. • The main photo on this article was changed on 11 February 2022. The previous photo featured Ananya Panday, not Deepika Padukone as the caption said. • Gehraiyaan is released on 11 February on Amazon Prime Video.Britain’s economy grew by 7.5% last year in the fastest annual growth rate since the second world war, despite falling back in December as the Omicron variant dented consumer spending. It comes after the UK suffered one of the largest annual economic contractions of any major economy when GDP fell by 9.4% in 2020 amid the fallout from the first wave of the pandemic. The Office for National Statistics said output fell by 0.2% in December – a stronger performance than expected – as shortages of goods in the shops in the run-up to Christmas and a record number of job vacancies also slowed the economy after a 0.7% increase in November. City economists expected a deeper fall of 0.6% in GDP but an increase in government spending on the vaccine booster programme and the test-and-trace system prevented an even larger slump. There was better news for the government from figures showing GDP growth in the final quarter of the year remained positive at 1% – the same as the previous quarter after the ONS revised down growth in the three months to September to 1%. Rishi Sunak credited the Treasury’s £400bn package of support and “making the right calls at the right time” for the economy’s resilience. “I’m proud of the resolve the whole country has demonstrated, and proud of our incredible vaccine programme, which has allowed the economy to stay open,” the chancellor said. However, Labour and trade union leaders said there was little to celebrate as living standards come under the most sustained pressure for three decades amid Britain’s cost of living crisis amid a faltering economic recovery. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said real wages were plummeting as household energy prices and the cost of the weekly shop soared. “This toxic combination is hitting economic demand and weakening our recovery from the pandemic.” Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the UK’s economic recovery “continued to underwhelm” after a strong start to 2021 petered out in the final six months amid chronic shortages of workers and materials and weaker export volumes after Brexit. The drop in GDP triggered by Omicron in December also meant that the UK economy remained smaller than before the pandemic, unlike the US, China and the eurozone. “Covid-19 can’t be blamed for the UK’s continued underperformance; Omicron hit all western European countries simultaneously, and the UK government imposed fewer restrictions in December than those in the rest of Europe. Instead, exports continue to stand out as an area of significant weakness,” Tombs said. The ONS said total exports of goods to the rest of the world in 2021 were down by 10.5% on 2018, a slump worth £36.8bn. Total imports fell by £23.4bn compared with 2018, a decline of 4.8%. Kitty Ussher, the chief economist at the Institute of Directors, said the latest snapshot from the economy showed the impact of a “screeching halt to festive cheer”, with consumer-facing services down 3% in December compared with the previous month. “Possibly ironically, one of the most buoyant contributions to economic activity was the vaccination and test-and-trace programmes. We know from our own data, however, that caution over Omicron among business leaders eased in January, so we are hopeful that next month’s data will see growth rising again.” James Smith, a research director at the Resolution Foundation, was also optimistic that December would prove to be a blip. “The Omicron wave has only briefly stalled the UK’s strong economic recovery, which should be more stable from here on in, allowing policymakers to focus on the more urgent cost of living crisis that Britain is experiencing.” However, he said there were reasons to worry about the damage caused by a fall in trade. “While Covid has undoubtedly damaged trade, so, too, has the introduction of fresh trade barriers with the EU. “As well as facing up to the cost of living challenge, the government also needs to redouble efforts to boost trade as part of a new economic strategy for the 2020s.”On a clear day from the beaches of Yeonpyeong, a tiny South Korean island, you can see the coast of North Korea some 12 km (seven miles) distant. Glance down, however, and you might see something else. Amid the tangle of seaweed and greying driftwood, the chunks of bleached polystyrene and shreds of fishing net, there may lurk bits of brightly coloured plastic. To the untrained observer, these scraps – sweet wrappers, cigarette cartons, instant noodle packets, all covered in oversized script, vivid colours and garish cartoon characters – might only confirm the Yellow Sea as one of Earth’s most polluted marine environments. To the sharp-eyed, however, encoded in the design of these snippets is valuable information about the society from which they originate: North Korea, virtually a closed shop to the rest of the world. The first person to appreciate this was Kang Dong-wan, a professor of politics at Dong-A University in Busan, South Korea. Kang has spent the past year collecting 1,414 wrappers from the beaches of some of South Korea’s most far-flung outcrops. Until Covid, he had studied the North from across the demilitarised zone, catching its changing slogans with powerful lenses. When access to his vantage point was closed off, Kang relocated. The Five West Sea Islands were occupied by the South at the end of the war and now form the de facto maritime border between the two countries. Yeonpyeong, the closest island to the North, was the subject of a tit-for-tat artillery barrage in 2010 that left four dead and led to the evacuation of about 80% of the island’s 2,000 residents. “The most surprising thing,” says Kang, speaking from the island where he continues to scour the beaches, “was just how much garbage made it here.” The professor has turned the fruits of his foraging into a book, Picking Up North Korean Garbage in the Five West Sea Islands, which divides the litter into categories: sweets, baked goods, drinks, dairy products, foodstuffs, seasonings, liquor, cigarettes, medical supplies and sundries. “With this rubbish,” he says, “I can see into the lives of North Koreans.” Foremost among the preconceptions shredded by Kang’s scraps is the idea that the country is unsophisticated, that what goods there are are basic. “The packaging is surprising in its refinement,” he says. Perhaps most surprising, he adds, is the way products from the North mirror those of the South. “In a capitalist economy,” he says, “packaging and design are tailored to appeal to consumers.” You might expect things to be different in a repressive communist regime, but Kang believes otherwise: “Not even North Korea can completely ignore the desires of its people.” Take the wrapper for Galaxy Candy with Strawberry Cream Inside, made in the Pyongyang Wheat Flour Factory in North Korea. It is covered in bright drawings and colours, with a cat suspiciously reminiscent of Sanrio’s Hello Kitty. This more elaborate packaging reflects recent changes, says Kang, as North Korean producers have developed sleeker branding. This is partially a consequence of reforms that followed Kim Jong-un’s accession in 2011, heralding a liberalisation of the economy. Simultaneously, an increase in smuggling has made North Koreans familiar with products from abroad. This more refined packaging is an attempt to compete. The trash also offers a glimpse into factory conditions, says Kang. Ingredient lists and production dates reveal what North Korea has been able to make itself during the pandemic, and what it is forced to import with its dwindling cash reserves. Packaging, too, will often specify what factory a product was made in. If it’s known to be operated by the military, this can indicate what the North’s soldiers are eating – as many such snacks are, says Kang, “supplied to the military. In general, the public don’t consume them. There is no money.” Even the material itself can hold clues. Newer trash, Kang explains, is often composed of recycled or locally sourced materials, a further indication of the North’s economic state. Perhaps their reasons are green, but it’s far more likely that recycling is being forced on them by scarce resources. Nick Bonner, who has written about North Korean product design, also sees the wrappers as a gauge of the North’s economic plight. “I would imagine over the next few months, as the sanctions bite harder and Covid keeps the border to China closed, there will be less and less garbage for Kang to pick up,” he says. “Sad for him but, more worryingly, a reflection of how tough its food and economic situation is.” In the meantime, however, Kang continues his shoreline vigil, adding to his haul with every new tide.As a child, I was obsessed with getting a pet but never allowed one. Dad bred St Bernard dogs and my mother grew up with a menagerie of animals, so neither wanted them at home. Instead, I’d get bug-collecting kits and animal books for birthdays. I had a Tamagotchi digital pet and a massive collection of stuffed animals and Beanie Babies. I was always looking for a real animal friend. I’m now a singer-songwriter, actor and author, living in Los Angeles, with my partner, Jhor, and our three chihuahuas, Charlotte, Henri and Scarlet. Four days before Christmas last year, while staying with friends in Tulsa, I pulled a half-eaten box of romaine lettuce out of the fridge to prepare a salad. I clocked a tiny tree frog motionless in the box; he was the exact colour of the leaves. I was amazed but concerned. He was so cold, I feared he’d gone into stasis. I had no idea how to keep this little guy alive. I posted a video of him on Twitter and asked for advice. My phone blew up and I was contacted by some pretty knowledgable people. I searched Google, too. It was below freezing and too cold to set him outside, so I pierced holes in the lettuce box, put the frog back in and sprayed him with mineralised water. I added some leaves and drinking water, and closed the lid. I continued documenting his life on Twitter and called him Tony. It seemed to suit him. By bedtime, thousands of people were invested in his fate. I got up at 10am the next morning, oblivious to the fact that tree frogs are notorious escape artists. Tony had poked his way through a hole and was perched atop a wooden door frame. A warm front was a few days away, so a local biologist advised to keep him indoors until then. I headed to a store and bought him wax worms to eat, and a hermit crab enclosure while I debated a permanent solution. Meanwhile, I had messages from people saying Tony’s story was making them smile, even cry. Their happiness blew me away. I established that Tony had the markers of a male frog – a slender body, distinctive white line and loose skin under his neck – although I couldn’t work out his age. As Christmas Eve approached, he escaped one more time, into the shower. I polled Twitter, asking whether I should keep him. There were 88,000 votes – 58% said “yes” – but I was still undecided. As Christmas passed, I continued speaking to experts at the Oklahoma Department of Wildlife Conservation, then a frog specialist at National Geographic, who contacted me to say that the kindest thing to Tony and the environment would be to keep him as a pet. If he carried disease and wasn’t native to the region, releasing him risked the entire local ecosystem. That made up my mind; he would stay. That first tweet has been seen 10m times. Not all the messages I received were kind. Some people were grossed out that a frog was in my groceries. Animal activists claimed I was keeping him for attention but I knew my intentions were authentic. I have always cared about conservation. Tony lives a chill existence. He’s mischievous, incorrigible and precious. A pet company gave me $500 (£370) to spend on a gorgeous big terrarium with temperature control, a rock bath and plants. His lighting is synched with day and night because frogs are nocturnal. He gets four or five crickets, every two days. For the most part he hides behind his leaves, occasionally hopping out at night. The terrarium was too big to take back to LA, so I left Tony in Tulsa in the care of my nephew. It was emotional leaving him, but I’ll be back in April, and can’t wait to see him. One of the most moving things about finding him was that a memory came back to me, from when I was 10: I was diagnosed with leukaemia, with a 50/50 chance of surviving, and begged my parents for a cuddly toy from the hospital gift shop. I found an old photo of me, holding it. It was a tree frog. Tony and I are both lucky to be alive. We are both survivors. In that regard, we’re kindred spirits. • As told to Deborah Linton Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comIn all honesty, I have no idea why I decided to go on Mastermind. I love pub quizzes, sure, and I’m good at them. Pre-Covid, I was part of a crack team called Quizlamic State, who regularly took home first prize in our local one. As team coordinator, I developed a reputation for ruthlessness, brutally ejecting friends and, on one occasion, my boyfriend, if I thought they were underperforming. At university, I was picked for our college’s University Challenge team, though we didn’t get on the show: too boring, apparently. (The producers picked a team of historical re-enactors and archers from a different college.) All of this stuff is what I say when people ask why I went on the show. But if I’m being honest, I don’t know why I did it. I don’t know why I do most things. I’m an incredibly impulsive person; always have been. To paraphrase Kim Kardashian West’s reply when asked why she filmed the sex tape that made her famous: because I was bored, and I felt like it. I guess if I’m honest, I thought it would be a win-win situation. Nail Mastermind, in which case I have lifelong bragging rights; or don’t, in which case I’ll have a funny story I can write about. Here’s the funny story. *** Another confession: when I apply for Mastermind, I haven’t watched it for years. How hard can it be? I think, with the breezy optimism of a rookie journalist thumbing a lift into a war zone. In late May, I fill out an online form and, to my surprise, get a call the following day. The first round is a Zoom interview and quiz with a friendly Northern Irish casting researcher. (Mastermind is produced for the BBC by Hat Trick Productions, which has offices in Belfast.) “You did great!” he says when I correctly name Virginia Woolf’s artist sister. (Vanessa Bell.) I feel a childish jolt of self-satisfaction. The email comes through the following day: Well done on being shortlisted for this series of Mastermind! I’m told that hardly anyone gets picked for the show, which inflates my confidence. “Your score in the trial was very impressive,” says a producer in a congratulatory phone call. (I later wonder if the producers zeroed in on me because I am a woman of colour, not because I was particularly good: historically, Mastermind has been an overwhelmingly white, male show.) Next, to pick my specialist subject. The answer comes quickly: the Kardashians. I know everything about that wretched family: their plastic surgeon (Raj Kanodia), the high school they went to (Marymount High), the designer of Kim’s house (Axel Vervoordt.) The opportunity to scrape some utility from this knowledge, like penicillin from mould, is too good to pass up. But alas, I’m not allowed to. (“We can’t accommodate the Kardashians this series,” says a cryptic email from the producers.) Nor am I allowed my second choice (Spice Girls), or my third, the novels of Jane Austen – there are only six major ones, so I figure revision will be easy – as both subjects have featured too recently. I’m floundering. There’s nothing else I want to do. I consider the novels of Hilary Mantel, but they’re so long, and I’ve only read them once. At this point, I go dark on the producers, but they keep calling me from unknown numbers, asking if I’ve got another specialist subject. Flailing, I cast out the TV show I’ve been binge-watching during lockdown: ER. Yes, they say. That could work. ER it is. This, I later realise, is why some people tank their specialist subjects on Mastermind. It seems the producers can refuse many of a contestant’s choices, leaving them to tackle subjects they don’t feel comfortable with. The contestants then don’t have as much time to swot up as they would like. So they bomb. Three contestants have scored just one point on their specialist subject to date, and my heart goes out to all of them. To my credit, I realise my insane folly a week later, when it becomes clear that I’ve got to rewatch all 331 hour-long episodes of ER in under six weeks, before the show is filmed in early July. I send a panicked email. Please, I beg yet again: can’t I just do the Kardashians? They are unmoving but, after some horse trading, the producers and I settle on an inspired compromise: I will focus only on the character of Dr Doug Ross in ER, who handily exits the show as a recurring character in season 5, and, even more handily, is played by George Clooney, in a career-defining role. For the next six weeks, I eat, sleep, and breathe Clooney, which, in all honesty, makes for the most fulfilling and erotic revision experience of my life. I listen to Setting the Tone, an ER podcast, when I’m brushing my teeth in the morning and getting ready for bed at night. I cancel my plans and instead stay in and watch ER every evening, watching Clooney save a boy from drowning in a storm drain while wearing a tuxedo, punch child abusers, and do that classic Clooney shtick of tilting his head down then looking up with those hangdog puppy eyes. It is rough going. Euro 2020 derails my revision but, as July rolls around, I’m feeling good. I know Dr Ross’s job title (paediatric fellow) and the names of his parents (Ray and Sarah) and how many children he has (a trick question – most people think it’s two, but he also has a son he mentions briefly in the first series). In the park a month before filming, a friend tests me on my general knowledge. I get two questions right out of 20. “I think the questions are easier than that,” I say breezily. He looks doubtful. “That’s … the official Mastermind quiz,” he says. *** I touch down in Belfast for filming, carrying a selection of wardrobe options at the producers’ request, and three pages of revision notes. (“Wear a fancy top!” says a producer brightly in a wardrobe briefing phone call.) The hotel is full of Mastermind contestants, which makes for a surreal dinner, each of us sitting alone, all of us side-eyeing each other, assessing who has the most bountiful general knowledge of them all. I nod at the man on the table next to me, without acknowledging that I know why he is there. A middle-aged woman returns from filming and begins talking about it on the phone. “Like being at school,” she shudders. I choke on my burger. By the following morning, a small animal is doing yoga in my stomach. We shuffle into a conference room for the obligatory pre-filming briefing and are given paperwork to sign. To my right, two contestants are whispering about a woman in the second row. (“Wasn’t she on Eggheads?” I overhear one mutter to another.) I return to my room for last-minute revision and begin to unravel. Part of the problem is that I’ve seen the other contestants’ revision folders, which are the Gutenberg Bible to my SparkNotes. But there’s nothing to be done and, before I know it, a researcher is walking me and three other contestants to the studio for our heat. The contestants chat among themselves about other quizshows they’ve been on. Virtually all of them, it seems, are old-timers: they’ve been working up to Mastermind for a few years. My mouth is suddenly very dry. A lovely makeup artist does her best to calm my nerves – really, she is so kind and, more importantly, my makeup looks great – and then it’s time to face the chair. The chair. How best to describe the Mastermind chair? It is spotlit, well worn, imposing. Its leather has been burnished by the arses of minds far greater than mine, minds capable of retaining all manner of trivia while staying cool under pressure and not panic-sweating profusely via their bum cheeks on to the seat; cellulite-free grey matter, crammed full of general knowledge like a suitcase you have to sit on to close. My mind, by comparison, is a duffel bag containing a single pair of socks. Because of Covid protocols, there is no studio audience, which is a blessing, because it gives the whole game an oddly low-stakes feel. A floor manager instructs us to stare into a camera while the Mastermind music thunders. Da da da da … DA DUH. The floor lights are raised. DA DUH. What am I doing here? Clive Myrie, the host, nods me into the chair. I’m first. He asks me my name and specialist subject, then we’re away. I get a couple wrong, a couple right. At the end of my specialist subject round, I’ve scored eight points, which is a respectable though not particularly impressive score. I definitely would have done better if I’d had more time to revise, as many of the questions were on minor plot points for episodes I’d only watched once, but lots of them I’d predicted, and did get right. In all honesty, it was fun. I enjoyed it. (Although I did bolt out of the chair when my round was done, and had to be reminded by producers to sit back down, so Myrie could tell me how I did. Apparently this happens often.) After everyone else has had their turn, I’m in joint third place for the specialist subject. Which is fine; I didn’t seriously expect to win. I sigh in relief and observe the other contestants. One won’t stop slouching in their chair. Producers stop filming and ask them to sit up straight, but they refuse and slump back down again within minutes. I aspire to their level of sang-froid. When Myrie beckons me to the chair again, I realise that, for all my cramming about dishy Dr Ross, I’ve completely omitted to even think about the general knowledge round. All my energy and focus has been on not tanking my specialist subject. Walking back to the chair, I think: should I have prepared for this? Could I have prepared for this? I fumble the first question, which is maddeningly easy – a question about tennis that I know, but wasn’t listening to properly – and just like that, it all falls apart. I can’t seem to hear the questions properly, like I’m in an aeroplane and my ears won’t pop. The only sensation I can compare it to is the time I jumped off a waterfall in South America and, while freefalling through the air, realised I had badly misjudged the angle and was about to land on a rock. Uh oh, I think, as Myrie pummels me with question after question I have no answer for. This is going to hurt. I emerge, dazed and metaphorically bloody, with a paltry four points, leaving me with an overall score of 12. To my eternal shame, I spend the next five minutes actively wishing for all the other contestants to do worse than me. Annoyingly, they do not. The final scores are 17, 16, 16 and 12. Reader, I came last. Dazed, I collect myself enough to congratulate the winner, and watch, amused, as the slumper scowls all the way back to their dressing room. I’d have killed for their score, but they’re clearly devastated. They probably think I’m an amoeba. Back at the hotel, I call my boyfriend and deliver the news. After a pause, he says: “Probably not worth it in retrospect. All that effort and you came last.” I consider never telling anyone about this ever, but I’d stupidly posted on social media about applying for the show, and my editor saw it and asked me to write this piece, and it felt wormlike to weasel out – even though writing this has, at times, felt like acupuncture with a drill bit, or watching every embarrassing thing I’ve ever done on an Imax screen. (Besides, I tell myself, as I lie awake at 2am, it’s not like I got the lowest-ever score on the show. That honour goes to athlete Kadeena Cox, who scored just three points on her specialist subject of Arsenal on the Celebrity edition, and none on general knowledge. I wonder how she’s doing.) What lessons can I learn from my tale of televised quizzing mediocrity? That Mastermind is harder – I would go as far as to say considerably harder – than a pub quiz. That next time I feel like doing something dumb and impulsive, I should get another piercing. That the best way to transcend shame is to lean all the way into it, make it a funny story, and come out the other side: because the only thing worse than a person who flubbed Mastermind is a person who can’t laugh at themselves. Oddly enough, I actually don’t regret it that much. I still love quizzes. I definitely didn’t do well, but I did go for the grandfather of all quizshows as a complete newbie with barely any revision, like scaling K2 without supplemental oxygen, in winter, on my first attempt at climbing. Next time, I’ll try a gentle walk up Ben Nevis first. Something straightforward, like The Weakest Link or Pointless. Until that day, I’ll return to the comfortable camaraderie of my Quizlamic State teammates. Some games are better played in the pub, after all.Grief is not a medical disorder to be cured. Grief is not a spiritual crisis to be resolved. Grief is not a social woe to be addressed. Grief is, simply, to be felt in our hearts and our minds and our bodies. I’ve been writing about grief since my child died in 1994. I can remember – at the time – questioning myself. Was I grieving too much, for too long and too intensely? But a small, still, thankfully wise voice within my feminine self rejected these intimations. I knew that this precious relationship I had lost was worth every tear I shed. Every cell in my body hurt – a physical pain that emanated from the tips of my hair to the tips of my toes. I couldn’t eat: eating was for the living, and I was still uncertain I was alive. I couldn’t sleep because thoughts of her haunted me. I didn’t recognise myself in the mirror. The yearning for her was so intense that her absence lived in the centre of my heart. I was changed and I knew it would be an irrevocable loss. I died with her that day and, after nearly three decades, I still miss her. Self-doubt, loneliness, fear, anxiety and the sorrow of not trusting oneself to grieve honestly are a tragic legacy – and something I often notice in those who lack strong support networks. A bereaved mother I recently worked with, whose child died in 1972, is only now reclaiming her experience of grief – and, thus, reclaiming her true self. She’s learning to reinhabit her physical, emotional and spiritual body after nearly 50 years of being utterly detached from herself and others. We can certainly avoid our grief, but we cannot avoid the consequences of doing so. Grief will disguise itself as something else, in our intimate and family relationships, in our minds and cognition, and also in our bodies. The sustained state of suppressed grief is fodder for disease. Today, we are witnessing the destructive psychological effects in this pandemic world, where so many have died, directly and indirectly, from Covid. The reclamation of who, and what, we are in the aftermath of tragic loss is a basic right as a living being on this broken and beautiful Earth. If you don’t know grief by now, one day I promise you will. Grief is the inevitable and worthy burden of loving another. It is an unstoppable and paradoxical force that creates and destroys. It moves in our bodies, it occupies the space between us and others, and it seeps through generations. And so, may our broken hearts land softly in the world, reverberating compassion towards others who know what it means to suffer. Perhaps, one day, when grief is finally venerated, it will inspire peace instead of war, tenderness instead of violence, and love instead of hate. Joanne Cacciatore is a research professor at Arizona State University, the founder of the Miss Foundation and the author of Bearing the Unbearable: Love, Loss, and the Heartbreaking Path of GriefAt first glance, the construction along the Brooklyn streets appeared routine. “You wouldn’t think anything of it,” said Fabian Rogers, a community organizer in Brownsville, a majority Black neighborhood where construction began in 2017. It wasn’t until years later, in 2020, that he learned that the overturned streets were making way for a fracked gas pipeline. “It just felt like a big slap in the face – to have [a pipeline] in my backyard that I didn’t know about,” he said. Rogers and other residents have spent the last two years protesting National Grid’s 7-mile pipeline, which zigzags through predominantly Black and Latino neighborhoods, bypassing whiter, wealthier parts of Brooklyn. Formally known as the Metropolitan Reliability Project, the pipeline is often referred to as the north Brooklyn pipeline. They have blocked the pipeline’s construction at demonstrations and some have stopped paying part of their utility bills, in an effort to divert funding from the project. Last summer, they went a step further, filing a complaint against the utility and state that argues the pipeline has resulted in racial discrimination, violating Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. (Title VI prohibits federally-funded entities from discriminating on the basis of race, gender, and other protected identities.) Historically, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has been slow to act on these types of complaints, rarely finding evidence of discrimination. But under the Biden administration, the agency has committed to changing this. How the EPA responds to this challenge – in which Black, Indigenous, and brown-led community groups say a fracked gas pipeline represents a violation of their civil rights – will be a test of the agency’s ability to execute on that promise. Not long after the complaint was filed, two federal investigations were launched into New York state agencies. (Asked for comment, a National Grid spokesperson said both of the federal agencies dismissed the complaint against the utility.) The lawyers behind the complaint hope that it will result in a full environmental review of the pipeline and connected facility for storing and refining the methane gas, which awaits an air permit. Ultimately, they hope that the gas in the pipeline – which began operating in 2020 – is permanently shut off. “It would be a real mistake if the state doesn’t listen to the communities that it is designed to protect – that already have a history of dealing with environmental harm and pollution,” says Britney Wilson, a co-counsel to the complaint and an associate law professor and director of the Civil Rights and Disability Justice Clinic at New York Law School. The pipeline cuts through the designated environmental justice areas of Brownsville, Ocean-Hill, Bushwick and East Williamsburg, neighborhoods long overburdened with toxic hazards from a history of racist policies. Large swaths of these neighborhoods were historically redlined, ineligible for federally backed loans. All neighborhoods have some of the highest rates of adult and child asthma in New York City, a legacy of its history of polluting industries and lack of public benefits. The pipeline has a terminal in Greenpoint, where one the largest oil spills in the country is still being remediated. “National Grid treated Brownsville like a backyard, but there’s a whole community back here,” said Rogers. “Folks have been supporting each other. Folks have been making it happen.” Responding to a request for comment, a National Grid spokesperson maintains that the utility company complied with all laws. *** The EPA was established just over 50 years ago. In that time, the agency has only made one final finding of discrimination. In 2017, the agency reached the conclusion that the permitting process for a power plant in Flint, Michigan, was effectively discriminating against African American residents. But it took the EPA more than 20 years to reach that point; the complaint against the Genesee Power Station was first submitted in 1992. The Center for Public Integrity found that the EPA rejected or dismissed over 90% of the civil rights abuse allegations, from 1996 to 2013, while only 5% of complaints were resolved with voluntary or informal agreements. To date, the agency has not once restricted federal funding for a civil rights violation. But under the Biden administration, there have been signs that the EPA wants to put environmental justice at the forefront of its policies. In October, the agency released a strategic plan draft that aims to revamp its civil rights enforcement program. The plan states the EPA will “vigorously enforce” federal civil rights law to “address the legacy of pollution in overburdened communities that results from discriminatory actions, whether direct or indirect, intentional, or unintentional”. This reflects a sharp departure from both the Obama and Trump administration’s strategic plans, which didn’t mention civil rights – let alone make it a central objective. “This could possibly be a turning point with how the EPA approaches environmental racism,” said Anjana Malhotra, a senior attorney at the National Center for Law and Economic Justice and a co-counsel to the complaint. “It’s a landmark acknowledgement of how [the EPA] hasn’t addressed environmental injustice.” After community groups filed their complaint against the north Brooklyn pipeline, the EPA launched an investigation into New York’s department of environmental conservation, while the department of transportation began investigating New York’s public service commission. Those investigations are currently paused while the federal agencies meet with the state to seek an informal resolution. In a recent development, Malhotra and Wilson were invited to meet with federal agencies in January. There, the co-counsels presented a letter reiterating why it is “unequivocally clear” the environmental conservation department violated the law and to push for greater inclusion of their clients in the informal resolution. Typically, the process doesn’t include the complainants, but the EPA and transportation department are developing a new model to better include the impacted communities, according to Malhotra and Wilson. It’s an important development, given that Brooklyn residents claim they never had the opportunity to consent to the pipeline – a frequent complaint shared by environmental justice communities. “[National Grid] never reached out to me, never reached out to my fellow neighbors, none of us,” said Rogers, a member of Brownsville Green Justice, one of the groups behind the complaint. If no agreement can be reached, the investigations will resume – with a timeline of 180 days in total to potentially arrive at preliminary findings of discrimination. A DPS spokesperson claims the agency’s decision to approve the pipeline was based on “a robust factual record”, while a environmental conservation department spokesperson similarly claims that the agency “subjects every application to rigorous review of all applicable federal and state standards”. With regard to the EPA’s record on environmental justice, there are some promising changes. Marianne Engelman-Lado, a lawyer who has previously described the agency as “spectacularly unsuccessful at ensuring that recipients of EPA funding comply with the non-discrimination provisions of Title VI”, was appointed to the agency last year. The EPA has also issued two letters with preliminary findings of civil rights violations in 2021, for separate complaints in California and Missouri. And in September, the agency responded to an audit from the office of inspector general with measures and deadlines for improving civil rights oversight – from more guidance for permitting decisions to initiating investigations even before a complaint is lodged. These moves could mean good news for organizers like the ones challenging the north Brooklyn pipeline. “Our neighborhoods in Brooklyn have always been dumping zones,” said Pati Rodriguez, a community organizer with Mi Casa Resiste, a Bushwick-based group resisting gentrification and displacement, and one of the complainants. “[But] these are our neighborhoods that we’ve stewarded.”The question of where 27-year-old Raveena Aurora fits in the current pop climate is an interesting one. Her independently released 2019 album Lucid was critically acclaimed, but her major-label debut inches her towards the mainstream, at least in theory – it’s both dazzling and impressively eclectic. Among the guests lurk not just Vince Staples – on the fantastic, Neptunes-esque Secret – and avant-garde LA singer-songwriter-producer Tweaks, but Asha Puthli. The Bombay-born singer’s extraordinary career takes in everything from collaborating with Ornette Coleman to ethno-fusion, to a brace of revered, idiosyncratic, oft-sampled disco records. Here, Asha’s Kiss feels like Raveena’s loving homage to the dreamy, drowsy atmosphere of Puthli’s mid-70s classics Space Talk and Flying Fish, a mood that predominates in the album’s second half. Elsewhere on Asha’s Awakening, the influence of exploratory early 00s hip-hop and R&amp;B production is strong: the warped rhythm tracks of Kismet and the stuttering beats of Magic, and the tabla drums on Time Flies, which carry something of Timbaland’s experiments with Indian percussion samples. There are ambient interludes, with names such as Arrival to the Garden of Cosmic Speculation, alongside straightforward pop bangers. Or at least relatively straightforward: the disco-fied Kathy Left 4 Kathmandu features a twisted off-key guitar sample that seems to underscore the prickly mood of its exploration of western attitudes to eastern spirituality. The album ends with a 13-minute-long “guided meditation” called Let Your Breath Become a Flower. It is questionable whether anyone not seeking mindfulness would ever listen to this twice, lovely as its drifting tones are, but its presence underlines that Raveena is a noticeably different proposition to her peers. Mainstream pop music should clear some room for her: it would make things infinitely more interesting.As soon as Dillibe Onyeama was born, in January 1951, his father put his name down for Eton, the UK’s most prestigious and expensive private school. No black child had gone there, but his father, a senior judge in Nigeria who had studied at Oxford, wanted him to have the best education he could possibly afford. Onyeama did go on to receive a fantastic education – and made history as the first black person to complete his study at Eton College. But the personal cost was staggering. Today Onyeama remembers the immense pride he felt when he first got in, and in the first few days he was confident he would enjoy being at the school. He wrote to reassure his father, and his guardian, the Reverend Arthur Cox, who had warned him he might have a difficult time. But he spoke too soon, later writing “there were many occasions when I regretted those words – bitterly”. His awakening came a few weeks into his first year studying with the children of the British elite, when the 14-year-old was greeted by ape noises and racial slurs when he entered his classics lessons. The taunts surrounded him. “Here comes the big black bastard,” one boy shouted, as others jeered. When he quietly asked what they were doing, his peers responded with more ape noises. So he sat down and tried to ignore them until a boy approached to ask if he felt ashamed wearing school uniform; when Onyeama asked why, the boy responded: “I thought that, since all Africans usually wore nothing, wearing this would make you feel ashamed.” Cue a louder chorus of laughter. He tried to explain that Africans don’t walk around naked, but it fell on deaf ears. In his four years at Eton, between 1965 and 1969, Onyeama was often verbally abused, called a “wog”, “nig-nog” and the N word. Shortcomings in his school work were attributed to him being black. Even when he did well, in sports, for example, he was told it was down to the so-called unnatural advantage his race afforded him. Onyeama wasn’t completely surprised by the racism he was forced to confront at such an early age, he tells me, because “Eton is built by English royalty, and that’s the first place that supremacist attitudes exist.” Nearly 60 years since he first stepped into Eton as a school boy, Onyeama’s shocking experiences are once again laid out in his frank and reflective memoir: A Black Boy at Eton. First published in 1974, it is set to be re-published by Penguin as part of its Black Britain: Writing Back series, an initiative by Booker prize winner Bernardine Evaristo to reprint hugely important books by black British writers that have since disappeared. Onyeama was born in Enugu in eastern Nigeria, the second eldest of seven children. His father, who lived in the UK for five years, was a magistrate (and would go on to become a supreme court judge in Lagos). It was while he was at Oxford that he heard of famous public schools like Eton, Harrow and Winchester, and, because of his great respect for the British education system, resolved to send Onyeama there. Onyeama describes himself as an “extremely sociable” child who mixed well with other children. When he was four, he was sent to live with his uncle, because his father was often posted to different parts of Nigeria. He loved playing football in the street and playing pranks on unassuming adults. Those early years were idyllic, with his favourite memories of time spent with his family in Lagos. Then, when he was eight, he was told he would be sent to England to go to a prep school. “My only knowledge of England was that it was a white man’s country and was very cold, and I wasn’t at all enthusiastic to go there,” he writes in his memoir. His parents gently turned down his protests, and, next thing he knew, he was on a ship steaming across the Atlantic. Two weeks later he joined Grove Park, a prep school in the Sussex town of Crowborough. He was the first black boy to attend that school, but had a wonderful time, facing no racism. “I suppose because we were all too young to know about colour prejudice, and that such a thing existed. I certainly had no notion,” he wrote. The students and teachers were caring – and supportive of his ambition to go to Eton. “I’m still in touch with my friends from there. It was a beautiful place, with beautiful people. They were great ambassadors of the English,” he says. Onyeama initially failed his entrance exam to Eton and, to his horror, another boy – Tokunbo Akintola, the son of the western Nigerian prime minister, Chief Samuel Ladoke Akintola – made headlines in 1964 when he became the first African boy to pass it. His dad was disappointed and it was agreed that he should leave Grove Park and go to a crammer, a specialised school that trains its students to pass certain entrance exams. He was sent to Beke Place and worked flat out in preparation for his second attempt at the exam. When he learned that he would be going to Eton, he was thrilled. “It was something he [my father] was invested in from birth,” Onyeama says. “He said: ‘Well done, work hard … fit in well, obey your superiors.” His excitement palled when a student at Beke Place told him he wouldn’t be very popular because he was black. He started Eton on 19 January 1965, just two weeks after his 14th birthday. It was a “grey, cold and miserable” day and he was racked with nerves. In the dining room for his first Eton breakfast, “A sea of moving white jaws became gapingly still as I entered,” he writes. “Almost complete silence momentarily fell and every head turned to look at me. My eyes must have rolled, my nostrils must have flared, and I know I gave a small whine of alarm.” He kept his head down at breakfast, and for much of the first few days, only looking up when there were other new arrivals, and speaking only when spoken to. It took about two weeks to wrap his head around the school routine but he quickly grew fond of it. “I had settled down by then and knew my way around most of the school, and, of course, had made friends. I was more or less mothered by everyone in my house, and shown great kindness,” he writes. It didn’t last long. Racial abuse and bullying soon became the norm for him, but he couldn’t understand why. “What was so bad about being black- skinned that I should be abused for it? I recalled that in my early days in Africa, there were many whites living there. Nobody ever abused them for being white, and they never abused us for being black,” he writes in the book. After the incident in the classics lesson, Onyeama stopped turning the other cheek. “There was something dehumanising and degrading about racial insults. It didn’t feel like an ordinary form of insults,” he tells me. “I didn’t speak to teachers about it. I didn’t speak to anybody about it … I defended myself.” He responded, often with violence. He says: “I used to smash people’s faces. I didn’t have any qualms about doing that.” It made him deeply unpopular, but he had to stand up for himself. He fell into a toxic cycle, however, writing: “The more unpopular I became, the more the taunting grew; the more I struck out, the more they jeered.” He is quick to say he wasn’t lonely. His schedule had kept him too busy. “It was a very full life. There was no room for loneliness. There were many forms of recreation. Everything was happening all the time; work, studying, sport,” he says. He excelled at sport, playing cricket, boxing, taking part in athletics and games unique to the school, such as the Eton wall game. He particularly loved being cheered on by his classmates. In those moments he could ignore how he had come to accept that he might be inferior because he was black, writing: “It was comforting and, indeed, a pleasure when my sporting ability was accredited to just that aspect of myself. It was good to know that the white man had some respect and fear for some ‘characteristics’ of blackness!” To the surprise of his classmates and his teachers, Onyeama did incredibly well in his O-levels. But he wasn’t allowed to bask in his success for long, with one student, who got worse grades than him, spreading a rumour that his pass marks were lowered and his papers were marked more leniently. “I cannot describe how the reaction to my results got on my nerves. It caused me to lie in bed till well past midnight on a number of nights thinking about them. And eventually I concluded that something should be done about it,” he wrote. This time, he decided he would respond differently. He wrote a letter to the local newspaper expressing his distress at how white people treated black people like him, while taking care to praise the British education system. The letter was published, but no one took much notice of it. Still, he was encouraged to keep writing about his experiences at Eton. He knew then he had an important story to tell. He was inspired by work of English and African writers such as Graham Greene and Chinua Achebe. He wove his experiences at school into a compelling narrative for his first book, Nigger at Eton, published in 1972 by Leslie Frewin Limited. A serialised version of the book was published in a magazine in the runup to the publication date, and sparked outrage at the school. Letters from students’ families and school staff were sent to the publishers. “I was shaken by the extent that they went to, to suppress it getting published. They did everything they could,” he says. “Imagine a headmaster ringing the publisher and saying, ‘Please, can’t you just bump this book?’” Others threatened lawsuits. “I’m sure the publishers had grown more grey hair in those few months than all their years … Even the police had come to the office of the publishers,” Onyeama says. But his publishers held their nerve and went ahead. The response was swift and brutal: Onyeama was banned from ever setting foot on the college campus. “I wasn’t surprised, but I felt outraged. Why the hell did they ban me? Other books went to town on the college, but they [the authors] were not banned,” he says. The ban felt like an institutional rubber-stamping of the racism he had experienced as a student. “I wrote to the Race Relations Board complaining that the ban was a manifestation of racial prejudice because other books had been written and no action was taken against the authors. Why should they take action against me? My claim was that this is racist. I wrote it as a matter of principle. It made news all over the world,” he says. The college refused to rescind the ban. Onyeama brushed it off as much as he could and pursued a career in journalism. He worked as a critic at the magazine Books and Bookmen, before becoming managing editor of a publishing house in London. He published a number of novels, thrillers, including Juju, Secret Society, Revenge of the Medicine Man and Godfathers of Voodoo, in the 70s and 80s. At age 30, he moved back to Nigeria and has lived there ever since. Finally, in 2020, the headmaster of Eton apologised for his predecessor’s action. “My attitude was: thank you very much,” he says. The ban had been rescinded a few years prior, but Onyeama has not returned to the campus. He doesn’t have any plans to do so. He believed the apology occurred as a result of the unprecedented Black Lives Matter protests in the summer of 2020, when 270 towns and cities held anti-racist demonstrations. Historians described it as the most widespread anti-racist protest in modern British history. A spokesperson for the school said: “Racism has no place in civilised society. Eton has made significant strides since Mr Onyeama was at the school but the racism he experienced was as unacceptable then as it is now. Eton has apologised to Mr Onyeama and has made clear that he will always be welcome here.” For Onyeama, the Black Lives Matter movement is forcing Britain to confront its imperial past. “It has been forcibly manipulated to that end … Society has to change and I believe it is changing on the back of this onslaught [protest].” He doesn’t think his experiences in Eton in the 60s would necessarily correlate to the experiences of black and other students of colour attending the college today. But nor does he believe there will ever be equality between black and white people in the UK. When his eldest son was born, Onyeama’s father suggested he sign his child up to attend Eton. He declined. • A Black Boy at Eton by Dillibe Onyeama is published by Penguin (£9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The hack Using a small cold compress with a tip – in this case, a frozen lipstick barrel – to alleviate dark circles. The promise Cold compresses are a great reliever of swelling, and using something small with a tip should (in theory) be effective on dilated blood vessels. The question is whether an old lipstick is the best tool for the job. TikTok seems to think so. The test Everyone from cold-bath enthusiast Wim Hof to Hollywood legends (Joan Crawford splashed her face with cold water 25 times each morning) has extolled the virtues of “icing” your face to increase circulation and reduce inflammation. But this is needlessly time-consuming. First, I removed the lipstick remnants from the bullet with a cuticle stick (time: 30 minutes). Then I cleaned it with rubbing alcohol to avoid bacterial contamination (10 minutes). Finally, I filled the tube with water and put it upright in the freezer (three minutes by propping it up with vegan Magnums). Next day, behold: a tiny ice roller. Using it in circles around my eyes was cooling – and it did depuff the area a little – but no more than a cold flannel or ice cube in clingfilm would have done. My dark circles were unchanged and the ice melted in about 30 seconds. The verdict Resolutely style over substance. For one minute of ice-rolling, I’d rather pop my face into a bowl of ice-cold water.Kanye West has said he won’t perform at the Coachella festival unless fellow headliner Billie Eilish apologises to rapper Travis Scott, after she appeared to reference the fatal disaster at Scott’s Astroworld festival during a recent show. Performing in Atlanta last week, Eilish stopped proceedings when she noticed a fan struggling to breathe. After the fan received medical attention, she resumed the show and told the crowd: “I wait for people to be OK until I keep going.” On Instagram, West (now legally known as Ye) shared screenshots of a news report about Eilish “dissing” Scott, captioned: “Come on Billie we love you please apologise to Trav and to the families of the people who lost their lives no one intended this to happen. “Trav didn’t have any idea of what was happening when he was on stage and was very hurt by what happened and yes Trav will be with me at Coachella but now I need Billie to apologise before I perform.” Eilish responded in the comments of West’s post: “Literally never said a thing about Travis. Was just helping a fan.” Eilish’s comment in Atlanta was widely interpreted as a reference to the tragedy at Scott’s Astroworld festival in Houston in November 2021. Ten people died as a result of accidental compressive asphyxiation in a crowd crush, with approximately 300 people injured. The youngest victim was nine-year-old boy Ezra Blount. Speaking to Rolling Stone, Blount’s grandparents described West’s remarks as “hurtful” and “idiotic”. Scott continued to perform while first responders were attending to what was described as a mass casualty event, and completed his performance. Analysis by the Washington Post showed that crowd members’ attempts to sound the alarm were drowned out by Scott’s music. Scott has denied knowing that fans were hurt during his performance, and subsequently denied responsibility for the deaths in court documents after more than 140 lawsuits alleging negligence were filed, including a mass litigation suit brought by more than 1,500 concertgoers. In December, a medical examiner found that the 10 deaths were accidental. Scott and event organisers remain a focus of a criminal investigation. Nobody has yet been charged. The Coachella festival is due to take place in California across two weekends in April, with Harry Styles as its third headliner. • This article was amended on 11 February 2022. A medical examiner found that the 10 Astroworld deaths were accidental, not a judge as previously stated.Ian McDonald, a co-founder of two era-defining groups in prog band King Crimson and rock outfit Foreigner, has died age 75. A representative said he had “passed away peacefully on 9 February in his home in New York City, surrounded by his family”. No cause of death was disclosed. McDonald was part of the original lineup of King Crimson, who formed in 1967 in Dorset. A multi-instrumentalist, McDonald became the band’s primary composer. After a breakout support slot with the Rolling Stones in Hyde Park, London, on 5 July 1969, they released their debut album, In the Court of the Crimson King, in October of the same year. It received critical acclaim and is now considered a classic. Pete Townshend of the Who called it an “uncanny masterpiece”. And Kanye West sampled McDonald’s instantly recognisable, swaggering saxophone from the song 21st Century Schizoid Man – originally recorded in a single take – on his 2010 single Power. McDonald told Ultimate Classic Rock that he wasn’t surprised the album had held up for more than 50 years. “When we made it – and I was basically at the forefront of the production – I wanted to make sure everything that went into the record would bear repeated listening and hopefully stand the test of time.” The band’s original lineup went their separate ways at the end of 1969, with McDonald and drummer Michael Giles diverging from the darker styles preferred by guitarist Robert Fripp. The departing pair released one album together, 1970’s McDonald and Giles, which reflected their poppier approach to prog. McDonald briefly rejoined King Crimson in 1974 before Fripp put the band on hiatus – though he would play with Fripp again in the 50-strong prog-jazz group Centipede, led by British free jazz pianist Keith Tippett. In 2002, former members of King Crimson, minus Fripp, reformed as the 21st Century Schizoid Band. McDonald formed Foreigner in 1976, alongside British guitarist Mick Jones (not the Clash guitarist) and US singer Lou Gramm. He appeared on the first three of their four consecutive five-times platinum-certified albums, but was sacked in 1980 as Jones sought greater control over the group. “I wouldn’t have left,” McDonald told Big Bang magazine. “I loved the group, it was not my decision.” However, he occasionally played with the band at later reunion shows. Between King Crimson and Foreigner, McDonald appeared on four of the biggest-selling albums of the period from 1969-79. As a session musician, he performed on T-Rex’s 1971 single Get It On. He also collaborated with Fairport Convention co-founder Judy Dyble (who was also fleetingly a member of pre-fame King Crimson), Steve Hackett and Asia. McDonald released his first solo album, Driver’s Eyes, in 1999, which featured contributions from Hackett and Peter Frampton. In 2017, he formed the band Honey West, which counted his son, Maxwell, among its members. McDonald was born in 1946 in Osterley, Middlesex. He played guitar as a teenager and developed his musicianship while serving five years in the British army as a bandsman, where he learned clarinet, flute, saxophone and musical notation. His love of big band jazz evolved into a love of rock’n’roll, which, he told Billboard magazine in 2017, “didn’t seem like a great leap to me. There was a great energy there that appealed to me”. Reflecting on his career to Billboard, he said: “I have trouble processing time in terms of years and weeks and months. I mean, it’s 40 years for Foreigner, almost 50 years for King Crimson – but it feels like milliseconds. It’s a lot of good work, though.”Benjamin Disraeli famously warned against putting too much store in statistics, and the latest growth figures are a perfect example of why the former prime minister was right. On the face of it, 2021 was an absolutely corking year for the economy. Britain has had some boom years in the postwar period – 1973 and 1988, for example – but the 7.5% growth last year was the fastest of the lot. However, 2021 can’t be seen in isolation. Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak are correct when they say the UK had the fastest growth in the G7 last year, yet what they normally omit to add is that it came after the UK had the biggest contraction of any G7 nation a year earlier. The real story is that the economy collapsed by almost 10% in 2020 and then recovered most of the lost ground last year. Activity in the final three months of 2021 was 0.4% lower than in the final three months of 2019 – the period immediately before the pandemic struck. By way of comparison, the eurozone is back to where it was pre-Covid, while the US is operating more than 3% above its level in late 2019. Unsurprisingly, 2021 ended on a weak note as the arrival of the Omicron variant led to tougher government restrictions and a more cautious mood among consumers. The impact of cancelled Christmas parties and emptier high streets meant activity in the hotel and restaurant sector fell by almost 10% between November and December, while retail was down by more than 3%. The 0.2% contraction in the economy as a whole in the month of December was slightly smaller than economists had predicted, in part because of increased health output as the vaccine programme was ramped up and more people used NHS test and trace. Statistically, 2022 will be another strong year and it is possible the UK will again top the G7 league table. Again, it would be wise not to get too carried away because most forecasters expect the economy to slow markedly in the second half of the year as higher taxes, rising energy bills, increased borrowing costs and a squeeze on incomes combine to hit spending power. In his response to the growth numbers, Sunak said the economy had proved “remarkably resilient”, helped by £400bn of spending from the government. But that support is now being drastically scaled back. A lot more resilience will be needed in what is shaping up to be a challenging period ahead.A British company has fallen foul of Greta Thunberg, Unesco, Sweden’s national church, and the indigenous people in the north of the country over plans for an open-pit mine on historical Sami reindeer-herding lands. The clamour of opposition was voiced as Beowulf Mining, headquartered in the City of London, suggested it was “hopeful” of a decision within weeks of a 5 sq mile iron-ore mine in an area where Sami communities have lived for thousands of years. The company’s share price has been on a sharp upward trajectory since December when the Swedish Greens, who have opposed the plans, left the governing coalition and the Social Democratic business minister, Karl-Petter Thorwaldsson, declared that his party “loved mines” and hoped to open more. But the proposed Gállok site, located 28 miles (45km) outside the town of Jokkmokk in the county of Norrbotten in Swedish Sápmi, commonly known as Lappland, has become a symbol of what has been condemned as a callous and unlawful disregard for the protected status of Sami culture by big business and government. The Sami parliament, the representative body for people of indigenous heritage in Sweden, has in recent days written to the Swedish government warning that the mine will destroy grazing areas and cut off the only viable migratory route for reindeer followed by the Jåhkågasska Sami community, who move westerly with their animals to the high hills of the Laponian area on the Norwegian border for the animals to calve during the spring. Sami communities to the west and east of the mine would also be hit through a reduction in viable grazing areas already under pressure from changes to the snow conditions attributed to the climate emergency, logging, power lines and the development of a hydroelectric dam, the parliament said. Unesco, the UN’s cultural protection wing, has warned of a potentially “large, very large” impact on the Laponian area, the mountainous world heritage site 21 miles west of the mine, counselling the Swedish government to undertake a more “in depth” assessment. The archbishop of Uppsala, Antje Jackelén, who heads the Church of Sweden, has written an open letter to the Swedish prime minister, saying the proposed mine “is not existentially and spiritually sustainable”. Thunberg, speaking to the Guardian during a visit to the Gállok site, said the government’s decision would be pivotal to Sweden’s future reputation. “The world’s eyes are on the Swedish government,” she said. “The profit that will be made from this mine will go to the British company not the local people who will have to pay for the long-term costs: the polluted air, water, lost biodiversity and lost traditions. “Of course we need local jobs, but it cannot be at the expense of the climate, environment, indigenous rights. The Sami villages affected by this mine have clearly said, ‘No.’ A no is no and we need to respect that.” Thunberg added: “Sweden’s government usually pretends it is a progressive country when it comes to human rights and when it comes to the climate and environment. “We usually call ourselves pioneers and climate leaders but when you see what is happening here it is the exact opposite. It is a textbook example that we still have not come to terms with history and that we are continuing in the same way we have always done, there are no signs of us backing down. “It is just more and more of the idea that we can exploit other people, that we can exploit nature, and that needs to be brought to an end.” Thunberg’s comments were echoed in a joint statement on Thursday by Francisco Calí Tzay, the UN’s special rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, and David R Boyd, the body’s special rapporteur on human rights and the environment. “We are very concerned by the lack of good-faith consultations and the failure to obtain the free, prior and informed consent of the Sami, and over the significant and irreversible risks that the Gállok project poses to Sami lands, resources, culture and livelihoods,” they said. “There has been insufficient assessment and recognition of the environmental damage the mine will cause.” Beowulf has been seeking approval for the mine since April 2013 but has consistently faced steep opposition in the Sami community, only strengthened by public relations missteps. In 2014, the former chairman Clive Sinclair-Poulton was filmed in a boardroom with a photograph of the site, telling investors: “One of the major questions I get is what are the local people going to go ahead and say about this project. And I show them this picture and I say, what local people?” A year later, when asked whether it would be difficult for the Sami to successfully oppose the proposed mine, Sven-Erik Österberg, the county governor in Norrbotten, told a documentary-maker: “Of course there is a lot of money in the area and, you know, money talks.” Despite this, Alice Bah Kuhnke, a former minister for culture, who is now a Green MEP, said her party had to make sacrifices on other issues when in government to prevent their Social Democratic coalition partners from giving the mine approval. Unesco’s intervention has been dismissed as “inappropriate” by Beowulf. The company’s chairman also complained that the Church of Sweden prematurely backed “one side in a sensitive and conflict-filled issue”. Kurt Budge, Beowulf’s chief executive, declined to be interviewed by the Guardian due to a family bereavement, but he pointed to a statement issued to shareholders earlier this week to “clarify facts and challenge certain misinformation”. “The future conditions for mining and reindeer husbandry to coexist at Gállok are possible, learning from local Sameby [unions of Sami], their knowledge, and from the many examples across Sweden where coexistence is a reality,” Budge wrote. “The company is committed to doing all it can to achieve this, through preventative and precautionary action and compensation deemed necessary.” Beowulf claims its project will create 250 direct jobs and more than 300 indirect jobs in Jokkmokk during its initial 14-year lifetime. The company says there is potential for it to be working for 25 years if further iron ore deposits are identified. The company further suggested that “reindeer can be moved around an obstacle, such as a mine, using specific fenced corridors, ecoducts [bridges] or even trucks”. The issue has divided the 4,800 people who live in Jokkmokk. The Social Democrat mayor, Robert Bernhardsson, who also declined to be interviewed, said in a written statement that the mine was necessary to reverse a decline in population over the last decade which stood at about 7,000 in the 1990s. “For Jokkmokk, which has routes of between 220km to 340km to other municipal centres, it is especially important to have a strong local business community and job growth,” he said. Henrik Blind, a Green member of the municipal board from the Sami community, said tensions in Jokkmokk were such that “people don’t like to talk about it”, but that those whose culture was at stake had to be heard. In its statement, Beowulf said iron mineralisation of up to 389m tonnes had been identified at Gállok and the mine would represent just 0.5% of the Jåhkågaska community’s available pasture lands of 1,019 sq miles. “You can show anything with statistics,” said Jonas Vannar, 42, a reindeer herder from Jokkmokk. “If you compare it to someone shooting an arrow to your heart, it’s a pretty small hole when you calculate the area of the wound compared to the entire body. Then it’s surely not possible to die from an arrow in your heart?” • This article was amended on 15 February 2022. An earlier version misspelled the name of the Beowulf CEO Kurt Budge.The stability of the Indo-Pacific will also be in danger if Russia is allowed to threaten Ukraine with impunity, the US secretary of state has warned during a visit to Australia. Antony Blinken said on Friday there were “very troubling signs of Russian escalation”, adding: “We’re in a window when an invasion could begin at any time – and to be clear, that includes during the Olympics.” He said the US would continue to draw down its embassy in Kyiv and reiterated calls for any American citizens who remain in Ukraine to leave immediately, following Joe Biden’s comment that “things could go crazy quickly”. After joining with his Australian, Indian and Japanese counterparts for a meeting of the Quad in Melbourne, Blinken made the case that allowing Russia to further invade Ukraine would have far wider consequences and could embolden other countries, such as China, to pursue military aggression. Russia, he said, was challenging the principles that “one country can’t simply change the borders of another by force” or “dictate to another its choices, its policies, with whom it will associate”. “If we allow those principles to be challenged with impunity, even if it’s half the world away in Europe, that will have an impact here as well – others are watching,” Blinken told reporters. “Others are looking to all of us to see how we respond. So that’s why it’s so important that we have this solidarity: that we do everything possible, through diplomacy, to try to avert a conflict and prevent aggression – but equally, to be resolute if Russia renews its aggression.” Russia has accused the west of ignoring its requests for security guarantees, including an assurance that Ukraine never join Nato. Blinken was in Melbourne for a meeting with foreign ministers of the Quad, an increasingly active diplomatic grouping that is viewed warily by China, which sees it as an effort to contain its influence. The meeting comes a week after China’s Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin of Russia signed a joint statement calling on the west to “abandon the ideologised approaches of the cold war”, as the two leaders showcased their warming relationship in Beijing at the start of the Winter Olympics. This so-called “no limits” agreement was one of the developments discussed at Friday’s meeting of the Quad foreign ministers. The Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, said Russia and China’s agreement was “concerning because it doesn’t represent a global order that squares with those ambitions for freedom and openness and sovereignty and the protection of territorial integrity”. Speaking at a joint news conference with her Quad counterparts, Payne said rules and norms were “under pressure, in particular from authoritarian regimes”. “Australia, in our actions, works to support a world order that favours freedom – where rules, not power and coercion, resolve disputes,” she said. Payne reiterated Australia’s “strong support for Ukraine sovereignty and territorial integrity” and signalled Australia was ready to join an international sanctions package targeted at Russia. Australia, she said, would “continue to support our allies and partners to deter this sort of aggression and to raise the costs of this kind of behaviour”. Japan’s foreign minister, Yoshimasa Hayashi, said his country would continue to collaborate with the international community and “take appropriate responses”. Friday’s meeting was productive, said India’s minister of external affairs, Dr S. Jaishankar. He said the Quad had a positive agenda, including on vaccine distribution. He said the Quad stood “for something, not against somebody”. The joint statement issued by the Quad foreign ministers did not directly name China, but stressed “the importance of adherence to international law” to meet “challenges to the maritime rules-based order, including in the South and East China Seas” – where China is engaged in territorial disputes. Clearly alluding to China, the statement also said the Quad countries “oppose coercive economic policies and practices that run counter to this system and will work collectively to foster global economic resilience against such actions”. The Quad would support neighbours in the Indo-Pacific region to “build resilience and counter disinformation”, it said. It would also assist countries in the region “to address the growing threat of ransomware, by strengthening capacity building to ensure resilient cyber security and to counter cybercrime”. A year after the military coup in Myanmar, the foreign ministers said they were “gravely” concerned about the crisis in the south-east Asian country. They called for “an end to violence, the release of all those arbitrarily detained, including foreigners, and unhindered humanitarian access”. The group also condemned North Korea for its “destabilising ballistic missile launches in violation of UN Security Council resolutions”. Earlier, the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, met with the visiting foreign ministers and said he appreciated their support as Australia weathered “coercion and pressure” from China. “We live in a very fragile, fragmented and contested world, and that is no more accentuated than here in our Indo-Pacific,” Morrison told the earlier meeting. Blinken said a confrontation with China was not inevitable, but “we share concerns that in recent years China has been acting more aggressively, a whole lot more aggressively in the region, and, indeed, potentially beyond”.That the props department had to source a giant birthday cake, a pink flamingo inflatable swimming ring and several luminous green hula hoops for this production should tell you everything you need to know about the reverence in which the source material is held. Director Anthony Lau, using a celebrated 1992 adaptation by Helen Edmundson, shows almost no respect for the milieu of Tolstoy’s epic masterpiece, and in thumbing his nose at the weighty reputation of the Russian’s magnum opus activates the story to create a production that is thrilling and utterly compelling. It is all built around an absorbing performance from Adelle Leoncé as the eponymous heroine. She goes through the wringer over the course of the three-hour piece, leaving everything on the stage. Around her, Lau makes some seriously bold choices. The costumes and staging are Baz Luhrmann-esque; indeed one scene that descends from Russian aristocratic ball to all-out disco could slip into any of the films in the Australian director’s red curtain trilogy. Edmundson’s smartly economical storytelling has Anna and Konstantin Levin, played here by the highly watchable Dougie McMeekin, asking each other “‘where are you now?”. Standing on an empty stage Anna can tell him “I’m on a train heading for Moscow” or “I’m in an Italian town in an old, shabby palazzo” and so she is and with her we go. Lau takes Edmundson’s economy and adds buckets full of irreverence. A day at the races becomes seriously racy as Anna gives into her animal urges with lover Count Vrosnky in a highly erotic seduction scene. A visit to Princess Betsy and one of her infamous parties is a hilariously postmodern, shot-drinking, bacchanalian affair. Leoncé’s Anna is a woman apart in several ways, the acting around her all nods and winks and slightly outside the action while she is entirely immersed in it. The angels of death who occasionally stalk the stage, looking like steampunk slaughtermen, lend an air of menace to a production that sees design and direction in perfect symbiosis. This is a spectacle in every sense. The purists? Let them eat giant birthday cake. At the Crucible, Sheffield, until 26 February.Have you ever been so hungry you became delusional? I have, when as a child in care I was placed in a hostel a few months after finishing my GCSEs. I remember rummaging through old birthday cards in the futile hope of finding a tenner. Despite my benefits and the job I did alongside school, I could not afford food and electricity – let alone books, school trips, or clothes. I once wrote an essay with a candle in one hand and a pen in the other. But the lack of human connection hurt most. In my first year of sixth form, I was in hospital for four days before “support” staff realised I was gone. I was 17, hooked to a drip, alone and terrified. The state was a lousy parent to me. It does not care for all its children equally – in fact, thousands of children in the care system in England are not entitled to care at all. Once they turn 16, children in care can be placed by local authorities in shared houses with adult strangers, bedsits and hostels with no adult carers. Before last year, children in care as young as 11 lived in “care-less” settings. The Department for Education has introduced secondary legislation which bans this – but only for children aged 15 and under. This leaves more than 6,400 children in England, a third of all 16- to 17-year-olds in care, unprotected. And it threatens thousands more, by allowing private companies to saturate the market when foster carers are in short supply. In the absence of a government that cares, our hope rests on this week’s judicial review. Article 39, a small charity, has taken the DfE to court on the grounds that the secondary legislation discriminates against children aged 16-17. The charity is backed by more than 10,700 people who signed a #KeepCaringTo18 petition. Last week, I was one of six care-experienced adults who delivered it to Downing Street. The judge has now heard evidence from both sides, and we’re awaiting his decision. It is arbitrary and cruel that a 15-year-old can be in a loving foster home until 11.59pm on the eve of their 16th birthday, but once the clock strikes midnight, they could end up in a hostel with offenders, gangs and vulnerable adults. No prisoner in this country is forced to forgo electricity or meals – yet children in care do. The government plans to bat off criticism by regulating this so-called “supported accommodation”, yet its proposed standards are so pathetic as to be useless – for example, Ofsted would be brought in to inspect only a “sample” of each provider’s accommodation, rather than each individual property. I recently published childhood diary entries exposing the impact of such accommodation on children’s wellbeing. In one, I wrote that “living is extremely difficult day in and day out. Coming home to a silent flat with no electricity. Being too frightened to leave the room at times, or being intimidated by the angry mob outside the entrance. The loneliness is astounding.” The combination of poverty and isolation left me self-harming, anxious and depressed. I cried myself to sleep most nights. Being a teenager is hard enough. Surviving physical and psychological changes, navigating relationships and getting through exams is challenging. But these are the least of worries for teenagers in care. England’s statutory child safeguarding panel, analysed incidents where children died or suffered serious harm in care. It found many examples of children entering care in adolescence having suffered “long-term parental abuse and neglect, with significant trauma”. These children need loving care; instead, the government suggested “welfare and maintenance” should be enough. That such dehumanising language can be used to describe children in the care system exposes how little the government values them. Private companies competed for £120m in contracts for accommodation in 2020 – at a time councils were running skeletal services after a decade of austerity. I know this because that year I was a frontline social worker. Things were desperate. So too were the issues faced by teenagers in care, who needed more nurturing and supervision, not less. They were vulnerable to county lines gangs, criminal and sexual exploitation, and online grooming. It goes without saying a child living alone in a hostel is at greater risk. But even if such threats were eliminated, physical and emotional needs still go unmet without proper care. Twenty-two children in England aged 16-17 died in care-less accommodation between 2018 and 2020. Seventeen-year-old Caitlin Sharp, who had severe epilepsy, died after being found unconscious at a man’s home in 2019. She had not collected her medication for five months. Her family and specialist nurse thought she was not capable of independent living. Little seems to have been learned from this tragedy. According to Ofsted guidance, children in supported accommodation are still fully responsible for their own medication and health appointments – even though many have autism, disabilities or complex needs. If a parent or guardian failed their child so miserably, there would be criminal proceedings. Shame on the government for caring so little about children that a small charity must take them to court to provide the bare minimum. Rebekah Pierre is a care-experienced author and freelance writerTo date, more than 48 million people in the UK (that’s 84% of over 12s) have now received their first and second Covid-19 vaccination doses, with more than 37 million receiving their “booster” or third dose too. The latest data from the UK Health Security Agency shows shortly after getting a booster, you are 85% less likely to end up in hospital than if you are unvaccinated. According to the Office for National Statistics, more than nine in 10 adults in the UK currently have coronavirus antibodies, either due to a past Covid infection or thanks to receiving the vaccine. But some still remain hesitant to receive their vaccination, citing reasons such as fear of potential side-effects and concerns over the speed of the vaccine’s creation, as well as practical barriers such as physical and mental health conditions making appointments difficult. Merchandising administrator and dancer, Camila Lopez-Pulido, 26, from London, fell into the vaccine hesitant camp, initially unsure about taking up the vaccine. “There were a number of reasons I was hesitant about getting vaccinated, but I think primarily it was the uncertainty of the whole situation,” she says. “To create a vaccine in such a short amount of time and to know so little about it – that was worrying to me. I was unsure, thinking: ‘How do I know this isn’t going to affect me in a year, or five years’ time?’ I felt we didn’t know enough about the vaccines and that worried me if I’m honest.” Uncertainty over the right thing to do meant Lopez-Pulido held off booking her vaccination appointment. “I’d been receiving NHS text messages asking me to book my vaccine since July 2021, but I kept putting it off,” she says. The situation proved stressful, made worse by conflicting views within her friendship group, a situation many others will be familiar with. “There was definitely a split where some friends believed one thing and others believed differently. It was really difficult,” she says. “I think it’s hard to have an open conversation around vaccines without people assuming you think the virus ‘doesn’t exist’ or you’re disregarding the severity of the situation, which I’m absolutely not. I suppose I was just curious because I figured there’s no going back once you’ve had it.” It wasn’t until September [2021], ahead of a holiday to Greece, that she booked her first vaccine appointment. “I figured I’d eventually have to do it and there was no point putting it off any longer,” she says. “I also reasoned that I’m an occasional drinker and social smoker and I’ve had plenty of other vaccinations before, including when pregnant. If I’m honest, I didn’t do my research back then or really know what was being done to my body at that point, so why was I assuming the worst now, why not take the vaccine? It seemed silly,” she says. An awareness for those around her also played a part in her decision. “I’m pretty convinced that before I got vaccinated, I had already contracted Covid-19 so I’m very lucky to be healthy. My family and I weren’t affected by the pandemic health wise like many other families have been, thankfully. So while I felt relieved to be getting vaccinated, it wasn’t necessarily in terms of my own health – more in terms of people like my mother, because she’s older so could have underlying health issues.” Much to Lopez-Pulido’s relief, the vaccination itself was simple, without side-effects or complications. “The vaccine didn’t affect me in terms of my health – so far, everything has been pretty normal and I haven’t felt any different or experienced symptoms really. Even straight after the injection, I had a sore arm and that was it. I didn’t get a bad cold or a temperature at all, so I guess that was my biggest relief.” There was another major benefit too, she says. “I have two children: Kiara, aged seven, and Jacob, who is four years old, and I’d planned to take them to Disneyland Paris pretty much their entire lives. When we went as a family in November, the fact I was vaccinated made it so much easier. It was very much like ‘take out your NHS passes and your vaccination certificates’ everywhere we went. I was so incredibly relieved, thinking: ‘Gosh, imagine if I wasn’t vaccinated – we wouldn’t be able to have done this.’ I definitely felt much more at ease knowing I could live my life again, really.” Mikaela Bartlett, 28, is a digital marketer and new mother from Devon My son Max was born in July 2021 and throughout my pregnancy, I was pretty anxious and uncertain over whether or not to get vaccinated. Months of deliberation meant I waited until May [2021], two months before Max was born via C-section, to have my first dose. I was able to squeeze in the second dose a few weeks before giving birth, getting my booster in December after he was born. Throughout my pregnancy, I felt conflicted about the vaccination because it felt like there was a lack of information available about the vaccine’s safety during pregnancy. I was also aware that being pregnant and having an autoimmune condition could make me more susceptible to serious illness or other complications if I were to contract Covid-19. It meant I spent a lot of time researching studies, as well as speaking to my hospital consultant, midwife and GP, asking for advice around what to do. Unfortunately, I found nobody wanted to give specific recommendations. As a first-time mum, you’re especially nervous, which meant all the uncertainty around the vaccine definitely added to the fear and paranoia. There were so many horror stories that it was difficult to know what to believe, or what to choose. My partner was supportive and said he was behind me, whatever I chose to do. I think the turning point for me came after speaking to my GP, who was seven months pregnant herself. She explained that she’d gotten the vaccine because she was seeing patients regularly and felt it was the best decision, so that really reassured me. Because Max was due to be born by C-section, I also knew that could make me more prone to infection, so that was another reason to get the vaccine. Looking back, I’m really relieved I got vaccinated when I did. I’ve since heard of friends of friends who contracted Covid-19 while having their baby in hospital and it sounds incredibly stressful being isolated at such a vulnerable time. I knew getting the virus would add another huge layer of stress, whereas I actually felt quite relaxed going into hospital to have Max, without the worry of contracting it or potentially passing it on to someone else. Even the thought of having a cold when pregnant or with a newborn was awful – the reality of catching Covid-19 would have been really hideous. I think, ultimately, the risk of catching the virus while pregnant – and being in intensive care or having a premature labour – outweighed any potential vaccine consequences that might realistically never have even come to light. I suppose it was measuring up the theoretical consequences with a genuine, real risk. Thankfully, Max was born with no complications either – and I’m pleased to say, very happy and healthy indeed. Covid-19 vaccination and pregnancy: what you need to know Pregnant women who get symptomatic Covid-19 infection are up to three times more likely to give birth to their baby prematurely. More than 96% of pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid-19 symptoms between May and October 2021 were unvaccinated. Around one in five women who are hospitalised with the virus need to deliver preterm to help them recover. Get your booster in England now by visiting nhs.uk/covidvaccination. If you’re in Scotland, visit nhsinform.scot/covid-19-vaccine, for Wales, visit gov.wales/get-your-covid-19-vaccination and for Northern Ireland, visit covid-19.hscni.net/get-vaccinated This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (“Get boosted now”) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirusWhy will I love it? Epipremnum aureum is known as devil’s ivy because it is almost impossible to kill, and it stays green even when kept in the dark. However, it is not actually an ivy. The heart-shaped leaves are bright green and variegated with white, yellow or light green streaks and blotches. It’s a trailing plant with stems growing up to 20 metres long. Light or shade? Bright but indirect light. Where should I put it? In the macramé hanger you created during lockdown, or on a high bookshelf (but remember to water it –it’s easy to miss plants above eye level). Height is also useful because it is toxic if ingested by cats and dogs. How do I keep it alive? Although it will survive in partial shade, the coloured patterns on its leaves may fade or disappear entirely without enough sunlight. Allow the compost to dry out completely between waterings. It thrives in average room temperatures and humidity, but can endure extreme temperature ranges of 5–35C. Did you know … They rarely bloom, even in the wild, which led to the plant being mistaken for a member of the Pothos genus for many years – hence its other common name, “golden pothos”.Cattle from a small south-east Michigan farm that sold beef to schools and at farmers’ markets in the state have been found to contain dangerous levels of PFAS, so-called “forever chemicals” that can pose a serious risk to human health. The news comes after consumer groups in 2019 warned that using PFAS-laden sewage sludge as fertilizer would contaminate dairy, beef, crops and other food products. However, at the time a Michigan agricultural regulator publicly assured the state’s dairy farmers her agency wouldn’t test milk for the toxic chemicals as they didn’t want to inflict economic pain on the $15bn industry, she said. Now just over two years later, consumer groups say their fears may have come true. Michigan discovered the contamination because it tests sewage sludge for PFAS more than any other state, but officials have downplayed the incident as “isolated” and for now won’t conduct further testing on livestock, dairy or crops. “It’s not enough – we need a lot more monitoring of our agriculture to make sure we’re keeping toxic chemicals out of our food supply,” said Christy McGillivray, executive director of Sierra Club of Michigan. Sludge isn’t the only route PFAS takes into the nation’s food. It’s also found in pesticides, rain, packaging and water used on crops, and testing is increasingly finding the chemicals in vegetables, seafood, meat, dairy and processed foods. Consumer groups say regulators are failing to keep the dangerous compounds out of food, a problem highlighted by the Michigan contamination. PFAS, or per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, are a class of over 9,000 compounds that are used to make products heat, water and stain resistant. They are dubbed “forever chemicals” because they don’t naturally break down, and they are so effective that they are used in thousands of products across dozens of industries. The chemicals are also linked to a range of serious health problems like cancer, liver disease, kidney issues, high cholesterol, birth defects and decreased immunity. Still, the US Department of Agriculture has largely been absent from the PFAS discussion while the US Food And Drug Administration hasn’t yet established health limits for food. The agency only conducts limited annual testing and recently adjusted its methodology so it will only catch what consumer groups say are extremely high contamination levels, and ignore relatively low to moderate levels that can still pose a health risk. In 2019, the FDA initially found 182 food samples to be contaminated with PFAS, but, after changing its methodology part way through the study, that figure dropped to 78, drawing accusations that it was intentionally covering up contamination. “Imagine using a radar gun to detect speeding in cars, but then manipulating the radar so that it only detects speeding in cars going over 100mph,” wrote Brian Ronholm, a former deputy under secretary of food safety at the US Department of Agriculture, in Consumer Reports after the FDA announced the change. Meanwhile, the FDA allows short-chain PFAS to be used in food packaging despite a growing body of evidence that the chemicals bioaccumulate, leach into food and are toxic at very low levels. Though health limits for PFAS in water have been dropping in recent years, the FDA seems to be allowing relatively high levels in food, and the agency “hasn’t really explained why they don’t have any concerns”, said Maricel Maffini, an independent food safety scientist who has petitioned the FDA to restrict PFAS in food packaging. “There’s a health risk in water at very, very small levels of exposure, so why would food be different?” she asked. “The FDA could be doing a lot more.” Meanwhile, sewage sludge is regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which allows the substance to be spread even as it investigates potential health risks. Wastewater treatment plants clean sewer system water, and sludge is the process’s semi-solid byproduct. It’s expensive to dispose of, and about 60% of it is now lightly treated and sold or given away as “biosolid” fertilizer because it’s high in plant nutrients. Consumer groups note sludge can also contain any of 90,000 manmade chemicals discharged into sewers, and the Sierra Club has characterized it as “the most pollutant-rich manmade substance on Earth”. In a scathing 2018 report the EPA office of inspector general wrote that the EPA couldn’t properly regulate biosolids because “it lacked the data or risk assessment tools needed to make a determination on the safety of 352 pollutants” that the office found in sludge samples. PFAS is the chemical in sludge getting the most attention, and Michigan’s biosolid program, run by the department of environment, Great Lakes and energy (EGLE), requires wastewater treatment plants to monitor for one type of PFAS. The agency has also identified dozens of PFAS polluters and required them to stop discharging the chemicals, and prohibits highly contaminated sludge from being spread. But questions remain about whether that’s enough to keep PFAS out of the food supply. Instead of implementing a wide-scale program to test livestock, crops and dairy for the chemicals, state agencies identified 13 farm fields considered most at risk for high levels of PFAS contamination, then checked nearby soil, surface water and groundwater for the compounds. State officials say the beef incident is isolated because the farm received some of the state’s most contaminated sludge, and because of its allegedly unique farming practices – the cows were fed on contaminated crops grown on the farm. But consumer groups say the limited testing process leaves huge blind spots, and is guided by arbitrary health risk standards. All biosolids contain PFAS, and EGLE considers sludge with less than 150 parts per billion (ppb) of PFAS to be safe to spread on farmland. But no one knows if sludge with less than 150 ppb of PFAS is safe to use. A spokesperson said the agency is waiting on the EPA to develop health risk standards, and called EGLE’s biosolids program “a good interim step”. Moreover, state regulators only have the authority to regulate PFAS in sludge, but thousands more types of PFAS exist, evidence suggests the entire chemical class poses health risks, and PFAS levels in sludge are likely much higher when other compounds are included. The state also relies on industry to self report and must get farmers’ permission to test cows. Already some farmers with high levels of the chemical in soil and water around their fields won’t let EGLE test cows. McGillivray said Sierra Club Michigan is calling on the state to prohibit the use of biosolids as a fertilizer, establish health risk standards, compensate farmers who are impacted, and hold chemical companies and polluters accountable. Ultimately, the incident is more evidence that PFAS need to be banned, she added. “The companies that make them have not had to show that they are safe, and instead the public has to show that harm has been caused, and that leads to rolling public health crises like this one with PFAS,” McGillivray said.Fifa has confirmed its ethics committee is in the early stages of an investigation into multiple allegations of sexual abuse around the world that are understood to include incidents tied to the Vancouver Whitecaps women’s team and its former coach Hubert Busby Jr. Busby was suspended from his role as head coach of the Jamaica women’s national team late last year after the Guardian reported allegations by a former player that Busby attempted to solicit sex from her while she was being recruited to join the Whitecaps in 2010. Busby has denied the allegations but the Jamaica Football Federation requested Fifa investigate his time in charge of the Whitecaps women’s program. “We can confirm that Fifa’s independent Ethics Committee is currently gathering information from different parties concerning historic abuse allegations that have been made, which will be analyzed in accordance with the scope and competence of the Fifa Code of Ethics,” football’s governing body wrote in a statement to the Guardian. It is understood the broad nature of the statement – while also avoiding specifics – means there are multiple cases of sexual abuse under review. “The size and scale of an investigation is on a case-by-case basis and there is no set timeframe,” a Fifa spokesman said. In the United States, investigations into allegations of sexual abuse by coaches and the failure of organizations to adequately address such claims have been recently announced by US Soccer as well as the National Women’s Soccer League. Canada Soccer and Major League Soccer have also launched separate investigations into allegations of abuse within Canada’s national women’s youth teams and the Vancouver Whitecaps women’s team. Abuse of players and the failure of organizations to substantially address allegations is a global issue. Allegations of sexual abuse and misconduct by administrators, coaches, and even teammates, have been recently reported in the UK, Australia, Afghanistan, Haiti, Barbados, Gabon, and Venezuela. While Fifa can issue a ban from football related activity for 10 years if an individual is found guilty of sexual abuse by its ethics committee, it is simultaneously restricted by its own guidelines that state cases cannot be prosecuted more than 10 years after they occurred. According to American attorney John Manly, who won a $500m settlement case as lead counsel for victims of infamous US Olympic women’s gymnastics team doctor Larry Nassar, Fifa’s rules demonstrate that sports organizations cannot investigate allegations within their own sport, especially regarding time limits on sexual abuse cases. “If you talk to any knowledgeable law enforcement officer they will tell you the late reporting of sexual abuse cases is common and usual,” said Manly, who now represents several former Vancouver Whitecaps women’s team players. “What you have is a by-law that is designed to fail. Everybody knows that if you report during your playing years, your career is over. “USA Gymnastics not only had Larry Nassar but tremendous problems with abusive coaches and a statute of limitations that was a year. They only had to investigate if the victim or the victim’s parents signed a statement under oath in writing. Nobody does that. It’s not how it works. This is not a matter of ignorance. If this was 1965 we could say ‘OK, maybe you are ignorant’. It’s 2022. They know damn well how this works and it is a system designed to give you public relations cover but a policy to fail the athlete as well.” The Vancouver Whitecaps case is a standout as Busby was the second coach who players reported for inappropriate behavior. After abuse allegations from players in 2008, coach Bob Birarda, who was simultaneously head coach of Canada’s U-20 women’s team, left his roles with the Whitecaps and national team by “mutual agreement” but returned to coaching teenage girls in the Vancouver area within months. Birada was last year arrested in Vancouver charged with six counts of sexual exploitation, two counts of sexual assault, and one count of child luring over a 20-year period between 1988 and 2008. The charges against Birarda are understood to involve at least four female players. This month he pled guilty to one count of sexual exploitation and three counts of sexual assault and is awaiting sentencing. Adding to the complexity of any Fifa investigation into Canada Soccer and the Vancouver Whitecaps is that the deputy chair of the Fifa ethics committee investigative chamber is Bruno De Vita, an attorney whose resume boasts his role defending sports and religious organizations from sexual abuse claims. De Vita is a Canadian who grew up in the strong soccer community of East Vancouver, alongside Concacaf president and Fifa vice-president Victor Montagliani, as well as Whitecaps executives (and brothers) Bob and Dan Lenarduzzi. Fifa could not confirm if De Vita would recuse himself from any investigation into events in Canada. “This underlines the complications of organizations investigating themselves,” says Kim Shore, a former board member of Gymnastics Canada currently involved in an independent taskforce into the culture of sports organization governance. “There are so many complex relationships, so many vested interests, and people invested in their own rise. “It is also not up to Fifa to say when a victim finds their voice. Many victims are just finding their voice now, especially if you are talking about someone growing from being a child into an adult. It’s not up to the sports organization to decide that someone should have come forward sooner.” Manly also questions the use of the term “independent” when referring to organizations investigating misconduct. Vancouver attorney Anne Chopra was hired in 2008 by Canada Soccer and the Vancouver Whitecaps to investigate the allegations against Birarda and his subsequent hire and exit. However, Chopra signed a non-disclosure agreement, and the report disappeared. No copy of Chopra’s investigation exists today. Montagliani, a Canada Soccer board member at the time, has said he and his fellow board members “followed the appropriate steps… with this very serious matter.” After recent media interest in how Canada Soccer handled the 2008 allegations against Birarda, the organization commissioned a new investigation into the events by McLaren Global Sports Solutions, a Canadian firm that has also investigated doping, bribes, and corruption in a variety of sports. One report from MGSS is due to be completed in April, focussing on the events of 2008 and the subsequent investigation undertaken by Chopra. A second report from MGSS, due in July will review Canada Soccer’s current policies and programs. “Attorneys that investigate their clients rarely find them guilty,” Manly said of the multiple investigations into sexual abuse in soccer now underway. “These investigations are always designed to protect the institution and designed to give them public relations cover to get the media and the public to believe they are actually doing something.” MLS, which is investigating the Vancouver Whitecaps allegations, did not respond to multiple requests for comment for this story. A spokesperson for Canada Soccer said in an email that MGSS “has complete independence of Canada Soccer and has a demonstrated history of independence. Canada Soccer is paying for the transparent third-party independent review but this does not constitute an attorney-client relationship. MGSS is not our attorney or legal counsel but an independent group that Canada Soccer has engaged to conduct this review with the autonomy to proceed with the investigation as they deem necessary.” Canada Soccer officials who were aware of the 2008 allegations against Birarda have subsequently risen to powerful global positions within soccer. Montagliani is now president of Concacaf and a Fifa vice-president. A Concacaf spokesperson has said Montagliani’s 2008 role as director of national teams was fiduciary oversight. Peter Montopoli, Canada Soccer general-secretary at the time of the allegations against Birarda and the Chopra report, was responsible for the day-to-day running of the organization. Last year Montopoli was appointed chief operating officer of the Fifa World Cup 2026 for Canada. Manly maintains that national sports organizations and clubs hold all the power when it comes to athletes reporting abuse and that the experience of female athletes under multiple coaches at Vancouver Whitecaps is a perfect example of how difficult it is for allegations to be treated appropriately. “The situation [for the Whitecaps players] is common,” Manly said. “No matter what country you are in there is only one way [to the Olympics or the World Cup] and that is through the federation. There is also only one professional soccer league for women. If you make a claim while you are playing then how is that going to affect your career? Not great. There needs to be a methodology for women to be confident that when they report it is not going to be used against them. “No woman – or man – should have to subject herself to sexual favors to play. They should be able to play and participate in a sport whether as an amateur or professional based on their ability. We believe this is a much larger problem not only in soccer but in other sports. And it has been going on for a long time. I believe these women [who have come forward] have opened the Pandora’s Box.”In January 1788, a fleet of British ships under the command of Captain Arthur Phillip anchored in a bay known as Warrane to the people living there. What happened next is the familiar story of Australia’s founding. Less widely known is that 11 blood-sucking vampires were also brought ashore by the “First Fleet” that day. Once loose, they became addicted to the blood of Indigenous Australians and set about massacring the population, thereby weakening their resistance to the British invaders. Or at least, that’s according to Shanika and Tyson, the vampire-killing “bloodhunters” at the centre of a new eight-part Australian series, Firebite. And who are we to argue? Nothing less than history, and who gets to decide it, is at stake in the new wave of colonial-confronting horror being made by First Nations film-makers from all over the world. Firebite originated in the brain of Warwick Thornton, a Kaytetye man from Australia’s Northern Territory and an internationally feted film-maker since 2009, when his debut feature, Samson and Delilah, won the Caméra d’Or (best first feature prize) at Cannes. “Y’know, we’ve made a lot of really worthy films,” says Thornton wryly, referring to himself and his Firebite co-creator, Brendan Fletcher. Fletcher is a white Australian film-maker who has long worked with Indigenous communities in the Kimberley region of Western Australia, including on his 2011 Sundance hit, Mad Bastards. “But with this, we just wanted to kick in the doors and turn the amps up for our mob, so that our kids can see us killing vampires.” Firebite absolutely lives up to that description, thanks to a raucous punk soundtrack and the rebellious energy of its two leads. Rob Collins, a well-established heart-throb with roots in the Tiwi Islands, plays Tyson, and relative newcomer Shantae Barnes-Cowan (an Adnyamathanha woman from South Australia) plays his adoptive daughter, Shanika. One of the white supporting characters is played by Australian actor Yael Stone, best known as Morello from Orange Is the New Black, who says she’s glad to be involved in a show that is correcting the “fantastical, polite version” of history she was taught at school. “Even if someone says: ‘That’s all bullshit,’ maybe they’ll then do some of their own research and find out: ‘Oh, actually, turns out there’s all these local massacre sites here, where I live,’” Stone says. “Because it really doesn’t take much to scratch the surface in Australia.” Like Stone and many other Australians, Thornton was well into adulthood before he learned details about the brutality of the British colonists. One lodged firmly in his imagination: the existence of 11 vials of smallpox on the First Fleet, which many historians now believe amounts to an act of biological warfare against the original inhabitants. “A lot of the history books don’t write anything about vials of smallpox, or Indigenous people,” says Thornton. “They called the place terra nullius, which is a land of no people – but we were here. So every time we make a film, even if we’re just trying to have some rock’n’roll fun, it’s always going to be a bit deeper, darker and slightly shocking.” The vampires-as-smallpox metaphor might be an elaboration on the historical record, but it would allow Thornton and Fletcher to get at the true horror of the past: “If you really wanted to talk about the Gadigal [the Indigenous population the colonisers first encountered] being wiped out by smallpox, it would be almost unwatchable,” he says. “So a vampire story is just a great device that allows us to, ironically, tell the truth, in terms of its essence.” Firebite is one of several films and TV series in recent years to use popular genres to add clarity, unheard perspectives and, not least, lots of gore to the official, sanitised version of colonial history. Reservation Dogs, an Oklahoma-set, Indigenous show on Disney+, has won a slew of awards for its Seminole creator Sterlin Harjo, by melding native spiritual traditions – such as “Deer Lady” or a bad-omen owl – with irreverent comedy. That show’s star, Devery Jacobs, also appears in Blood Quantum (2019), an Indigenous – and ingenious – Canadian zombie movie from Mi’kmaq writer-director Jeff Barnaby, in which the Red Crow reservation becomes a sanctuary from the infected hordes of white-people zombies. Back in Australia, Bjorn Stewart, a Kuku-Yalanji/Wemba Wemba man, is developing his short Killer Native into another zombie feature, about a modern-day British couple terrorised by the reanimated corpses of the smallpox-ravaged dead. While all these examples are recent, the Barbican in London is screening Tracey Moffatt’s 1993 film Bedevil, as part of their season Homeland: Films by Australian First Nations directors. This trio of ghost stories made Moffatt the first Australian Indigenous woman to direct a feature. Nearly 30 years later another Indigenous woman, Leah Purcell, has also chosen to make her feature debut in the genre space. The Drover’s Wife: The Legend of Molly Johnson, another film in the Homeland programme, is an outback western that reimagines Henry Lawson’s 1892 short story as a tale of resistance and resilience. Purcell herself stars as the eponymous, rifle-toting drover’s wife, alongside Firebite’s Rob Collins as a fugitive Indigenous man, loosely based on Purcell’s own great-grandfather. “If you pick a popular genre, then you know you’re going to get an audience,” says Purcell of her decision to tell her story as a western. This sounds like a bait-and-switch move, but all genre thrills will be delivered as advertised: “First and foremost, I want to go out there and entertain people. Secondly, I will always, as an Indigenous woman, put [across] my family’s plight through those stories.” For Indigenous film-makers, horror can be a means to reclaim stolen creative territory and otherwise get your own back. “In every Indigenous community, so much of our traditional storytelling is based in this sort of world,” says Thornton. “Not vampires, but in monsters and demons and morals.” Vampires, specifically, have no Australian roots and are best thought of as “just another kind of nasty animal that was sent here”, as much an invasive species as the European rabbit. Perhaps that’s why the traditional vampire-killing kit of holy water and a crucifix is useless here. Firebite’s fanged undead can only be slain by exposure to the scorching desert sun or a boomerang to the heart. Vampire stories are endlessly adaptable and enduringly popular, but maybe, says Collins, it’s the changing perspectives that really matter. “I think Australia’s been swept up in what feels like a global urge to see diversity on screen. And there’s this feeling – I don’t know how accurate this is – that Indigenous stories are becoming really attractive to people abroad.” Someone who agrees, and has the sales charts to prove it, is Emile Sherman, Firebite’s executive producer and the co-founder of UK-Australian production company See-Saw Films. See-Saw has never previously worked with an Indigenous director or an Indigenous-led cast, though it’s had huge successes with prestigious, socially minded dramas such as The King’s Speech (2011) and Lion (2016), both of which won numerous awards. But “now is the moment”, says Sherman, thanks to “a combination of interest in uncovering voices that haven’t been heard before, together with a genre-engine, together with the economic model of the S-Vods [streaming and video-on-demand] services”. Previously, low-budget Indigenous horror such as Blood Quantum or Rodrick Pocowatchit’s zombie comedy The Dead Can’t Dance (2010) would only have been seen by small festival audiences. Now they are available to appreciative genre fans globally on Shudder and Amazon Prime Video, respectively. Meanwhile, deals such as the one See-Saw did with AMC+, the new streaming wing of the American network behind Breaking Bad, secured Firebite a budget that can really – as Thornton would put it – “kick in the doors and turn the amps up”. So while it’s probably still true that history is written by the victors, media technology is helping to shift the narrative power balance. In Captain Arthur Phillip’s day it would have taken at least a year for any message about successfully subdued “natives” to get back to Britain. Now, thanks to the universal language of zombie gore, Indigenous people can get their side across at the speed of superfast broadband. Firebite is coming soon to UK television. The Barbican’s Homeland: Films by Australian First Nations directors runs to 23 February. The Drover’s Wife: The Legend of Molly Johnson is out in cinemas nationwide on 13 May.The fact that Love Is Blind was Netflix’s breakout dating show took me by surprise. I thought the real hit would be the trashier Too Hot To Handle, which forbade its contestants from having sex then did everything it could to encourage them to do just that. Instead, it was the series that attempted to prove a seemingly heartwarming theory. It argued that if the digital age of dating apps is superficial and looks-based, perhaps we should allowe two people to fall in love with one another, without either seeing what the other looked like. Now it is back for a second season, returning in exactly the same clothes it was wearing last night. The focus is soft and the music is soaring. Every time something emotional happens, the background music swoops in at top volume, and sings the couples’ feelings, like a toddler trying to articulate itself. “I’m afraid!” goes the music, as someone reveals their vulnerabilities. “I feel it all!” it pounds, as someone tries to work out who it is they prefer, while glugging from a golden goblet. This is a series that is very pleased with its own work, its theory apparently “proven” by the first season, which provided two couples (Lauren and Cameron and Amber and Matthew) with what appear to be genuine happily-ever-after marriages. It is, insists host Nick Lachey, “a proven approach for finding love.” Well, it is, and also, it isn’t. It is a proved approach to making undeniably gripping television, but it is as cooked-up and massaged as any other reality show. We meet 14 men and women, all claiming to be exasperated by the superficiality of modern dating, all ready to propose to someone they have never laid eyes upon. But first, the “pod” stage, which is speed dating behind frosted glass, with the couples taking more notes than Gogglebox’s Jenny watching an episode of Line of Duty. We don’t see these annotations, which is a shame. One contestant proudly writes the name of another at the very front of his book, which suggests his understanding of true love peaked at primary school. The topics go deep, quickly. The couples talk about tough childhoods, relationship histories, racial stereotypes and assumptions based on class. The men talk about being macho, or not being macho enough; the women have a thinly veiled loathing of their own bodies, and worry that they are too old. It is depressing. But it does seem more brutally frank than most dating shows, if not in what they are actually saying to each other, then in how they are talking about themselves. It soon becomes apparent who the “stars” of this series will be, and what their “storylines” are. Many of the contestants fail to meet their match, and simply fade into the background, and the ones who last tend to be the biggest, loudest, most complex characters. If you ever wondered whether your partner believing in evolution (or not) would be a romantic dealbreaker, then allow this show to put that to the test. Insecurities run rife, as people attempt to put their preconceived notions about what constitutes physical attractiveness to one side. For all of its crowing about finding proof that physical attractiveness is irrelevant, though, it often proves the opposite. It shows that all people are judgmental, to some degree, and it naughtily nudges viewers to feel the same. The most enlightening moments in these early episodes are when the couples finally come face-to-face, running towards each other, or not, from behind Blind Date-style screens. (“I think you’re a beautiful person, inside and out,” says one contestant to another, just before the reveal, which is, surely, jumping the gun.) I strongly believe that you can tell in an instant whether they fancy each other or not, no matter how much they claim to be attracted to “energy”. A holiday in Cancún, Mexico, follows the pods and marriage proposals, so that the new couples can get to know each other better before walking down the aisle. See if you can spot the fearful looks off into the distance the participants have when they think nobody is looking at them. It is all so excruciatingly, unbearably intimate. You see arguments, rows, deeply personal discussions, betrayals, regrets. Entire relationships form and collapse at a staggering rate. The programme-makers throw spanner after spanner into the works. The spectacle is undeniable. It is hard to look away. Netflix is staggering the release of this into a semi-binge, dropping the first five episodes in one instalment, followed by the next four a week later, and the finale a week after that. I will be there until the bitter end. But am I proud of myself for it? I’m not so sure.I cried the night Michael K Williams joined the over 100,000 Americans who died of an overdose in 2021. When I heard that Williams, the actor best known for his role as Omar, the queer, gun-toting rogue in The Wire, had suffered an accidental overdose in his apartment, I felt a deep sense of dread. The knowledge that another Black man not too dissimilar from myself had passed before his time mingled in my mind with my bitter memory of the moment when I learned that my best friend, Joseph Rodriguez, had overdosed at the age of 19. I am grateful, I suppose, that by the time Joe had died, in 2009, the public narrative around drug users had begun to evolve. Young suburban white kids had started dying, and the country quickly shifted to protect its most prized possessions. Teens were sent to rehab, and drug dealers, like those who allegedly sold Williams his final dose, were rounded up and blamed for what is clearly a broader societal issue. Last week four men in Brooklyn were charged with having sold fentanyl-laced heroin to Williams and others. This hollow act is part of the problem. The US has long chosen mass incarceration as the solution to substance abuse. Arresting people didn’t prevent Williams’ overdose, and arresting more now won’t prevent future ones. And given Williams’ stance on the war on drugs, it is doubtful he would have endorsed this action. There are many solutions that could have helped keep Williams alive. While it is unlikely that the US will rid itself of many of the underlying drivers of drug addiction – such as violence, systemic racism and the inequalities of capitalism – anytime soon, the country, and the federal government in particular, has long ignored policy reforms that could help address the worst of our current addiction epidemic. The most important reform, decriminalization, has gained steam in some places, like Oregon, but remains far away as a federal reform. Williams was a one-of-a-kind man and artist, but not unique in his struggles with drugs: according to the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 14.5% of Americans – roughly 40.3 million people – had a substance use disorder in 2020. A couple hundred of those people die of an overdose every day. This is a long-term trend that continues to explode over time; while over 100,000 Americans died of an overdose last year, the number was roughly 17,000 in 2000. As someone who has been involved with drug policy reform since 2010, roughly a year after my friend died, it is difficult to maintain hope as the bodies pile up, especially as solution after solution is ignored by the federal government. There are an embarrassingly large number of policies that could be backed by the federal government and implemented nationwide to save lives and nudge addicted people towards healing. Rather than concentrating power in the police through criminalization, most of these policies involve treating drug users like human beings worthy of love and care. One of the simplest ways to save lives is to make drug testing kits easily available for drug users. Williams was reportedly poisoned by fentanyl, a synthetic opioid mixed into cocaine and heroin as a means for illicit manufacturers to increase profits. Drug testing kits, like fentanyl test strips, let consumers ensure that they know what they’re putting into their bodies. While these strips are available for free in some places, such as New York City, they are still illegal in many states because they’re considered drug paraphernalia. Another potentially life-saving intervention? Supervised consumption sites. These are locations where people can consume drugs safely, with the support of medical staff that can ensure the purity of what is being used while being on call to intervene in the event of accidental overdoses. These locations can also connect people with treatment services and safer alternative drugs. If this all feels unfamiliar, think of bars as a crude version of these sites: bartenders administer doses to clients and can cut them off if they are too intoxicated. If anyone drinks too much, bartenders can call an ambulance and have them hospitalized. Creating robust supervised consumption sites could save lives, and destigmatizing those sites could save even more. All of these interventions would be made more effective and possible if the federal government took the important leap to decriminalize the possession of small amounts of all drugs. Total decriminalization may seem extreme, but there is evidence that it could save lives, reduce drug use, and prevent more unnecessary incarceration and harassment of those who use drugs, particularly Black Americans. Living in New York City, Williams did have access to some harm reduction resources but, like many drug users, may have felt too much stigma to seek help. Portugal decriminalized all drugs, in small amounts, in 2001. The country has also radically expanded its capacity to treat substance use disorders. According to the US-based Drug Policy Alliance, overdose deaths in Portugal decreased by more than 80% after decriminalization. By contrast, in 2017, “there were more than 72,000 overdose deaths in the US. If the US overdose death rate were on par with Portugal’s, there would have been fewer than 800 overdose deaths that year.” By 2008, three-quarters of those suffering from substance use disorder in Portugal were in treatment. The deaths of Michael K Williams and Joseph Rodriguez were perfectly preventable if we’d wanted them to live. Addiction is inevitable in our present society. Capitalism is a system that necessarily involves the commodification of human beings and the reduction of the individual into a tiny cog that exists to work and create profit. This dehumanization, exacerbated by racism, is probably why there are strong relationships between poverty and addiction, and why Black men are now the people most likely to overdose and die. The reality is that there will be many more deaths like Williams’. I expect to lose more friends; it would be naive to think that I won’t. In recent years both Democrats and Republicans have slowly shifted closer to the kind of drug reforms that could save lives. But for some of the people I love it is too little, too late and, without a comprehensive federal plan that includes decriminalization, we may as well brace ourselves for more tearful phone calls and funerals. Akin Olla is a contributing opinion writer at the GuardianExhibition of the week The World of Stonehenge The secrets of Britain’s most renowned Neolithic monument should make for a fascinating show. • British Museum, London from 17 February to 17 July. Also showing Louise Bourgeois: The Woven Child The revered artist seen from a new perspective, stressing her use of textiles. • Hayward Gallery, London, until 15 May. Beatrix Potter: Drawn to Nature Nature drawings that reveal the scientific side of Peter Rabbit’s creator, as well her original designs for picture books. • V&amp;A, London, from 12 February to 25 September. Ai Weiwei: The Liberty of Doubt Fake and real antiquities alongside simulacra of everyday objects by the activist and dissident. • Kettle’s Yard, Cambridge, from 12 February to 19 June. Ida Applebroog: Right up to Now, 1969-2021 A mini-retrospective of this veteran New Yorker’s feminist paintings and cartoons. • Hauser and Wirth, Somerset, until 2 May. Image of the week Louise Bourgeois’s sewn-together body parts, such as The Good Mother, above, dangle from the ceiling, hang out on stands or have sex in vitrines at the Hayward Gallery in London. They were created in the final decades of the artist’s long career and are provocative, scary and marvellous. Read full review of Louise Bourgeois: The Woven Child here. What we learned A 5,000-year-old chalk drum is the “most important prehistoric art find in Britain for a century” A rotting London warehouse has been transformed into a cutting-edge “makerspace” The statue of a 13th-century Jewish businesswoman was unveiled in Winchester A South Korean academic is reading North Korean sweet wrappers for clues Damien Hirst is facing plagiarism claim No 16 Female photographers are exploring nudity and the feminine gaze Kurt Schwitters’ unknown portrait sitter was a German spy Sad young women are the latest book cover trend Glasgow’s Burrell Collection is reopening after a six-year refurbishment Life is beautiful in infrared Manchester’s new flue is a towering achievement, inspired by Tudor palaces Masterpiece of the week The Ain Sakhri Lovers, Natufian culture c 9000BC, Ain Sakhri, Jordan This is one of the oldest sculptures of the human figure and may also be the earliest image of gay sex. The two lovers sensually embracing don’t have defined genders, but the fact they both resemble erect penises makes male on male passion a legitimate interpretation - especially in LGBT+ history month. At the very least we might say this ancient marvel of erotic art leaves identities open and possibilities unclosed. It may represent people exploring new ways of life as human society got more complex. Older images of the human form tend to be “Venus” figures that symbolise fertility. The Natufian period was when people were starting to experiment with agriculture and domesticity. In this liberating work of art, sex is depicted not just as a means to reproduce the species, but a form of play – with whomever you love. • British Museum, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe game is changing now. When I last wrote, Omicron had just been identified and was becoming the dominant variant. Cases were shooting up and I and my colleagues were preparing for another Covid wave like those we had seen with Alpha, then Delta. Why would we not? The data at the time showed Omicron was fiercely infectious and case numbers were rocketing. It seemed only logical, based on my experience of the past two years, that this was going to be followed by rising hospital admissions, critical illness, death. It felt like a foolish roll of the dice not to be taking it more seriously. And – whatever may be said – those in charge did not know differently in early December. Decisions were made day by day, trying to second-guess from our admissions one day whether hospitalisations would rise the next. If they had, it would have been too late for new measures to stem the tide. But we got lucky. Omicron is not the same disease as Delta and Alpha. While it is unbelievably infectious – just look at how many of your family and friends will have had it recently – it is not as dangerous now. That is not to say it can be trivialised, however. If you have not been vaccinated, you will still be at risk; severe Covid pneumonia in healthy people remains primarily a disease of the unvaccinated. But the majority of patients coming into hospital with Covid these days are admitted for other reasons and just happen to test positive, reflecting the enormous community prevalence. Not to mention the significant number who catch it while on our wards; this has been a big problem from the beginning but with Omicron it is ever harder to avoid. The last two months have been tough, though. The winter pressures have felt harder than normal, our hospital more full, the critical incidents being declared more often than usual as we ran out of beds. Infection control has been a nightmare as we have fought to contain outbreaks on our wards, shutting and flipping wards between Covid and non-Covid on a near hourly basis. Omicron has been just severe enough to push our already overloaded system over the edge more and more often. And yet the numbers in hospital are at last going down. We are down to just one or two Covid wards in our hospital now as we slowly win back territory. Just recently I did the first shift in a long while where during 12 hours on call I admitted nobody who had Covid. Numbers in intensive care with Covid are small and population immunity is high. Due largely to a combination of high vaccination rates and widespread exposure through near disastrous pandemic management, Covid is not the killer it once was. Still, there is no time to relax. We have a shiny, new, ambitious elective recovery plan to get on with. We will be showered with billions of pounds – though not as much as was wasted on unusable PPE, I note – to support us as we try to pretend the pandemic never happened. So far as I can tell, this means targets and paperwork. It will take months for any new cash to come through. We have been mandated to come up with local plans to explain how – with no new resources, the same fragmented and knackered workforce, constraints due to infection control, among a host of other issues – we are going to reduce our backlog even as ever more referrals come in due to pandemic-delayed care. And money is no use without staff. As things stand, we cannot fill our vacant posts and we do not even have secure funding to keep people in post for the long Covid provision we have managed to set up. It is an uphill, exhausting struggle. And this is the time that our PM, out of the blue, has chosen to announce the early removal of all restrictions. Everyone I have spoken to has been taken aback by this. Are we still “following the science”? And, in practice, what will this mean? Do we stop regularly testing ourselves and come to work to cough and splutter over our vulnerable patients? And also, now that the plan to mandate vaccinations for healthcare workers has been quietly shelved, raise the risk of infecting potentially unvaccinated colleagues? Although hospitalisations with Covid are manageable right now, there were more than 66,000 new cases on Thursday, even with continued mask wearing, lateral flow testing and self-isolation. Cases will certainly rise as a result. Whether hospitalisations also will, even only a little, remains to be seen. But a little is all that it would take to destabilise the system. And this is the crux of the problem for me. I love the NHS. The colleagues I work with and the kindness, expertise and quality we have are genuinely second to none; it beats the private sector hands down. I am incredibly privileged to do the work I do. But overall the NHS is a failing system at present, unable to offer good enough healthcare to our population. The current waiting times for non-urgent care; the pressure placed on under-resourced staff to achieve results that are not remotely realistic; the difficulties that patients have accessing the care they need; these are all utterly unacceptable. It makes me furious. But it is not Covid that has brought us to this point. Decades of underfunding, hospital closures, poor workforce planning and societal health inequalities have left us sailing so close to the wind that dealing with the pandemic has resulted in the continuing collapse of planned care even two years on. We need to recognise how valuable and precious and fragile our NHS is. Yet the framing of the recovery plan to me suggests that we are aiming simply to get back to where we were in 2019. And even this is being gambled on – again – by rushing to remove restrictions ahead of a planned timescale. We need strong, careful leadership, as we will do for many years to come. I don’t want to be over-cautious, but it is not appropriate for those in charge to risk our health by doing what suits them politically at any given moment. We all deserve better than that. The writer is an NHS respiratory consultant who works across a number of hospitals.Good morning. President Joe Biden has urged Americans in Ukraine to immediately leave the country, stressing that “things could go crazy quickly” as Russia-Ukraine relations further deteriorate. “American citizens should leave, should leave now,” Biden said in an interview with NBC News. “We’re dealing with one of the largest armies in the world. This is a very different situation and things could go crazy quickly.” Russia and Ukraine said on Thursday night in Berlin that no breakthrough had been achieved after a day of talks with French and German officials. Talks between the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, also failed to make progress. Why was there no breakthrough? Russia and Ukraine continued to hold different interpretations of the 2015 Minsk agreement aimed at ending the separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine, said the Russian envoy Dmitry Kozak. How quickly could Russia launch an attack? Moscow has gathered more than 135,000 soldiers on Ukraine’s borders in Russia and Belarus, military analysts say. Some believe nearly all the key elements are in now place for an attack. US urges Canada to end trucker blockade The US has urged Canada to use federal powers to end the protest blockade of the Ambassador Bridge, where protesters opposed to vaccine mandates are causing deeping economic disruption. The “Freedom Convoy” of truckers opposed to a vaccinate-or-quarantine mandate for cross-border drivers began blocking North America’s busiest international land border crossing on Monday. The US homeland security secretary, Alejandro Mayorkas, and the transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg, urged the Canadian government “to use federal powers to resolve this situation at our joint border”. The mayor of Windsor, Ontario, Drew Dilkens, said that police near the Ambassador Bridge had begun receiving reinforcements, saying: “[If] the protesters don’t leave, there will have to be a path forward,” he told CNN. “If that means physically removing them, that means physically removing them, and we’re prepared to do that.” What else is being done to end the blockade? Windsor is seeking an injunction from Ontario superior court to have the protest ended, Dilkens said, adding he continues to search for a peaceful resolution. What are the protesters demanding? As the “Freedom Convoy” protest in Ottawa enters its third week, the movement has broadened to demand an end to all Covid public health measures. QAnon candidates vie for election official roles in swing states Far-right conspiracy theory movement QAnon appears to have begun a nationwide attempt to seize control of the US election process in key swing states ahead of the 2024 election. At least 15 candidates associated with the movement, which maintains the lie that the 2020 election was “stolen” from Donald Trump, are running to serve as chief election officials in crucial battleground states. At least eight of them are working in coalition, sharing tactics and ideas on how to radically reshape the election system. “This is the way that QAnon could trigger a constitutional crisis,” said Alex Kaplan, senior researcher at the watchdog Media Matters for America who is a close observer of the conspiracy theory. “QAnon is linked to an effort to recruit and elect candidates to positions directly controlling election administrations, and given their ties to harming democracy, that is very concerning.” How could the candidates subvert democracy? If any are elected, they would be in a strong position to distort or even overturn state election results in favour of their preferred candidate, which could sway the national result. In other news … Federal protections for gray wolves have been restored in much of the US after being scrapped during the Trump administration. Wildlife advocates have hailed it as a significant conservation success, while the move has angered livestock farmers. Jerry Harris, the former star of the Netflix documentary series Cheer, has pleaded guilty to federal charges of receiving child sexual abuse images and soliciting sex from minors. Harris, 22, pleaded guilty to two of seven felony counts against him and is scheduled to be sentenced on 28 June. The spread of the mysterious Havana syndrome has seriously affected US morale and ability to recruit diplomats, the head of the American Foreign Service Association has said. Recruits are asking whether the government would provide for them if they became ill with the syndrome, which involves long-term loss of balance and cognitive function. Stat of the day: Texas law causes abortions to drop by 60% in state The number of abortions carried out by registered practitioners in Texas dropped by 60% within a month of the state passing the most restrictive abortion law seen in decades, new figures show. The law, which bans the procedure once cardiac activity is detected and makes no exception for incest or rape, has forced some patients to travel hundreds of miles to clinics in other states, resulting in a backlog of appointments in some places. Don’t miss this: finding refuge in Chernobyl Despite the continued threat of radiation that persists 35 years after the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl, refugees displaced by the eight-year conflict in the Donbas region have moved into abandoned housing near the forbidden zone. Photojournalist Gaëlle Girbes documents the lives of Ukrainians seeking refuge in a largely deserted area with almost no infrastructure and no jobs. Last Thing: Experience: I found a tiny frog in my salad – now he’s my friend After Simon Curtis found a tiny tree frog in a box of lettuce while preparing a salad, he did what any concerned pet-owner-to-be would do: asked Twitter for advice. His phone blew up with people invested in the story, and after consulting a frog specialist, he decided the best option was to keep the animal, which he named Tony, as a pet. Curtis describes him as living “a chill existence … He’s mischievous, incorrigible and precious.” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comFrom oral contraceptives to proposals to edit their DNA, efforts to control the UK’s invasive grey squirrel population have become increasingly elaborate. But a growing number of chefs and conservationists have a far simpler idea, which they see as part of the trend in ethical dining: eat them. “My original starting point with grey squirrel was taste. But it’s also great for the environment,” says Paul Wedgwood, one of Scotland’s leading chefs, whose restaurant on Edinburgh’s Royal Mile has had grey squirrel on the menu since 2008. Wedgwood has even made haggis from the North American rodent that has driven the local extinction of the native red across much of England and Wales. “It’s mellow, nutty and a bit gamey. It’s just a really nice flavour, and it’s easy to match. Anyone who’s doing rabbit could just easily swap in squirrel,” he says. Wedgwood is not alone among chefs putting invasive species on the menu. At Dai Due restaurant in Austin, Texas, owner and chef Jesse Griffiths is encouraging Americans to hunt and eat more of the millions of feral hogs that cause billions of dollars of damage to farmland. In the Bahamas, Michelin-starred chef José Andrés is serving up invasive lionfish to help protect reefs in the Caribbean. At Fallow in London, chefs are planning to cook king crab, the latest arrival on British shores that has sparked fears for native brown crab and scallop populations. The concept of “invasivorism” was developed more than two decades ago by Joe Roman, a conservation biologist at the University of Vermont. “With this idea, humans are a form of biological control. Humans are amazing predators: whether it’s eating the grey squirrel in Britain or the European green crab in the US, we know eating them can have an impact on populations,” he says. The spread of invasive species counts among the major drivers of extinctions and biodiversity loss on Earth, according to leading scientists. Not all non-native organisms become invasive, but those that do spread rapidly and outcompete native wildlife, often due to the absence of predators, causing financial and ecological damage. Examples include mice on Gough Island in the south Atlantic where the rodents eat albatross chicks in their nests, and the Burmese python in Florida’s Everglades, which has devastated mammal populations. Invasive species are also expensive: a Queen’s University Belfast study revealed this week that they have caused £878bn of damage worldwide since the 1960s, a bill set to spiral this century. Roman runs the website EatTheInvaders.org, hosting recipes for invasive species in the US that include the green iguana, wakame seaweed and nutria or coypu – a river rat. “We need to say from the beginning that the goal is to reduce these populations – not to create a market for them. We don’t want people to say ‘wow, this crayfish is really good. I wish we had it in this river system’ or something like that,” Roman says. “In this time of globalisation, we’re moving animals, plants and fungi around all the time that have ecological impacts. We are trying to work against that.” Critics are wary of how effective invasivorism can be at achieving its aims, with evidence the “eat them to beat them” approach can have the opposite effect for some species. A 2020 paper on catching invasive signal crayfish populations in North Yorkshire, where Britain’s only native crayfish is being driven out, found that traps were likely ineffective and helped spread the crayfish. Despite the crayfish being promoted by chefs including Gordon Ramsay, the report found that less than 2.5% of invasive crayfish were large enough to be caught in traditional traps, which could harm other creatures. Then there is the question of scale. The Wild Meat Company, which sells game from Suffolk, England, sold about 10,000 grey squirrels last year, hardly enough to dent the population of 2.7 million in the UK. In the US, a 2014 review found that while eating invasive species can reduce populations and raise public awareness, it might inadvertently provide disincentives to their eradication. It offered an 11-point strategy for using invasivorism effectively, along with following local laws on harvesting species, which differ around the world. While proponents acknowledge it is not possible to turn all invasive flora and fauna into gourmet food, they say that taste is key to success. At Miya’s, a sustainable sushi restaurant in New Haven, Connecticut, head chef Bun Lai developed a dedicated invasive species menu and won the White House champions of change award in 2016 for his sustainable food. “If we ate invasive animals such as boar and nutria instead of cows, we would have a significant impact on climate change because of their greenhouse gas emissions,” says Lai, who now runs sustainable sushi pop-ups after the closure of the restaurant in 2021. “From a swamp rodent called nutria to python, poisonous cane toad and a plethora of invasive plants, I have hunted, fished and foraged many invasive species. People’s tastes are constantly changing,” he says. “In my sushi platters for decades, I’d include non-conventional ingredients. Rather than tuna, farmed salmon, eel, and yellowtail, I’d use invasive carp with black soldier fly larvae, invasive blue catfish, invasive lionfish, edible weeds, invasive plants, and organic vegetables and fruit. For years, people would tell me every day that the sushi I was making wasn’t sushi, but over time it became more accepted.” In the UK, time will tell whether Japanese knotweed vodka and muntjac deer burgers become part of the measures to limit invasive species. Not all invasive animals are classed as game, and therefore the public is not free to shoot, trap and consume every invasive species. But for fine diners in Scotland, grey squirrel, which it is legal to kill humanely, is already a firm favourite. “The demand is there from customers,” says Wedgwood. “I had a guy fly in from Switzerland who ordered a squirrel tasting menu. A six-course menu … just with squirrel!” Squirrel rack, confit jersey royal potatoes, carrot puree, wild garlic Recipe by Paul Wedgwood. Serves 2 2 squirrel racks – room temperature 2 jersey royal potatoes 1 clove garlic 1 sprig rosemary 500ml goose fat 1 large carrot 50g butter, diced in small pieces 2 wild garlic leaves 50ml oil Salt and pepper Peel the potatoes and gently fry in a little goose fat to add colour. Transfer to a small saucepan, add the garlic and rosemary and enough goose fat to cover the potatoes. Place on a medium heat. Bring the fat to a simmer, reduce the heat and gently simmer for about 30 minutes or until the potatoes are soft and cooked through. Peel the carrot and slice. Place in a small pan with a little salt and cover with water. Bring to the boil and cook until the carrot is soft. Drain and reserve the cooking liquor. Using a hand blender, blitz the carrot with the diced butter and season with salt and white pepper. Adjust the consistency if required with the cooking liquor and leave somewhere warm. Blitz the wild garlic with the oil and pass through a fine sieve. In a small frying pan, take two spoonfuls of the potato confit fat and heat until it is just beginning to smoke. Turn the heat down slightly and carefully add the squirrel racks and baste for about two minutes. Remove the racks from the pan, season with salt and pepper, and leave somewhere warm. Add a spoonful of the carrot puree to a plate, remove the potatoes from the fat and place on an absorbent cloth for a few seconds. Season with salt, then add to the plate. Place the squirrel rack on top and drizzle with wild garlic oil. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresToday in a nutshell: We said farewell to Shaun White, Lara Gut-Behrami finally got a medal, Nils van der Poel smashed a world record and Irene Schouten is hopefully having a nice rest after destroying the field in the speed skating late yesterday Next up: There’s more curling and ice hockey today, and then tomorrow we can anticipate the US v Canada in the men’s ice hockey After his final Olympics appearance retiring snowboarding legend Shaun White said of the younger generation: “I don’t want to beat these guys anymore. I want to sponsor them.” White first won Olympic gold when aged 19 in 2006. This year’s gold went to Japan’s Ayumu Hirano. Australia’s Scotty James took silver, while Switzerland’s Jan Scherrer took the bronze. “I just tried to ski today, nothing more, nothing less,” Switzerland’s Lara Gut-Behrami said when asked if her previous near misses had played on her mind. “Sometimes that’s the problem: we just try to think too much and try to do something different at the Olympics.” The 30-year-old won gold today in the women’s super-G after two consecutive agonising fourth-placed finishes at previous Games. Her compatriot Michelle Gisin took bronze, Austria’s Mirjam Puchner was second, 0.22 seconds behind Gut-Behrami. Mikaela Shiffrin finished ninth after failing to finish in either of her two previous races in Beijing. On the endurance side of things, Finland’s Iivo Niskanen dominated the men’s 15km classic cross country. He finished just over 23 seconds ahead of Alexander Bolshunov of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC). Marte Olsbu Roeiseland won gold for Norway in the women’s 7.5km biathlon. The future of 15-year-old Russian figure skater Kamila Valieva remains in limbo despite the Independent Testing Agency confirming that she tested positive for the banned substance trimetazidine on Christmas Day. Whether she is allowed to compete or not – along with whether the Russian team can keep its team gold – is still being contested in a courtroom. Irene Schouten is just a phenomenon on ice. Yesterday she added the 5,000m speed skating gold to her earlier 3,000m victory, 4.67 seconds ahead of Canada’s Isabelle Weidemann. It wasn’t just a second gold – it was a second Olympic record in the space of a few days, breaking a mark that was set in Salt Lake City by Claudia Pechstein 20 years ago. Nils van der Poel of Sweden was also a record-breaker, setting a new world fastest time in the men’s 10,000m as he took a second gold of these Games. Things you might have missed The mixed teams aerials final in the freestyle skiing yesterday went to the US, with China in second and Canada third. There was no surprise in the result of the first quarter-final of the women’s ice hockey, as the US progressed 4-1 at the expense of the Czech Republic. However, the Czech team had taken the lead, and once again the US women unleashed attack after attack without scoring prolifically. “You’ve just got to keep shooting – doesn’t matter how many shots you’ve taken, one’s going to go in,” four-time Olympian Hilary Knight said after the match. “These goalies are great at this level and we really have to challenge them.” If it is the luge, then it is probably a gold medal for Germany. The team relay competition yesterday was no different. You might also enjoy: Reality bites for China’s ice hockey ringers on Winter Olympic debut ITA confirms Russia’s Kamila Valieva tested positive for banned substance Team GB’s struggles go on with problems for skeleton crew Australia’s Scotty James wins silver medal in snowboard halfpipe The briefing’s picture of the day There’s a relentless amount of curling going on. So far in the round robin stage, in the women’s contest Switzerland and the US remain unbeaten after three matches. In the men’s, Sweden are unbeaten after three, and Canada have a 100% record after their two games. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Friday 11 February 8.05pm Curling – Great Britain face boring-trousers-Norway in the pick of the last session 🥇 8.20pm-9.55pm Skeleton – the men will go in their final two runs to decide the medals 🥇 8.43pm Short track – we have the women’s 1,000 metres final 🥇 9.10pm Ice hockey – Canada v Sweden in the women’s quarter-final 🏒 Tomorrow – Saturday 12 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm – roll up, roll up for all day curling with 11 preliminary matches 🥌 10am Snowboard – the mixed team cross event, with the final scheduled to begin at 10.50am 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – in the women’s competition there are two quarter-finals: ROC v Switzerland (12.10pm) and Finland v Japan (4.40pm). The US face Canada in the biggest game for the men on the day – that one is at 12.10pm too 🏒 3.30pm Cross-country skiing – the women do a 4x5km relay 🥇 4pm Speed skating – the women’s team pursuit quarter-finals are first, followed by the men’s 500m 🥇 5pm Biathlon – the men will do their 10km sprint. I remain unconvinced anybody actually “sprints” on skis and especially not for 10km but what do I know? 🥇 6pm–8pm Ski jumping – the opposite of the normal hill is disappointingly not the weird hill, it is the large hill. The men are jumping off it today 🥇 7pm Figure skating – the rhythm dance section of the ice dance competition ⛸ 8.20pm and 9.55pm Skeleton – the final two rounds for the women 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6.15pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 6 🥈 3 🥉 5 total: 14 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 6 🥈 3 🥉 0 total: 9 3 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 5 🥈 2 🥉 2 total: 9 4 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 4 🥈 6 🥉 4 total: 14 5 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 4 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 10 6 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 4 🥈 4 🥉 1 total: 9 7 🇨🇳 China 🥇 3 🥈 3 🥉 0 total: 6 8 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 2* 🥈 4 🥉 6 total: 12 9 🇮🇹 Italy 🥇 2🥈 4 🥉 4 total: 10 10 🇯🇵 Japan 🥇 2 🥈 2 🥉 4 total: 8 [*The ‘Not Russia’ total includes the team figure skating gold which is yet to be formally presented] As we head into the second weekend of the Winter Games don’t forget you can get in touch at martin.belam@theguardian.com. The last word Those latest terrible Olympic skating news have honestly touched me. Kamila Valieva is a young girl and child prodigy, whose highly difficult performances and grace enchanted the whole world at only 15, a minor, depending on adults and she is not to blame here. It is a shame, and the responsible adults should be banned from the sport forever – skating legend Katarina Witt posting on her social mediaAt one of Italy’s darkest moments in the pandemic, the government introduced a list of draconian rules to halt the outbreak of Covid, including which sports Italians would be allowed to practise. Among the activities the authorities considered safe were a few Italians barely knew. One was padel, a fast-paced racket sport popular in Spain, similar to tennis but with a dash of squash thrown in. For Italians, it was love at first smash. According to data from the Padel National Observatory, since early 2020 the number of padel courts in Italy has increased fivefold, up to almost 5,000. Padel schools and clubs have tripled, and the game looks likely to become the most practised sport after football in Italy. “No sport in Italy has ever had such success in such a short time,” said Salvatore Palumbo, 35, a Sicilian former under-18 tennis champion and soon to become a padel instructor. “Italians had to deal with one of the strictest lockdowns in the world. Playing sports was the only relief and a reason to leave the house.” Sports such as football and basketball were in effect banned for months because they were considered contact sports and therefore risky, while gyms and swimming pools were shut down. “At this point there were few options left, such as tennis and padel,” said Palumbo. “But if the former requires lengthy technical preparation, the latter is much easier to learn and lots of fun. Success was immediate.” Padel was invented in 1969 by a Mexican businessman, Enrique Corcuera, who wanted to build a tennis court at his holiday home in Acapulco. Not having enough space on his property, he decided to make a smaller court and to use the walls that delimited the area as an integral part of the game. Padel is almost always played in doubles. The courts, about 25% smaller than tennis courts, are surrounded almost entirely by walls, part glass and part metal mesh. Unlike in tennis, the ball remains playable if, after being hit on the ground, it then hits the walls. By the time Italy began to ease Covid restrictions, padel had taken hold. But, faced with hundreds of thousands of people eager to play, the few hundred courts around Italy were overwhelmed. “At one point demand far exceeded supply,” said Edoardo Scarlata, 38, a lawyer from Sicily’s capital, Palermo. “In Sicily there were already dozens of padel players, but [later in] the pandemic they became thousands. So last year, with a group of friends, we decided we had to seize this opportunity and invest in this sport.” Scarlata is now one of the owners of City Padel, a club with several courts in a residential neighbourhood near the centre of Palermo. Today, Palermo has about 100 padel courts. (There are only 90 in the UK.) Many of these have supplanted five-a-side football pitches. Padel in Italy is officially recognised as a discipline of tennis and is governed by the Italian Tennis Federation (FIT) which, given the incredible growth of this sport, broadcasts padel matches every day of the year on its TV channel, Super Tennis. “The growth of padel in Italy follows in some way the growth of tennis in the country,” said FIT’s president, Angelo Binaghi. “And it is a blessing the tennis federation is its governing body, otherwise the risk was that padel courts would replace tennis ones, and one sport risking damaging the other.” Matteo De Simone, 44, a padel player and the club manager of City Padel, said the secret of the sport’s strength was that “it is a suitable sport for everyone, of all ages, and this has contributed to making padel not only a sport but a real movement in Italy. Among the players who attend our courts, there are children aged six up to men aged 80. And above all, there are many women.” At the professional level, Italian women outcompete men, said Carlo Ferrara, 50, the founder of the Mr Padel Paddle website and owner of the My Padel F84 club in Rome. “There are no Italians in the top 100 rankings of men in the world, while there are seven Italian women in the female rankings.” Chiara Pappacena, 27, who is 61st in the World Padel Tour ranking, said Italian women had long faced discrimination in the sport. “This is finally changing. I am very proud to see very young girls and women over 60 on the padel courts today.” Padel continues to grow in other European countries, such as Sweden, where its popularity has not gone unnoticed by the online dating app Tinder, which created its very first padel court as a meetup location on a rooftop in Stockholm. The sport is most popular, however, in Spain, where padel courts have long been a common sight. Nacho Perulero, a spokesperson for the Spanish Pádel Federation, estimates the sport is now played by about 5 million people in Spain. Here, too, the pandemic has served only to fuel an “exponential growth” in padel playing, Perulero said. “It is practically impossible to reserve a court in any big Spanish city these days.” The rules of padel Thick, smooth and perforated paddles that resemble beach tennis rackets are used for padel, which is overwhelmingly played in doubles. The courts are surrounded almost entirely by walls, part glass and part metal mesh. The scoring is the same as in tennis, butthe ball can be played off the walls. When serving, the ball must bounce once on the floor and hit at waist level. Players can reach over the net with an arm or racket when hitting a ball but if the racket hits the net – or if the ball hits the wall or fencing before it hits the floor – it is a foul. After the ball hits the floor, it may hit the wall or fencing once or more before it is played back. Out-of-court plays are authorised, leading to some dramatic flourishes.Little remains of the street where Kenneth Branagh was raised. It is the day after the Oscar nominations and Branagh has professed he is “dazed and delighted” and in a “beautiful state of shock” over the seven Oscar nominations his film Belfast has received. A BBC radio crew goes house to house to inquire about the parties planned for Oscar night. But the pickings are thin. Most of Mountcollyer Street, including No 96 where Branagh grew up, was demolished 10 years ago. It’s pretty much a wasteland. Buddleia competes with moss for the cracks in the street, and a so-called peace wall and 3-metre-high galvanised steel fencing stretching along both sides of the road suggest dereliction and years of neglect. But the place is packed full of memories for those who remain and those who, like Branagh, moved away as the Troubles began in 1969. Fond recollections of playing on the street until dark, of running in and out of each other’s houses, Catholic and Protestant. But also memories of the intimidation, of the petrol bombs to get Catholic families “put out” of the area – all depicted in this semi-autobiographical film now destined for world acclaim. “I cried, my wife cried,” says Moore Armstong who grew up at No 92, two doors down from the Branaghs. “When the hand-to-hand fighting started, I just sat in the cinema; the tears. I just cried. It was scary and it was reminiscent and realistic. “I didn’t see fighting in Mountcollyer Street because we moved to the Ardoyne by the time the Troubles broke out, but I saw fighting there too. And it was just like in the film.” Like Branagh he moved permanently to England, a journey many of his generation underwent. “It was like going from hell to heaven,” he says. An older woman who lived four doors up from the Branaghs is initially reluctant to chat. She doesn’t want to revisit the past but has heard all about the film. “That was the way it was back then. It was terrible. There was violence on both sides. People were told to get out of their houses. And you just did what you were told. You were just glad you weren’t shot or kneecapped,” says Marilyn. “I remember from my bedroom window seeing a large group of men who had barricaded the soldiers against the fence and throwing stones and petrol bombs. I just thought: is this real life or am I watching a movie?” Those who did not live through the Troubles or in Northern Ireland will have little understanding of the horrors of what many think was a civil war. “I worked in town in Donegall Street and a bomb went off,” Marilyn says, remembering an IRA atrocity in 1972. “A bin lorry just came and they were throwing bits of legs and stuff into it. I couldn’t go and watch that film.” Not everything is a faithful representation of Branagh’s childhood street, which was recreated on a studio set in England because of Covid restrictions during filming in 2020. In real life there was just one side to the street, recalled 92-year-old Peggy who lived a few doors away from Branagh. The terrace of red bricks was a mixture of “kitchen houses” – local slang for two-up two-downs with outdoor toilets, which Branagh’s grandparents lived in – and the bigger “parlour houses”, including No 96, that had sitting rooms and indoor toilets. A mural of Northern Ireland’s second most famous footballer, Danny Blanchflower, is also a forgotten memory or fiction for most. When Armstrong was small it bore the words “Sexy girls wear frilly knickers”. “I remember it very well because I didn’t understand what ‘sexy’ was and I remember asking my mother. She told me it meant ‘girls who were not married’,” he recalls. For some it is a glimpse of the poverty as well as the violence of the time that Branagh has got spot on. “There’s a scene when someone is there sitting on the toilet having a cup of tea and chatting and there’s newspaper hanging on the wall. My grandad used to do that. He would cut out the newspaper in triangles and hang it on a butcher’s hook and that was the toilet roll,” says Clara Stratton, whose mother was a first cousin of Branagh’s mother, Frances Harper. They lived 2 miles away and she says the sectarianism was the same. “I thought the movie was so sad. We had Catholic families that were also ‘put out’. Neighbours rallied round and told them they were not to go, just like in the film, but the people who’d come for them would come from another part of town. How to blessed God did we live in those days. It was just unbelievable,” she says. Branagh has said the film is not an autobiography but inspired by his memories and “a look at a people and a place in tumult” through the eyes of Buddy, the central character of the movie at nine years old, the same age as Branagh was when his parents moved to England. • This article was amended on Saturday 12 February. The article originally referred to Moore Armstrong as Moore Kennedy. This has been corrected.Every year, after the nominations for the Academy Awards are announced, our brethren at Guardian US drop their roundup of Oscarbait failures, highlighting those poor films that didn’t earn any nominations despite trying the damnedest to do so. You know the type: big stars, lavish production values, a period setting, worthy subject matter, and a sense that they have been genetically engineered to win over Academy voters. This year, per the list, there seem to be more Oscarbait failures than ever: take your pick from Dear Evan Hansen, George Clooney’s The Tender Bar, a Mark Wahlberg drama whose existence I wasn’t aware of until 38 seconds ago, and not one but two Ridley Scott films. There’s even that most dead cert of Oscarbait dead certs: a biopic, in the form of Jennifer Hudson-starring Aretha Franklin life story Respect. Strange days indeed. Something seems to have changed among Oscar voters in recent years: the bait is being set but the Academy doesn’t seem to be gobbling it up in the same way. Instead its appetite has become more adventurous. Take the last two best picture winners: a virtuosic Korean comedy-thriller (Parasite) and an impressionistic road trip movie whose cast – bar one admittedly stellar name, and a few respected character players – was pretty much entirely made up of non-actors (Nomadland). This year’s runaway favourite, meanwhile, is Jane Campion’s brooding tale of mangled masculinity, The Power of the Dog. It has common ground with more traditional winners of the past – a garlanded director, a lead actor (Benedict Cumberbatch) seemingly hellbent on winning a best actor gong, the sort of trad period setting beloved by older Academy voters – but in other ways it feels about as far from Oscarbait as possible: too opaque, too understated and just a bit too twisted for middlebrow tastes. Yet it earned a whopping 12 nominations, as many as perhaps the definitive example of an Oscarbait movie, The King’s Speech, managed. Indeed, The Power of the Dog looks a positively safe choice when placed next to another of this year’s nominees, the Japanese drama Drive My Car – a two-hour 59-minute Murakami adaptation that muses meanderingly on death, creativity and Chekhov. Even the token blockbuster in the nominations list, Dune, feels about as arthouse-y as a blockbuster can get. This isn’t to say that more typical ‘awards-y’ films are entirely out in the cold – Belfast, for one, definitely ticks that box – but there does seem to be an interesting broadening of tastes being exhibited, most likely a result of the Academy’s decision to expand its member base, making it younger, more diverse and international. Suddenly the prospect of wins for foreign language dramas, stories you haven’t seen before on screen, or films directed by people who aren’t white blokes (should Power of the Dog win best picture it would be the first time there have been two back to back wins by women in the category) feels far more possible. And, at a time when mainstream cinema seems to be an endless procession of superhero sequels, that is something to cling on to. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Relatives and friends of the serial killer Stephen Port’s victims have welcomed Dame Cressida Dick’s resignation, saying they had no confidence in her leadership after her refusal to accept prejudice played a part in the inept police investigations into the four deaths. Sarah Sak, the mother of fashion student Anthony Walgate, 23, Port’s first victim, said: “I’m really pleased. Week in, week out the Met is in the news. It’s about time somebody came in and took control.”. During a recent meeting with Dick, Sak said she told the commissioner that she “truly believed the officers who originally dealt with Anthony’s case were homophobic”. Sak said: “And she gave me this big long spiel about how diverse the Met is, how many gay officers, etc, etc. She just didn’t believe there was any homophobia. I felt she just paid lip service to me.” “Somebody has got to get a grip and not be a political puppet,” said Sak, whose book of her experience, A Life Stolen, is published next week. “She was in charge. She was getting paid to be in charge, and it was all crumbling around her feet. She had no option, I think, but to resign.’” A jury found Port, who fatally drug-raped victims he met on dating sites, might have been stopped sooner and lives saved but for police failings. For legal reasons, the jury was instructed it could not comment on whether prejudice, discrimination or homophobia played any part. The Met has consistently denied any prejudice. John Pape, a friend of Port’s second victim Gabriel Kovari, 22, who accused the Met of “institutional homophobia” in his evidence to the inquests, said: “I feel relieved and gratified that someone in power, Sadiq Khan, has taken decisive action. “It feels like somebody has got the message that we need radical change within the culture of the Met in order to restore confidence.” Because of the legal scope of the inquest preventing the jury from being able to consider prejudice as a factor, Pape said of Dick: “She totally hid behind that.” He claimed Dick had told a recent London assembly meeting Pape attended that the coroner had found there was no evidence of homophobia. “That’s was my tipping point. I thought, ‘Well, she has to go.’ “It feels like her instinct is always to defend the Met from the public. But the deal is we give them powers to arrest us, to use violence against us, and in return we are supposed to feel protected. But after the experience I’ve had with the Port case, as a gay Londoner, I don’t feel protected and I wonder who does. “Their core values are supposed to be professionalism, integrity and courage. And I think by not acknowledging that prejudice played a part in the Port case, I feel she was unable to embody those values, and as such it is right that she has gone.” Pape recently attended a meeting with the LGBT+ Met police advisory group, “and there were a couple of young LGBT+ people there who said they would now not go to the police if they had a problem because they had lost faith in the Metropolitan police. That’s downright dangerous if people have lost faith to the extent that they wouldn’t report crimes to the police.” Ricky Waumsley, the partner of Port’s youngest victim, Daniel Whitworth, a chef aged 21, said he “didn’t have much faith” in Dick when he met her just before Christmas, and that she “definitely needed to go”. “There’s so much homophobic, sexist and racist stuff going on within the Met police right now. I don’t think she is capable of sorting out these issues,” he told Radio 4’s Today programme. He is calling for an investigation into the officers who handled the case to be reopened.Harry Randall and Alex Dombrandt have been selected to start for England against Italy on Sunday as Eddie Jones rings the changes. Jones has made six changes in total, with Randall, Dombrandt and Jack Nowell all starting in an eye-catching XV as England seek to get their campaign back on track after last Saturday’s defeat away to Scotland. Jamie George and Will Stuart come into the side, as does Charlie Ewels, with Maro Itoje shifting to blindside flanker in the absence of the injured Lewis Ludlam. Tom Curry again captains the side from openside flanker, with Courtney Lawes still sidelined while Ben Youngs is set to equal Jason Leonard’s England caps record of 114 assuming he comes off the bench. Leicester’s Ollie Chessum is also named among the replacements with the 21-year-old set for a debut if he comes on. Ellis Genge, Henry Slade and Luke Cowan-Dickie – who is among the replacements – have all been named as vice-captains. Jones’s decision to select Randall at scrum-half is a show of intent from the head coach. The 24-year-old was an unused replacement against Scotland but is a livewire No 9 and caught the eye in his two previous appearances last summer, dovetailing nicely with Marcus Smith. With Dombrandt preferred to Sam Simmonds at No 8 it is an attack-minded side Jones has picked with the Harlequins back-row coming in for his first Six Nations start. Nowell, who was a late replacement against Scotland, comes on to the left wing with Joe Marchant shifting to his more familiar position of outside-centre and Elliot Daly dropping to the bench. Itoje’s move to the back-row paves the way for Ewels to join Nick Isiekwe in the second-row while the selection of George and Stuart to start will allow Jones to call on the more dynamic Cowan-Dickie and Kyle Sinckler as the game opens up against Italy. Genge keeps his place at loosehead prop while Smith, Slade, Max Malins and Freddie Steward all keep their places. Joe Marler is again on the bench with Cowan-Dickie, Sinckler, Chessum, Simmonds, Youngs, George Ford and Daly. Jones said: “We’ve set ourselves the target of playing really well and lighting up Rome. We’ve made some changes and this is the best side to face Italy. We want to start fast and take the game to them. It’s been a difficult week, but the players have bounced back well, trained hard and are ready to put on a good performance on Sunday.”Cressida Dick was “the most defensive and dismissive” leader of a British police force, with problems worsening under her tenure as Scotland Yard’s commissioner, the leader of the National Black Police Association (NBPA) has said. Dick announced her departure on Thursday after a falling out with London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, who lacked confidence that she could improve an allegedly misogynistic, racist and closed culture blighting Britain’s biggest force. Insp Andy George, the president of the NBPA, praised Dick’s decades of public service but said it was right she should stand down. George, a former firearms officer based in Northern Ireland, said Dick had been brought down by her “achilles heel” of wanting to protect the Met’s reputation. He said the next commissioner needed to end a “culture of fear” and a “toxic culture” in the Met. The ousting of Dick triggered criticism of Khan, praise for the outgoing commissioner, as well as relief that Dick’s tumultuous commissionership was coming to an end. George said: “The news that Dame Cressida Dick has resigned from leading the Metropolitan police service has come with great sadness across policing. Her devotion to officers and staff was clear for all to see but this was ultimately her achilles heel and her desire to protect the reputation of the force has prevented the wholesale cultural reforms that are much needed. “The vast majority of police officers put on their uniform and do their best to protect the public but time and again we have seen a culture of fear within the [Met]. A fear of challenging inappropriate behaviour and even when that behaviour is challenged, it is rarely dealt with robustly. The officer reporting discrimination can often find themselves being targeted for speaking out. “Defending the indefensible and failing to tackle the widespread issues of racism, misogyny and bullying allows bullies and poor behaviour to thrive and does a disservice to the many hardworking police officers across London and the UK. I have the privilege of speaking to many leaders in policing and I found Dame Cressida Dick to be the most defensive and dismissive leader I meet.” However, critics of Khan said Londoners were less safe as a result of Dick’s departure. Asked if Dick’s departure meant Londoners were less safe, the chair of the London assembly’s police and crime committee, Susan Hall, said it did, and pointed to the turmoil that would now follow. She said the mayor was wrong to have put Dick on notice. “Ninety-nine per cent of officers are really good, very good brave officers and they have been absolutely rocked by the latest IOPC [Independent Office for Police Conduct] report into misogyny. They need confidence. They need support and to have done this in this way is completely wrong,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “It will leave a void at the top as opposed to a properly managed handover, which is no way to run a service like this, no way to run the Metropolitan police.” Last Wednesday Khan had put Dick on notice that she had to rapidly reform Scotland Yard or would lose his support. His confidence in her was shaken to breaking point by a scandal at Charing Cross police station where officers shared racist, sexist, misogynistic and Islamophobic messages. Two of the officers investigated were promoted, while nine were left to serve in the Met. Her resignation comes less than three weeks after the Met announced a criminal inquiry into lockdown parties in Downing Street. Dick, the first female leader in the Met’s 193-year history, has led the force since 2017, with her five-year term as commissioner due to end in April this year. Her contract was extended by two years to 2024 only last September by the home secretary, Priti Patel, a decision endorsed by Khan. In a statement Dick made it clear she had been forced out: “It is with huge sadness that, following contact with the mayor of London today, it is clear that the mayor no longer has sufficient confidence in my leadership to continue. He has left me no choice but to step aside as commissioner of the Metropolitan police service.” Khan in effect picked Dick as commissioner in 2017, thrilled by the historic legacy of the first woman commissioner in the history of the Met, which was founded in 1829.Book now Having a healthy brain is crucial to our wellbeing and happiness. However, diseases of the brain and mental health are the most prevalent causes of death in the 21st century. In this masterclass with chartered psychologist Kimberley Wilson, you will discover, through evidence-based research, the secrets to a healthy brain, and how improving your brain health can significantly strengthen your mental and emotional resilience. Beginning with an overview of prevailing attitudes and common perceptions, Kimberley will reveal how and why your brain will greatly benefit from the same attention and care as your other organs. She will share what foods and nutrients the brain needs, where these come from, and what happens when there are imbalances in our diet. She will also discuss the crucial roles that sleep and exercise play in our brain health. This masterclass is essential for anyone who wants to learn how to nourish and protect their brain, and will feature exercises for you to take part in, and simple, practical tips helping you to start embracing these new and effective habits. Course content Brain disorders as leading causes of illness and death How modern psychiatry is still influenced by Descartes The role of prevention in mental vs physical health The unique structures and qualities of the human brain What builds our brains: fats and micronutrients Nutrition and stress resilience Benefits of aerobic, walking and resistance exercise Sleep problems and interventions Q&amp;A This course is for … Anyone with an interest in how the brain works, and who wants to learn how to protect their brain health Tutor profile Kimberley Wilson is a chartered psychologist with a Masters degree in nutrition, visiting lecturer and the author of How to Build a Healthy Brain, working in private practice in Central London. She is a former governor of the Tavistock and Portman NHS Mental Health Trust, and led the therapy service at HMP and YOI Holloway, then Europe’s largest women’s prison. Kimberley now hosts the BBC Radio 4 health science podcast Made of Stronger Stuff alongside Dr Xand van Tulleken. Kimberley is often recognised as a former finalist on the Great British Bake Off and was the featured mental health expert on several Channel 4 documentaries throughout 2020 about the impact of Covid-19. She is a regular contributor to Lorraine on ITV. Kimberley believes that the way we think about mental health – as separate from physical health – is flawed. Her philosophy of whole-body mental health is a comprehensive approach to mental health care, integrating evidence-based nutrition and lifestyle factors with psychological therapy. Kimberley’s latest book How to build a healthy brain is released on 3 March 2022. If you live in the UK, you can purchase a book and ticket for the combined price of £59.65 including P&amp;P. Details Book now Date: Thursday 24 March 2022 Times: 6.30pm-8.30pm (GMT) Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee) or £59.65 for book + ticket (plus £3.12 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm GMT | 7.30pm CET | 11.30am PDT | 2.30pm EDT You will be sent a link to the webinar 2 hours before the start time of 6.30pm (GMT). Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Brighton may be ninth but they are absolutely one of the hardest teams to beat this season. Only Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester City have lost fewer than Brighton’s tally of four. They restart after a three-week break without Dan Burn’s significant presence but with Graham Potter’s superior coaching it is unlikely to break the spell against Watford. Adam Webster has stepped up to replace Ben White so one imagines Potter has another in mind to burst on to the scene, or maybe just good old Lewis Dunk. Roy Hodgson’s side are in desperate need of a win after a run of 10 matches since their last under Claudio Ranieri but their mishmash of a squad is unlikely to pose too much of a threat to Brighton’s slimline but efficient side. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Vicarage Road Last season n/a Referee Jon Moss This season G15 Y29 R4 2.2 cards/game Odds H 3-1 A 13-11 D 23-10 WATFORD Subs from Elliot, Bachmann, Fletcher, Gosling, Hernández, Cleverley, Pedro, Kabasele, Rose, Sema, Sierralta, Louza, Masina, Ngakia, Troost-Ekong, Sarr, Baah, Etebo Doubtful Etebo (match fitness), Sarr (match fitness), Baah (ankle) Injured Nkoulou (hamstring, Mar) Suspended None Discipline Y39 R2 Form LLDLDL Leading scorer Dennis 8 BRIGHTON Subs from Steele, McGill, Alzate, Ferguson, March, Mac Allister, Trossard, Veltman, Caicedo, Duffy, Offiah Doubtful Trossard (Covid) Injured Sarmiento (hamstring, 26 Feb), Mwepu (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y39 R1 Form WDWDDD Leading scorer Maupay 7The This by Adam Roberts (Gollancz, £16.99) Imagine a social media app implanted in the roof of the mouth for more immersive connectivity. This one small step turns out to be a giant leap in human evolution, a sort of telepathy that brings everyone together as parts of one vast, gestalt consciousness. But is that really such a great idea? Roberts takes a classic trope of speculative fiction, combines it with current preoccupations and views the whole in the context of religious belief and Hegelian philosophy. The result is dazzlingly inventive, exciting, funny and addictively readable. All the White Spaces by Ally Wilkes (Titan, £8.99) This impressive debut is a vivid, immersive tale about a fictional British expedition to the Antarctic in 1919-20 – classic territory, but with a transgender perspective. The narrator is a teenage stowaway aiming to leave life as a girl behind, and begin again as Jonathan Morgan. This point of view effectively defamiliarises the standard narrative, as well as adding a layer of suspense, making for a gripping read. On top of that (although it comes halfway through the book) is the element of supernatural horror. Here, too, the author excels, creating a new sort of ghost story in the empty, icy wastes. The Embroidered Book by Kate Heartfield (HarperVoyager, £14.99) In 18th-century Europe, two little girls discover a hidden spellbook. By the time they are sent away to take up their roles as wives to foreign princes, the sisters are determined to become magisters, and use their secret powers for the good of their people. One, the new queen of Naples, achieves acceptance as the first female member of the local secret order, which jealously guards this hidden knowledge. The other, now known as Marie Antoinette, casts her lot with the people, and the rogue magisters. Heartfield has clearly done her research; the many historical figures who make up the cast of characters are depicted in convincing detail. The age of reason was also an age of secret societies, alchemists and self-styled magicians. In this absorbing novel, magic is a field of study like chemistry, but to do it takes considerable sacrifices, both physical and emotional. Focusing on two of the most famous and highly placed women in the late 18th century, Heartfield sustains a fine balance between history and fantasy. The Leviathan by Rosie Andrews (Raven, £14.99) There are so many literary historical novels that cross the border into supernatural fantasy that they are almost a genre in themselves: this haunting debut is a fine example. The plot is as surprising and sinuously twisting as the legendary sea monster of its title. In addition to the biblical references to this mysterious, powerful beast, Hobbes’s Leviathan points to a political subtext. Thomas Treadwell, an unwilling soldier in the English civil war, finds more trouble waiting for him at home, his father felled by a stroke and his sister accusing their servant of witchcraft. He considers himself a rational man, but reason alone can’t deal with a mounting death toll, and he’s forced to go for help to a distant kinsman, the poet John Milton, who eventually reveals the terrible choice he must make. More than just an entertaining fantasy, the novel offers a lesson about the importance of accepting responsibility. Echo by Thomas Olde Heuvelt (Hodder &amp; Stoughton, £16.99) The long-awaited new novel from the Dutch author of Hex is an ambitious, capacious work referencing books by Shirley Jackson, Clive Barker, HP Lovecraft and other gothic classics. The story, which circles around the mystery of a climbing accident in the Swiss Alps, is related through a variety of manuscripts, reports, notes and recordings, most narrated by the American Sam Avery and his Dutch husband, Nick Grevers, who claims amnesia about the disappearance of his climbing partner and the accident that sheared off half of his own face. It’s a long, rambling tale, containing everything from psychological suspense to cosmic horror. With moments of wonder as well as terror, it looks likely to be one of the highlights of this year’s horror scene. They by Kay Dick (Faber, £8.99) “They” are those who distrust imagination and individuality, think books and art should be destroyed, approve of television and social housing … This “lost masterpiece” was originally published in 1977. Although there is a cool, sinister edge to the stories, they don’t add up to much; the persecuted artists are a bit too self-righteous (and privileged), and the book shows its age. Ray Bradbury’s still-relevant Fahrenheit 451 is a much more coherent treatment of the theme.Booking Office 1869 lives inside St Pancras International, which is that rarest of British railway stations in that it’s a highly enjoyable one to linger in. Yes, Didcot Parkway will have its fans, but St Pancras is a destination in its own right, where splendid gothic 19th-century architecture meets shimmery luxury boutique shopping, and it’s also colonised by chic Parisians awaiting the Eurostar and enjoying the Tracey Emin light sculpture. At St Pancras, even the people clanking away on those public street pianos have a working knowledge of Ludovico Einaudi. That said, until now, I’ve never been truly excited by St Pancras’s food offering, although the humongous Wetherspoons, The Barrel Vault, on the ground floor is never anything short of heaving. However, the recent revamp of the Booking Office – a bistro on the first floor, but also accessible via the St Pancras hotel – is interesting for several reasons. At the helm is chef Patrick Powell, who is also behind one of London’s loveliest, and possibly most underrated fine dining experiences, Allegra at The Stratford next to the Olympic Park. Powell is a unique talent, and Allegra’s menu is ever-intoxicating, mixing hearty Irish cooking with intricate French technique and tangential modernity: fried oysters with ginger and seaweed, lobster vol-au-vent with buttered leeks, and chicken in vadouvan spices with pommes Pont Neuf and pickled jalapeños, to name just three. Powell is a fan of classic cooking, but he’s also a feeder and a creator of lavish comfort food. Powell’s menu at The Booking Office 1869 is less fancy-dan, but only marginally so. Yes, there is a house burger and a caesar salad, but there is also poussin roasted over coal, monkfish curry and slow-roast lamb in chermoula. It’s a menu that’s much more ostentatious than a railway station typically deserves, and it’s made all the more gloriously incongruent by Parisian interior designer Hugo Toro’s lavish rethink of the space. Behold, the 8m palm trees and the animal-print armchairs alongside turquoise tiling, which all combine to create a style vibe I’m calling Phileas Fogg Acid-Safari chic. What’s more, the place takes its cocktail list as seriously as the Savoy’s American Bar, so if you were to order, say, an Ol’ Signalman – made from pecan-infused bourbon, Cocchi Rosa and coconut bitters – a man will appear tableside with a blowtorch and start scorching the caramelised pecan nut garnish with both aplomb and due care for your eyebrows. Yes, we are dining in a railway station, but we’re not at the Delice de France kiosk any more, people. I mean, there’s even a raw bar with Irish oysters and tuna skewers with daikon. Those skewers, incidentally, are one of the best things on the menu: top-notch fresh sashimi, all rich with white soy, miso and sesame seeds. The moment I ate it, I thought, OK, this has heavy shades of Allegra. The same goes for the dainty gildas featuring salty anchovy, an olive and a pickled chilli, while the humbly named “fried chicken” turns out to be a painstakingly boned bird, breadcrumbed, deep-fried and served with a lime-infused yoghurt dip. Of all the starters, though, don’t miss out on the cashew hummus. Yes, I know: hummus. Bad hummus is soul-zapping, but good, silky, nutty, oily hummus, such as the one here, is an emotional experience, plus it is topped with a soft-boiled egg and wisps of sliced pickled radish. A Tuscan brussels sprout salad follows with dried chicken skin, dried cranberries and fresh pecorino, all unusual partners for sprouts, which are perhaps a little al dente if you’re planning to mix in polite society afterwards. A plate of cured salmon, chopped and served tartare style, comes with a rösti, the sliced potato erected into a fabulous and delicious turbo-chip. I’ve had similar elsewhere, sure, but I will never tire of spud-based architecture. The Booking Office is not a sedate, genteel restaurant; it is a decidedly lively, slightly noisy, serious cocktail bar that’s filled with well-heeled commuters and guests from the St Pancras hotel, and that boasts one of the best menus within a two-mile radius, an area where competition is fierce yet very hit-and-miss. I couldn’t resist trying Powell’s “fried fish sandwich”, which turns out to be breadcrumbed halibut slices in a glossy steamed white bun with spicy homemade tartare containing fistfuls of gherkin; underneath the bonnet of the bun lies a thick layer of ready-salted crisps. Pudding was a slice of salted caramel tart that, while very edible, was perhaps not the most exciting or freshest I’ve ever eaten, and I still regret not opting for the rhubarb brioche doughnut with cinnamon cream. But I will go back, because it’s in St Pancras station, which I pass through several times a month, along with what feels like the rest of the planet during rush hour. I can’t guarantee that it’ll be any calmer in the Booking Office, but you’ll get properly fed and they’ll make you a very good cocktail. • Booking Office 1869 St Pancras Station, Euston Road, London NW1, 020-7841 3566. Open Tues-Sat, 4.30pm-midnight (1am Fri &amp; Sat). About £50 a head, plus drinks and service.It’s called Forgiveness but that’s not the keynote of Jonny Donahoe’s solo show. He calls himself a storyteller but this meditation on trauma, fear and love barely coheres into a story. Forgiveness is too fractured and unresolved for that. You have to respect Donahoe’s refusal to wrangle this raw material, addressing how new parenthood prompted a reckoning with the childhood trauma he had long run from, into a neat narrative shape. There’s a deficit in dramatic terms: the show isn’t always gripping. But you never doubt its honesty, or the hard-won nature of the truths it unfolds. Donahoe’s tale begins on a trip to San Francisco with his partner, the comedian Josie Long. Long discovers she’s pregnant; Donahoe (a musical comic himself with his band Jonny and the Baptists) has a panic attack, then locks himself in a dark room for a fortnight. Childhood, we learn, has negative connotations for Donahoe: his was blighted by abuse. Memories – some vague, some maybe even unreliable – now refuse to be stifled. Donahoe must tell his story, he says, to make moving on and becoming a father possible. But are stories the solution or part of the problem? Forgiveness, directed by P Burton-Morgan, is much exercised by this question. A substantial portion finds Donahoe ruminating over what he is telling us and why. The show runs along twin tracks – shards of childhood memory spliced into the linear tale of Long’s pregnancy and birth – but the impact of the former on the latter is not always clear. His story of expectant fatherhood, with its trips to Ikea and deep dives into parenting literature, is not a remarkable one. Donahoe is still processing what he endured as a child. With many a brooding pause, he gives full account of his conflicted feelings and this stuff feels still raw. But there’s lightness, too, in the conversational moments when he engages the crowd, and in his reverence for his partner and their new arrival. This isn’t a perfectly constructed show, but in its intimacy and cautious hope, it is unquestionably affecting. Forgiveness is at The Point, Eastleigh, 11 February, then touring until 5 March.“It’s very draughty and cold,” said Rahimah Baccass, 68, who lives in one of the hundreds of three-bedroom semis built in the 1930s after a slum clearance in Upney, east London. Recently her gas heating broke down for three days and she was “absolutely freezing”, wrapping up in layers of jumpers and hot-water bottles. The retired civil servant is one of millions of people living in interwar housing – from Blackpool to Barking – which the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) has identified as in urgent need of overhaul. Many homeowners have already tried to fix the problems with uPVC double glazing and loft insulation, but the biggest problems – uninsulated walls and cash- and carbon-guzzling boilers – are harder to crack. “We have double glazing, but it’s difficult to keep warm,” said Baccass. “I tried to go for cavity wall insulation but it was too expensive.” With rising gas heating and food bills, she is now considering switching the heating on only once instead of three times daily. More worryingly, she is having to rethink what food she buys, a particular problem as she is diabetic. “I was always able to buy good value food that is good for my body, but now I am tempted to buy some of the rubbish.” In Kingstanding in north Birmingham, the largest council housing development in Europe when it was created in the 1930s, Lee Mason, 80, has also decided that insulating his walls – the source of about 50% of heat loss in many cases, according to the RIBA – was too expensive. He installed solar panels on the roof and insulated the loft, but was told it would cost several thousand pounds to insulate his walls, which were built without cavities. “We’re very economical, we can’t do any more to be honest with you,” he said. “We only heat the lounge and the kitchen during the day. And our fuel bills are reasonable at the moment. But getting the walls insulated is a lot of money.” Nearby lives Sharon Merryweather, 62, who has felt the benefit of insulating the loft of her 1937 home before Christmas, to save money before the energy price rises come in. “Without insulation it can be quite draughty, but luckily we haven’t had a bad winter this year,” she said. “The bedrooms are much warmer since we’ve had the [loft] insulation put in though.” Tam, 39, a mother-of-two living in an interwar home in Dagenham, said it was long past time that the government tackled insulation. She said her “penny-pinching” landlord refused to insulate the walls. There are draughts around doors and a 5cm gap in one room between the skirting and floorboards that lets cold air stream in. She is already paying £80 a month on her gas meter and is regularly in her emergency credit. “It’s hard to keep it warm, but I need it warm,” she said. “I can’t have my children going cold.”* 14 solutions, not defined in their clues, are kinds of fruit Across 7* jackfruit JACK + FRUIT [of one’s labour] 8* melon LEMON (anag) 9 fortunate FOR  TE 10* olive 0 + EVIL (rev) 12* lychee thoroughLY CHEEky (hidden) 13 ryegrass ARE EMBARRASSINGLY less LAMEBRAIN (anag) 16 dubstep BUSTED (anag) + (u)P 19 Britain B*/R  AIN 22 monument MO(ment)/NUMEN/T(ime) 25 gamete G(onads)/A(nd)/M(ight)/E(ngage)/T(he)/E(gg) &amp;Lit 27* peach P(enny)/EACH 28 hexagrams X (kiss) in MEG/SARAH (anag) 29* mango GORMAN less R(ide) (cycling) 30 alternate A/(liverpoo)L/TERNATE Down 1 parody P(l)A(y)/R(o)O(m)/DaY 2 sketches KETCH/E(ast) in SS 3* orange AN(n) in OGRE (anag) 4 fixture FRUIT EX (anag) 5* medlar meddler (hom) 6 loaves LO 
<a>VES 11* pear P/EAR 16,15* damson NOMADS (anag) 17,14* banana BAN/ANA 18 ewer U (hom) + R(iver) 20* tamarind TAMAR/IN/D(evon) 21 Othello 0/THE/L(ake)/L(ake)/0 23 one-way ONE(a)-YAW(rev) 24 uncage (g)U(y) (o)NC(e) (e)AGE(r) 25* grapes GR(1/A)PES 26* tomato TO  O </a>What began as Pulitzer prize-winning journalism in the New York Times in 2019, and was later expanded into a book and a podcast, has made its final transformation into an audiobook. A collection of essays, poems and fictional works by more than 50 writers, The 1619 Project is a remarkable reframing of American history in which slavery and the Black experience are at the heart of the narrative. It traces the birth of a nation not to 1776 and the American revolution but to August 1619, when a ship arrived at Point Comfort in Virginia carrying a cargo of between 20 and 30 African captives, beginning a system of chattel slavery that would continue for 250 years. Discussing the origins of the project, journalist Nikole Hannah-Jones recalls her realisation that the history taught to her at school had “rendered Black Americans, Black people on all the earth, inconsequential at best, invisible at worst. We appeared only where unavoidable.” Elsewhere, Yaa Gyasi, Honorée Fanonne Jeffers, Terry McMillan, Wesley Morris and Barry Jenkins are among those considering themes of democracy, capitalism, music, religion and justice, each piece given renewed power through the voice of its author. Among the many highlights is a section, written and read by Robert Jones Jr, about an offer of freedom to enslaved men in 1775 by Lord Dunmore, the royal governor of Virginia, in return for joining the British Army, in which the narrator wonders whether Dunmore is a man of his word. “Never safe to trust toubab,” he says, with profound melancholy. “If you remember the ship, if it didn’t take your mind from you, then you understand.” • The 1619 Project is available on Penguin Audio, 18hr 57min. Further listening Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism bell hooks, Tantor Audio, 8hr 55min The late feminist trailblazer’s landmark examination of the racism and sexism experienced by Black women is narrated by Adenrele Ojo. Who Do I Think I Am? Mark Steel, Audible Originals, 8hr 56min Wit and pathos go hand in hand in comedian Mark Steel’s investigation into his adoption and the secrets of his biological parents.“I can’t see, I can’t see,” Omar Elabdellaoui shouted at a friend after a firework exploded in his face on New Year’s Eve 2020. Gunpowder and metal had penetrated his skin and eyeballs and his jacket was burning. His wife, Anne, ran to help put out the flames but the devastation was obvious. It was to be the start of a long road to recovery for the Galatasaray defender, who is in the frame to make a miraculous first-team return on Saturday after 11 surgeries to restore his vision, having been clinically blind. “I just thought I had something in my eye and had to clear it out but then I felt my face totally burning and everything was black,” Elabdellaoui recalls. He was in the garden preparing to light a third firework with friends and family, including his three children, when it went off prematurely as he tried to light the fuse. An ambulance came within minutes but Istanbul’s size meant it took a long time to reach the hospital. By the time Elabdellaoui arrived, journalists and teammates were waiting – the story had travelled fast across social media once a photo of his badly burned face, taken in the ambulance, was posted. “I didn’t really have control over the first days,” the Norwegian says in impressive English developed during a spell in Manchester City’s academy. “Everything was dark – I didn’t know if it was night or day. Time was irrelevant.” There was anger among Elabdellaoui’s nearest and dearest that a person supposedly sent to help had shared a picture of him at such a traumatic time. Some demanded the accused be sacked or sued but Elabdellaoui asked only for an apology, knowing further punishment would help nobody. He is yet to receive one. As doctors assessed the injuries, Elabdellaoui’s career looked over. “There were a lot of people and noise,” he says. “Voices become so much louder as you hear everything when you can’t see. The longer it took, the more afraid I was.” The 30-year-old had been in Istanbul for a matter of months after moving from Olympiakos but was already a popular member of the squad. Teammates offered support, spending hours at the hospital. The then head coach, Fatih Terim, left his New Year’s celebration to join them, and Elabdellaoui’s brother Rashid and his agent, Mikail Adampour, travelled to be there. The damage to Elabdellaoui’s face meant his brother could not recognise him and collapsed to the hospital floor in tears. “I tried desperately to understand but it was difficult,” Elabdellaoui says. “Because of all the gunpowder my face was burned. I think it was difficult for them to say how bad it was straight away. In one moment I grabbed the doctor to say: ‘Just tell me the truth, tell me how bad it is.’ She said: ‘Your left eye doesn’t look too bad but your right eye, we do not know.’ But the way she said it, I knew it was not good.” There was a chink of light, literally and metaphorically, as vision started to return to Elabdellaoui’s left eye, allowing him to see shapes and colours. “I didn’t dare to sleep. As soon as I got a bit of light after a few days in my left eye, I was afraid to sleep as I was afraid of the darkness, so was afraid to close my eyes. Even though it was a tiny bit of light from my left, I was always checking if the light was there because I was afraid of losing it.” It was obvious there was no simple solution to get Elabdellaoui his sight back, let alone playing football again. Adampour, of Tempo Sports Group, and the club doctor Yener Ince set about finding the treatment to give him the best chance. Extensive research was done and inquiries made at hospitals from the UK to China and Canada. Last February Elabdellaoui travelled with his agent to see Dr Edward Holland at the Cincinnati Eye Institute, where Holland has pioneered corneal transplant surgery. He would end up spending six months, on and off, in the US. Like the body, the eyeball has layers of skin for protection but Elabdellaoui had burned away all the tissue that creates new skin, leaving his right eye in the state you would expect of a third-degree burns victim. He had also burned away his tear ducts. Corneal transplants are very effective when the ocular surface skin is healthy but Elabdellaoui’s was anything but. His iris was opaque and to complicate matters he had lost one-third of his upper eyelid. A strategy was created to get the eye to a state where a corneal transplant could be considered, and the processes had to be fast-tracked to give Elabdellaoui a chance of resuming his career. Holland gave Elabdellaoui a 5-10% chance of getting his sight back because it was one of the worst injuries he had examined in a 35-year career. He described it as four times worse than those suffered by an American soldier he treated who was blinded by a bomb in Afghanistan. The first stage was to calm and stabilise the eye with oral and topical anti-inflammatory medications, using procedures to reinforce the surface. Doctors used an amnionic membrane from human placenta, a technique borrowed from dermatology, to create a pseudo skin. A new eyelid was also needed because an eye cannot function without one; it is required for protection and to keep it moist. For that, membrane was taken from inside Elabdellaoui’s mouth and skin from one of his ears by plastic surgeons. By spring the medics and Elabdellaoui could move to the stages for restoring vision. An ocular surface stem cell transplant from a family member would enhance the chances of success, and one of his sisters, Ikram, was found to be a perfect match. “It was unreal,” Elabdellaoui says. “It was a big sign that this might actually go well. Even though we knew it was a long way, to have my sister 100% made a big difference. To make my sister go through an operation is not something I wanted. It’s funny as my other siblings were almost upset it wasn’t them, as they wanted to be the one. It was important to have that love from my family. It did a lot to have my sister give me her cells.” Ocular stem cells from his sister and an anonymous donor were needed to allow the eye to create its own skin again and give the planned corneal transplant the best chance of working. Elabdellaoui watched across the corridor as cells were taken from his sister’s eye and walked across to him. It was the latest in a long line of surgeries, each testing his attempts to stay optimistic. “When reality hits you and you’re alone in the room and everything is still dark, then it is difficult to keep that positive mindset. Even when I was totally down and felt my life was ruined, I still kept the discipline for the task. I could have felt sorry for myself, I could have cried and got very down, but I did everything I had to do.” Among the constant treatment and checkups in Cincinnati, Elabdellaoui trained when he could to maintain fitness, despite being able to see only out of his left eye. A fitness coach at the NFL team Cincinnati Bengals, who play in the Super Bowl on Sunday, was enlisted to give sessions suitable for a wide receiver – supposedly the sport’s fittest players – but they were not intense enough. “That saved me, that kept me alive, I am not going to lie,” Elabdellaoui says. “Without that I would have not been able to survive all the way – that was my real escape. I started training early on and I put in my mind that I would be going back to play no matter what. Every time I had a really good hard session I would sweat everything out. I could feel I was still capable, strong and still alive. “Training for me was everything. I remember the few weeks when I could not train, if I had a delicate procedure or operation. They were the most difficult times and Holland understood that and would make sure I trained when I could. The training and visualising training with the team was something that kept me alive.” Galatasaray and Elabdellaoui’s Norway teammates have been very supportive, and the club have paid for his treatment. “He has a strong mentality and has been able to stay positive and see the possibilities,” Norway’s head coach, Ståle Solbakken, says. “I think the people around him have been very good at supporting him because there have been some bumps along the way where you have doubts.” From the second night in hospital to the months away from his family in America, Elabdellaoui has had one man by his side: his agent. “I don’t think there is any agent in the whole world that would do what he has done and he deserves all the praise,” Elabdellaoui says. “The accident happened and he came and slept in the hospital room with me for a month. Bear in mind this is the January transfer window, so I am really lucky and I am so thankful to have him.” Adampour was there when the corneal transplant took place in September. To get to this stage Elabdellaoui had been on a regime of drops, an anti-inflammatory diet and drinking only water for months. Holland describes Elabdellaoui as “the most motivated patient” he has seen. “His perseverance to get his vision back has inspired me and my staff,” he says. “He will jump through hoops of fire if we tell him to.” Elabdellaoui left the hospital and within an hour was removing his patch to see again. “It was really special – I do not know how to put it into words,” he says. “You can try to imagine but I do not think it is possible for anyone else who hasn’t been in the position. I was taking off the patch and had a bit of vision; I was closing my left eye and could actually see my hand on my right side; I could see all the movements on my right side that I hadn’t. It was a miracle, like a dream come true. You never think that to see is a dream – you just take that for granted.” A permanent return to the family home after more than half a year was another milestone for the right-back. “This period has given us more emotional moments than we have had all our lives, so for me to be able to come back home and see them and them to see me … there were a lot of tears, of hugs. When your only goal for nine, 10, 11 months is to see, when it’s the only thing you think about 24/7, when we were able to achieve it, that was pure happiness.” Elabdellaoui, who has to use eye drops every half an hour unless on the pitch, was reintegrated into the squad at the start of January, fitted with specialist glasses and a contact lens. His fitness regime meant he slipped back in easily. “When he returned to play it was very emotional, all the players were crying and hugging,” says Galatasaray’s Dr Yener, who has since cleared Elabdellaoui to play. Two Fridays ago Elabdellaoui featured in a friendly, which felt like his professional debut as a teenager, but his league return was delayed by Covid. He is expected to be on the bench on Saturday at home to Kayserispor and is hoping for an emotional comeback for a club with whom he now has an unbreakable bond. After a year of pain, Elabdellaoui has a career to look forward to again. “It is something that will stay with me forever,” he says. “I cannot forget. It is a scar that will be with me forever.”The leader of a party in Belgium’s governing coalition has sparked a debate after proposing that the country abolish internet shopping to let its high streets thrive and reduce night warehouse work. Paul Magnette, the leader of the Socialist party and mayor of Charleroi, Belgium’s third biggest city, said he feared the current trends were hollowing out urban centres and driving down working conditions. “Let Belgium become a country without e-commerce,” Magnette told the Flemish newspaper Humo. “I don’t think e-commerce is progress but social and ecological degradation. Why do we have to let workers work in those warehouses at night? Because people want to buy around the clock and have their parcels at home within 24 hours. Can we really not wait two days for a book?” According to Eurostat, 75% of Belgians aged 16 to 74 made a purchase online in 2021, just above the average among the 27 EU member states. Denmark had the highest proportion of internet shoppers (91%) and Bulgaria the lowest (33%). The Covid pandemic has sped up the transition. In March 2020, about 40% of UK shoppers said they had been shopping more online than before the pandemic. By February 2021 this proportion had grown to approximately 75%, according to Statista. Magnette’s comments were made before a decision of the federal government on possible changes to the regulations on night work, a measure deemed necessary by some in order for Belgium to keep up with neighbouring countries such as the Netherlands. Companies in Belgium must pay a night rate for work carried out after 8pm. A new system is under consideration where a daily rate is applicable for 20 of the 24 hours of a day, if a union representing staff in the company is in agreement. Magnette argued that night work should instead be limited to where it was strictly necessary, including in the emergency services, as he claimed the biggest risk facing Belgium was “not unemployment but the long-term sick”. A spokesperson for the Socialist party later clarified that Magnette was not opposed to the digital sector but that he wanted there to be a debate about the consequences of internet shopping. The comments nevertheless drew scornful responses from his political foes. Egbert Lachaert, the chairman of the Open VLD, a Flemish conservative-liberal party, tweeted: “Going back to the economy of 100 years ago will not help us. E-commerce can now provide jobs for thousands of people. We’re not going to let that go, are we?” Georges-Louis Bouchez, a senator in the liberal Francophone Reformist Movement party, said: “The 19th century cannot be a model of society. Progress is an opportunity. We need an open mind and adaptability in our society for greater wellbeing. We should not just leave e-commerce to other countries. We would lose hundreds of millions.” Asked to comment on the debate, Vincent Van Peteghem, the federal finance minister and a member of the Christian Democratic and Flemish party, said he recognised the need to strike the right balance. “I do not think it should be one or the other, but rather one and the other,” he said, adding that it was important to have “an e-commerce sector which is sustainable and which functions with adequate working conditions”. • This article was amended on Friday 11 February 2022 to correct a reference to Humo, which is a Flemish newspaper, not a Francophone one.From Kingstanding in Birmingham to Becontree in east London, architects are calling for England’s draughty interwar suburbs to be wrapped in insulation in a national drive to reduce carbon emissions. The Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) has calculated that insulation, double- or triple-glazing and gas boiler replacement in 3.3m interwar homes that sprawl around England’s towns and cities could cut the country’s carbon emissions by 4%, helping it towards the net zero target by 2050. The professional body is calling for a national programme and has costed the works at up to £38bn, which far exceeds current government green homes subsidies. But it believes the works could prove cheaper because the repetitive designs of the terraced and semi-detached homes should allow for economies of scale in a mass rollout. It also foresees savings of more than £500 a year in energy bills in many cases. The RIBA is calling for policies to incentivise private owners, who own more than 70% of interwar homes, and social landlords to fund the works. The proposal comes as householders face soaring utility prices. With a fifth of residents of poorly insulated interwar homes already in fuel poverty, they look likely to be among the worst hit. Around half of the interwar homes – those built between 1919 and 1930 – have uninsulated solid walls that are responsible for almost half of heat loss. Those built between 1930 and 1945 mostly have cavity walls, few of which have been insulated. “There can be no further delay in embarking on a national programme of home retrofitting, which will transform UK housing, creating warm and cheaper-to-heat homes while bringing health and wider societal benefits,” said Simon Allford, the president of the RIBA. “This process will drastically reduce fuel poverty, create half a million green jobs, and positively contribute to the national levelling up agenda.” Experts have cautioned that some measures to retrofit housing to cut carbon emissions are more cost-effective than others. Jan Rosenow, the Europe director at the Regulatory Assistance Project, a clean energy thinktank, said loft and cavity wall insulation were among measures that delivered the best “bang for buck” in terms of cutting carbon, while solid-wall insulation was less efficient. Investing the money in other carbon-cutting technologies such as renewable energy might be more cost-effective. But solid-wall insulation also makes homes more comfortable. Rosenow also said he believed the RIBA estimates of 4% carbon savings were too optimistic. Jess Ralston, an analyst at the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit, said: “Efficiency is the first crucial step to limiting our [energy] demand. Once we have done that we can fill the gaps with cheaper renewables, bring out homes down to zero emissions and save money on bills.” The RIBA’s plan coincides with a growing campaign among architects to “retrofit-first”, to reduce the carbon emissions from creating new buildings. Campaigners claimed a victory last month when the multinational bank Citigroup chose not to demolish its 42-storey skyscraper at Canary Wharf, and instead planned to retrofit it, saving 100,000 tonnes of embodied carbon. Energy use in homes accounts for about 14% of the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions. Only 10% of interwar homes achieve an energy performance certificate (EPC) above band C. If current band D rated homes were retrofitted to achieve band C performance, households would save £511 a year under the proposed 2022 energy price cap, the RIBA said. A higher proportion of households who live in interwar homes (17%) are fuel poor than the general population (13%), which means living in a home with an energy efficiency rating below band D or having an income below the poverty line after housing and energy bills. Energy use in homes accounts for about 16% of England’s greenhouse gas emissions, producing a total of 58.5m tonnes of CO2 every year. These emissions need to fall by about a quarter by 2030 from 1990 levels for the UK to meet its carbon budget, and housing is one of the only sectors where the implementation of measures to reduce emissions has stalled, the RIBA argues. Rates of installation of cavity wall, solid-wall and loft insulation all fell between 2012 and 2017. The independent Climate Change Committee, chaired by John Gummer, the Conservative former environment secretary, has calculated that to get to net zero the UK needs to spend £55bn on improving efficiency in existing homes by 2050. It warns that buildings of all types are one of the most costly challenges across the economy but that for every £12bn spent each year there could be annual operating savings of £5bn. While some homes will require much more, close to two-thirds of homes need no more than £1,000 spent on retrofitting energy efficiency measures.She doesn’t pretend this isn’t hard. Devastating, even. When you’ve won as often as Mikaela Shiffrin – three overall World Cup titles, two Olympic gold medals, more victories on alpine skiing’s top flight than all but two people in history – the acid taste of coming up short under the brightest lights will never be easy. Nor should it. But as the 26-year-old American stood at the bottom of the women’s super-G course on Friday having crossed the finish line for the first time in three races at the Beijing Olympics, the familiar smile that’s been absent throughout the most arduous week of her professional life was back. It wasn’t the result she wanted. Shiffrin needed 1min 14.30sec to negotiate the icy track known as the Rock, coming in 0.79sec behind the early leader and eventual gold medalist Lara Gut-Behrami, of Switzerland, beneath a pale blue sky on the south side of Xiaohaituo Mountain. But simply making it down the course and finishing ninth overall was reason enough to feel good amid the lowest week of a career defined by dizzying highs. “It felt really nice to ski that today,” Shiffrin said. “There’s been a lot of disappointment over the last week. There’s a lot of emotions. [It was] not really easy to reset and know if I was up for the challenge today. “The track itself is beautiful, and it’s sunny, and the snow is amazing. Coming back out and getting the chance to race again was just the perfect thing to do, actually.” Shiffrin’s disqualifications for missing gates early in her opening runs of Monday’s giant slalom and Wednesday’s slalom were unexpected enough. After all, the Colorado native had failed to finish a race only twice in four years entering the Beijing Games – and a total of 13 times in 228 starts across all disciplines at World Cup, Olympic and world championship events. The shock was compounded by the fact they happened in two of her best events – the disciplines at the foundation of her dominance and metronomic consistency – striking destructive blows to her confidence. Not since December 2011, when she was 16, had Shiffrin failed to make it to the bottom in back-to-back technical races. Her ninth-place finish on Friday came in the speed race which she has only contested twice in the past two months on the World Cup circuit (where she is once again the overall points leader). She opted to skip the super-G entirely at her first two Olympics, but winning it at the 2019 world championships made her a strong contender to reach the podium in Beijing. That was before Shiffrin was unable to navigate more than 12 gates in her first two outings, throwing her plans of entering as many as six events at these Olympics into question. Battered by self-doubt and battling what she described as “emotional fatigue” after her nightmarish start, Shiffrin went through three training runs on Thursday before deciding that she felt OK to race. “I feel emotionally weary right now, there’s just a sense of dullness, and you can’t have that racing, especially not racing speed,” Shiffrin said. “But when we got out today I just felt a little bit more settled, a little bit quieter, trying to keep some calmness and just trying to focus on the task at hand so I could put my attention where I wanted and ski the hill and the course properly. “It’s a really big relief to be here now in the finish, having skied a run well. I wasn’t skiing safe or anything, but I also did get to the finish and that’s really nice for my heart to know that it’s not totally abandoning everything I thought I knew about the sport.” Athletes at the Olympics are under no obligation to speak with the media while passing through the mixed zone after an event. But after both of her DNFs and again on Friday, Shiffrin has spent hours fielding a stream of questions. Even more impressively, she did not simply resort to the canned soundbites that are amply within the scope of her years of media training, but gave lengthy, thoughtful and considered responses that have shown her grappling with a crisis of confidence. On one hand Shiffrin’s professionalism comes as no surprise. She has always embraced the responsibilities that come with being the face of a sport and, for a second straight Winter Games, the tentpole of NBC’s breathless promotion of the Olympics in the United States. But the real test comes when not everything is falling your way. And she’s handled all of it with a remarkable self-awareness, humility, empathy and often brutal honesty. Throughout Friday’s marathon session with the press, Shiffrin acknowledged her crushing disappointment and confessed to a sometimes unhealthy obsession with competition in one moment while maintaining a balanced perspective on her blessed life and career in the next. “A lot of athletes have said before pressure’s a privilege, and it truly is, to be in the position that I come to the Olympics and I’m a contender, and actually expected to medal in multiple events,” she said. “That’s spectacular. It says a lot about the work that my whole team, we’ve all done to this point. “But it’s an enormous letdown when it doesn’t happen. I can go back and say I’ve won medals before in my career and that’s wonderful, but it doesn’t take away any hurt or disappointment from these races. I think it’s possible to feel both proud of a career and sad for the moment you’re in.” The direct and transparent manner in which Shiffrin has managed this trying hour – not falling back on credible excuses like the back injury that limited her preparations in November, or the bout with Covid that sidelined her in December, or the all-encompassing grief over the unexpected death of her father, which caused her to openly contemplate retirement – has laid down an example that everyone can learn from: life goes on. As a press flack tried to wrangle Shiffrin away, the American insisted on answering one final question when asked about a word that keeps coming up amid her third Olympic campaign: failure. “Failure is a scary word, and disappointment, all the negative words, because we’re supposed to be kind to ourselves. But I do consider it failure. I think a lot of people do. It’s just tough to see that word in the headline of an article, and it feels like clickbait to say ‘crashes out, fails, disappoints the world, chokes’. They’re just harsh words, but I’ve finally come to terms with that being a little bit part of what we’re doing here. “I’ve had a lot of moments where I didn’t fail as well, so it all comes out in the wash in the end.”Monday The Location, Location, Location presenter Kirstie Allsopp has some advice for young people wanting to buy their first home. Think twice about going to university and racking up student debt. Move back in with your parents for three years if you can. Stop going to the gym, watching Netflix, buying coffee from Starbucks and taking a couple of easyJet flights abroad each year. And be prepared to move to a cheaper part of the country if necessary. For someone who has made a living out of telling people how to get the best value for money out of their property, Allsopp’s maths is a little suspect. Assuming you are paying your parents no rent, you are probably saving yourself about £7,000 a year. Given that the average deposit, according to Halifax, is £59,000, you are going to have to stay with your parents for eight and a half years – assuming house prices don’t rise during that period. And if staying with your parents isn’t an option, it will take you 37 years to save for a deposit if you’re relying on cutting out coffee, the gym, streaming TV and overseas holidays. Nor does Allsopp seem to have thought through how moving to a cheaper part of the country might work if your job is in the south-east. Then there is the knock-on effect. If young people from London all move to the north to find affordable housing, where are those living in the north supposed to buy? There will always be someone who loses out. Though not Kirstie. She walked to work, went without a foreign holiday or two and soon had cash spare to buy her own house. That was in 1981, when the average house price was £51,000. And she was helped out by her parents. Tuesday The Mail on Sunday and the Daily Mail have been publishing extracts of Michael Ashcroft’s biography of Carrie Johnson. It’s been hard to keep track of her apparent crimes against humanity but they include using her husband’s phone to send messages rubbishing MPs she doesn’t like and getting Boris to change his mind about decisions he has made. Then there are the friends she insisted be given important jobs in Downing Street and the enemies she tried to have fired. However, Carrie’s greatest offence appears to be that she isn’t his second wife, Marina, who was considered a steadying influence and would put up with any old shit – up until the moment she decided she had had enough, of course. One colleague of Boris was quoted as saying: “He’s fallen out with his children, he’s lost Marina, and since he became prime minister so many of the problems he’s had have been because of Carrie … His potential to transform the country has been squandered. It’s like a toxic relationship. He’s isolated. It’s very sad.” To which any sane person would say: “What a load of sexist crap.” Boris isn’t some passive receptacle in all this. He is responsible for his own choices. Carrie can do or say what she likes but it’s Johnson who should have the final say on what goes on in government. If he can’t manage that, it’s not his wife’s fault. After all, it isn’t as if his back catalogue of malice, infidelities, incompetence and bad faith don’t predate his marriage to Carrie by many decades. The clues were all there and it’s just the country’s bad luck that the Tories chose to ignore them when they elected him as their leader. Wednesday RIP Bamber Gascoigne. The original and – for me at least – the best presenter of University Challenge. Call me chippy, but I still think I detect a pro-Oxbridge bias in Jeremy Paxman, something you never used to get with Gascoigne. I first started watching University Challenge back in the 60s with my dad and I’ve scarcely missed an episode since. My best years were when my children were in their teens and I could get them to sit in silence and score for me while I concentrated on the answers. I didn’t differentiate between starter and bonus questions: I just awarded myself one point for each answer I got right. And I had some handy cheats. Any maths ones I didn’t know, I just shouted out 0 or -1. While pre-impressionist French painters came up a lot and were invariably Delacroix or David. Now the kids have left home, I have to score myself, which wrecks my concentration. I did also once get invited on to the show to represent Exeter in a Christmas special edition about 10 years ago and I thought it would be a dream come true. Far from it. Not only did our team not have anyone who could answer the science questions, we were up against one man on the Glasgow team who was lightning-quick on the buzzer. Come the halfway mark we were losing by something like 100 points to 20 and I had humiliated myself by misspelling mozzarella. We then decided to change tactics and start pressing the buzzer even if we weren’t wholly certain of the answer; by the end we had managed to claw things back so we only lost by about 160 to 125. Hardly a triumph, though. Hubris, thy name is Crace. Thursday There may well be many benefits to the UK leaving the EU – Boris Johnson is curiously reluctant to implement one, the cutting of 5% VAT on domestic fuel bills, that would make an immediate difference to everyone – but the government appears loth to tell us what they are. During the Brexit referendum we were promised the country would be far better off, that we could carve out more advantageous trade deals and that deregulation would reduce bureaucracy and cut prices. Six years on, even the low-hanging Brexit fruits have remained tantalisingly out of reach. So much so that Johnson used his largely cosmetic reshuffle this week to demote Jacob Rees-Mogg to the newly created role of minister for Brexit opportunities. If you think Jakey has a plan and is about to spoil us with treats, then think again. For today Rees-Mogg has written an open letter in the Sun asking readers to tell him exactly what these Brexit opportunities are. Though some might think twice before replying, as Rees-Mogg compares himself to Lord Kitchener putting out the all-persons “Your Country Needs You” poster. You might remember that what the country needed men for in 1914 was to die in their hundreds of thousands in a bloodbath of futile gestures. Rees-Mogg also appears confused as the only example of a Brexit benefit he can cite is the Johnson lie that being outside the European Medicines Agency allowed the UK to be the first to implement a Covid vaccine programme. This is simply untrue. And presumably we are expected to look on the extra 215m customs declaration forms that HMRC predicts are heading our way each year as exciting Brexit red tape gains. In the meantime we can only hope the country hasn’t run out of ideas for a bright Brexit future. Even if the government has. Friday New research by a team from Cambridge University, published in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, has found that people from around the world with the same personality types tend to like the same types of music. Neurotics, it seems, are universally fond of David Bowie. Something I am happy to confirm. Though I can’t say I’m also a big fan of punk and heavy metal, which also appeal to neurotics. My mosh pit days are well behind me. Not that they ever really started. Nowadays you’re more likely to find me at the opera or classical music gigs – which apparently makes me open and agreeable, according to the research. Not words my wife often associates with me. Then, I don’t listen to Journey and Coldplay, so there are clearly limits to my openness and agreeability. Still, I am open and agreeable enough to be enjoying the feeling of the world slowly returning to normal after two years living under the shadow of Covid. When I travel on public transport, go into work or go to the opera – I went to Theodora at the Royal Opera this week and it was sensational, get a ticket if you can – I no longer feel like I am taking my life into my hands. Though perhaps I have just – like the government – become demob happy, as Covid infections still remain stubbornly high. In his race to appease the libertarians in the Tory party and make the UK free from all restrictions, Boris Johnson does appear to have abandoned any pretence of following the science. It can’t be a good idea to do away with self-isolation requirements for people who have Covid when there are no plans to protect the immunosuppressed and other vulnerable groups. Perhaps we’d all be better off waiting until Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance are willing to endorse the government’s plan at a Downing Street press conference. Their absence from our screens perhaps tells its own story. Digested week, digested: One Dick resigns. Just one more to go. • This article was amended on 11 February 2022 because an earlier version referred to “the cutting of 20% VAT on domestic fuel bills”. That should have said 5%. • An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: Join online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace looking back at the latest events in Westminster. On Monday 7th March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets here.The six puppies were dumped in a crate on the verge of a main road in Kent. Four cocker spaniels and two terrier crossbreeds, bright-eyed and full of life despite being abandoned like fly-tipped rubbish. A passerby took them to the RSPCA’s Canterbury branch where they were fed, watered and nursed back to health before being fostered by staff while permanent homes were found. They are safe, but animal charities have warned that the end of the “puppy mania” that seized so many people in lockdown could mean dangerous times are ahead for countless young dogs. There is concern that as demand – and thus prices – fall, unscrupulous breeders may find themselves with puppies they cannot turn a profit on and dump them. As more people return to physical workplaces, fears are growing that new owners may try to sell on dogs on to inappropriate homes or simply abandon them. Over Christmas the RSPCA received reports of 1,478 abandoned dogs and other animals, up 29% on the previous year. A spokesperson said this week: “We have long feared that the combination of a surge in spur-of-the-moment pet ownership during the pandemic, the change in people’s circumstances as some normality returned, and the economic impacts of the pandemic could be a perfect storm for abandonments.” Clive Hopwood, an RSPCA inspector who dealt with the Kent puppies last month, suspects they may have been abandoned by a breeder. “We’ve seen a massive surge in dog ownership,” he said. “Many people have seen this as an easy opportunity to make money by breeding and selling puppies. We believe these puppies may have failed to sell, so they were abandoned. We’re expecting to see more dogs abandoned.” There have been other abandonments over the last few months. Fifteen sick cockapoo-type puppies, believed to be from two litters, were dumped in a dirty crate at the side of a road in Pitsea, Essex. One of the cockapoos was dead when it arrived at the RSPCA’s centre and three others were so ill they had to be put down. There are some horribly sad stories. Just before Christmas the bodies of four newborn puppies were found next to a road in Darlington, while three dead newborns, possibly staffordshire bull terriers, were dropped into a canal in Tipton, West Midlands, and at the end of January the bodies of two pups thought to be German shepherds were discovered next to a canal in Leeds. One of the most curious cases was the discovery by Rob Carter, the managing director of a Winchester construction company, of seven beautiful Labrador puppies running free as he cycled home in October. “What was remarkable was how calm they were. They were clearly used to human contact,” he said. “They had no collars on, no form of identification. They had just been abandoned.” Carter, a dog lover himself, phoned for help and a kennels came out to pick the dogs up. Before the pandemic, the average price of a dog was £876, rising to £2,237 in March 2021, according to the online marketplace Pets4Homes. By the summer it was down to £1,873 and it continues to fall. Some online sellers were this week offering puppies at sharply reduced prices: American bullies down from £3,000 to £1,800; cavapoos from £2,200 to £1,800; and jugs (a hybrid of a pug and a jack russell) from £650 to £450. A spokesperson for Pets4Homes: said: “It would seem that puppy mania in the UK has peaked and normality is returning.” Kennels are not reporting a flood of incoming puppies, but this is not necessarily a good thing, the charity Blue Cross said. It pointed out that people who paid inflated prices for dogs at the height of the pandemic would want to recoup some of their outlay and were more likely to sell on their dogs rather than give them up to a charity for rehoming. “That can lead to dogs being unsettled and having behavioural problems or being housed in inappropriate settings,” said a spokesperson. The Kennel Club published research in the summer that found almost a quarter (23%) of all owners feared they would no longer be able to provide a suitable home for dog when “normal life” resumed. As more and more people return to physical workplaces, Bill Lambert, a spokesperson for the Kennel Club, said it could be a challenging time: “The fear is there is going to be an influx [of] rescues. Now is the danger time.”Asked in 1978 to describe his job, the visual effects pioneer Douglas Trumbull said: “I’m in the area of creating experiences that are beyond the realm of physical reality.” Trumbull, who has died aged 79 from cancer, was instrumental in bringing to the screen three of the greatest science-fiction films ever made: Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), Steven Spielberg’s Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977) and Ridley Scott’s Blade Runner (1982). He was 23 when he began working with Kubrick. During a production schedule that lasted for more than two years, he went from designing graphics for the film’s computer screens to masterminding the kaleidoscopic “star gate” sequence, in which the astronaut Dave Bowman, played by Keir Dullea, passes through an intergalactic corridor of streaking, coloured light. “We had to build new equipment, we had to build new types of cameras, we had to build lighting systems,” said Trumbull. He adapted the “slit-scan” photography technique, placing in front of the lens a giant movable slide with an aperture. To this set-up, he then added a backlit glass panel on to which patterns were projected while being photographed with a long exposure camera. Six months of experimentation produced the spectacular psychedelic effects that would endear the film to the acid-dropping midnight-movie crowd, while leaving sober viewers just as dazzled and disoriented. “We wanted the audience to feel like they were actually going to space,” he said. For Close Encounters of the Third Kind, he made advances in motion control photography to enable the camera to tilt and move for the first time with special effects in the frame. (Most effects shots prior to that had been static.) He also conjured the baleful cloud formations that precede the approach of the alien mothership. This he achieved by introducing white liquid paint into a colossal aquarium tank filled with water. “If Trumbull hadn’t accepted the job, I’d still be on the Columbia backlot, trying to get a cloud to materialise out of thin air,” said Spielberg. His contributions to Blade Runner included the moving images on the sides of skyscrapers and blimps, as well as the liberal use of smoke. Scott’s film earned Trumbull a third Oscar nomination following previous ones for his work on Close Encounters and Star Trek: The Motion Picture (1979). On the latter title, he was entrusted with directing several sequences, including Spock’s space walk, during which Trumbull paid homage to his own work on 2001. He already had one directorial credit under his belt by then: the prescient and poignant Silent Running (1972), which starred Bruce Dern as a botanist tending to Earth’s last remaining forest. Rescued from the planet, which is now denuded of all plant life, the flora is contained within greenhouse-like bio-domes on a spaceship called the Valley Forge. Though the film was retitled in some territories as 2002: The Second Odyssey, it was far more modest in scale than Kubrick’s work. Instead of the plush bombast of Strauss on the soundtrack, Trumbull used original songs by Joan Baez to establish a reflective tenor. Trumbull was born in Los Angeles, to Marcia Hunt, an artist, and Donald Trumbull, a special effects rigger whose credits included The Wizard of Oz (1939) and, later, the original Star Wars (1977), which Douglas had turned down. Though Donald moved into the aerospace industry after Douglas was born, father and son ended up working on several of the same films. On Silent Running, Douglas hired his father to oversee the trio of waddling robots, named Huey, Dewey and Louie after Donald Duck’s nephews. Douglas was educated at Morningside high school and El Camino college in LA County. He parlayed his enthusiasm for science fiction and his skill at drawing into work as a background illustrator at Graphic Films, a Los Angeles studio making animated simulations for Nasa. To the Moon and Beyond, a short which screened at the 1964 New York World’s Fair, brought him to Kubrick’s attention. “It just turned out that I had this weird skill set that lent itself to what his needs were,” he said, “and I started solving some problems and building weird gizmos for photography.” He was surprised to find that the technological gauntlet thrown down by Kubrick’s movie was not widely taken up by other film-makers. “We thought at the time that 2001 would start a big trend,” he said. “It really didn’t … The main effect it had … is that people look at 2001 and say: ‘No one’s ever going to do this again …’” A stint doing effects work on the ending of Zabriskie Point (1969) was short-lived. He was fired by the director, Michelangelo Antonioni, who chose instead to use more traditional techniques. (Trumbull later incorporated into Blade Runner some of the footage he had shot for Antonioni.) He developed for The Andromeda Strain (1971) a camera that could relay images seen through a microscope. In 1974, he established with Richard Yuricich a special effects research facility to explore new technology. In 1983, he directed his second feature, Brainstorm, a thriller about a device that enables users to experience pre-recorded sensations uploaded on to a virtual reality-style headset, from the giddiness of a rollercoaster ride to the horror of a heart attack. Trumbull was unsuccessful in his attempt to convince MGM to let him make the movie in his own pioneering Showscan format, which projected 70mm film at 60 frames per second, rather than the usual 24. The film was greeted with lukewarm reviews, and came to be associated with the death of its star, Natalie Wood, who drowned in suspicious circumstances during a break from production. Trumbull distanced himself from the industry after this, though he continued to work in the field of technical innovation and immersive entertainment. He designed the Back to the Future ride at the Universal theme park in Florida, and helped to popularise the Imax format. He also worked on sequences imagining the creation of the universe in Terrence Malick’s The Tree of Life (2011). It was that early collaboration with Kubrick, though, that lingered throughout his life in good ways and bad. Though he referred to the director as his “mentor”, the pair fell out after Kubrick, credited on screen as the designer and director of the “special photographic effects”, won a visual effects Oscar for the film. Trumbull, who was credited along with three colleagues as “special photographic effects supervisor”, believed the director ought to have insisted on sharing the award. A rapprochement of sorts was initiated by Trumbull, who phoned the director out of the blue in the 1990s to thank him for the effect he had on his career. Trumbull is survived by his third wife, Julia Hobart, and by two daughters, Amy and Andromeda, from his first marriage, to Cherry, which ended in divorce. His second wife, Ann Vidor, died in 2001. • Douglas Hunt Trumbull, film director and visual effects artist, born 8 April 1942; died 7 February 2022 • This article was amended on 12 February 2022 to correct Trumbull’s full name, and amend marital details.Grandparents planning hefty amounts of childcare this half-term might want to think again after research claimed to disprove previous findings of a “rejuvenating effect” from looking after grandchildren. Many studies have appeared to show mental and physical health advantages for those who care for their grandchildren. But none involved researchers talking to the same grandparents before and after their caregiving responsibilities began. When the authors of Is There a Rejuvenating Effect of (Grand)Childcare? A Longitudinal Study, published this week in The Journals of Gerontology, did that, they found that caring for grandchildren failed to make grandparents feel any younger than their actual age. The age people feel they are – as opposed to the age on their birth certificate – is seen as a strong indicator of their mental and physical wellbeing, sometimes even outperforming chronological age as a direct predictor of psychological and health-related outcomes, including risk of death. “This is the first study to look at the same people before and after taking up grandparental childcare in terms of the effects on subjective age,” said Dr Valeria Bordone, co-author of the report. Bordone is also co-author of a 2016 report, Do Grandchildren Influence How Old You Feel? That found over-65s who take care of grandchildren feel at least two years younger than their age, rising to 2.6 years for men aged 74-85. But her new findings have given her pause for thought. “Contrary to our 2016 findings, our new study found no youthful effect of the transition from not being a caregiver to becoming a grandchild caregiver for either grandfathers or grandmothers,” she said. The new study was welcomed by Prof Cecilia Tomassini, a leading member of the Grandparenting in Europe network of researchers. “This research adds important insight to a question that hasn’t previously been interrogated by going back to the same people,” she said. “Even studies that have gone back to the same group have tended to lose sight of grandparents in ill health because they’ve dropped out of the research. This means those papers have ended up by only looking at healthy grandparents, which is why they’ve been getting, until now, largely positive responses.” Bordone now believes that attributing a causal effect between childcare provision and feeling younger is wrong. Instead, she said, the link is likely to have more to do with hidden selection effects. “It may well be that personality traits and family values that mean grandparents already have a young, subjective age are overrepresented among individuals who provide care to others,” she said. In short, rather than childcare making grandparents feel young, it’s the grandparents who feel young already who do more childcare. When Bordone researched this issue in 2016, she asked adults who care for their grandchildren how young and healthy they felt. This time, she questioned the same 7,730 adults aged 50–85 before they began childcare. Returning over a period of time during which 21% started providing childcare, she asked the same question. Those who never provided childcare remained in the control group. If your children’s grandparents are now reluctant to step up this half-term, you might have more luck asking a friend or neighbour of grandparent age. The research threw up the unexpected finding that there are slight benefits in older adults looking after young children who are not their own kin. The hypothesis, said Bordone, is that unrelated children bring with them the rejuvenating effect of youth – without the same reminder of old age that grandchildren do. “Grandparenthood is a powerful reminder of a person’s ageing and as such it is likely to affect subjective age,” she said.Wayne Rooney said Derby have taken a significant step towards a takeover after the troubled Championship club reached an “accord” with Middlesbrough over a compensation claim that threatened to undermine their attempts to secure their long-term future. The agreement between Derby’s former chairman Mel Morris, who owns the stadium, and the Middlesbrough owner, Steve Gibson, comes on the eve of a potentially fractious meeting between the teams at the Riverside Stadium on Saturday. Last week Morris invited Boro and Wycombe, who are also seeking recompense, to take their claims to the high court against him personally. “The fact that a resolution has been discussed and agreed should be comforting to both sets of supporters,” read a Derby statement on Friday. “It is important for all interested parties, including potential bidders, to be confident that the Middlesbrough claim will not be an impediment to Derby County progressing its plans for a sale of the club.” Gibson had been seeking compensation of about £40m, after arguing Derby’s breach of financial rules prevented them from reaching the 2018-19 play-offs. Boro finished seventh, a point behind Derby, who lost in the play-off final. Wycombe want at least £6m after they were relegated by a point at Derby’s expense last season. The Wycombe owner, Rob Couhig, is understood to be arriving in London from New Orleans on Saturday for an unscheduled visit, with meetings planned. Last month Couhig accused the administrator, Quantuma, of painting Wycombe and Boro as “the bad guys” and maintained he was willing to discuss a “reasonable compromise”. A partner at Quantuma, Carl Jackson, said the resolution with Boro “allows us to push forward with our plans for the sale of the club”. Derby have been in administration since September and are fighting relegationafter a total 21-point deduction. The protracted legal battle – Boro launched their claim against Derby more than 12 months ago – had been a major hurdle in any potential takeover. “I don’t know the timeframe on when the preferred bidder is going to come but now hopefully that brings them back to the table and speeds things up,” Rooney said. “I’ve been pushing and pushing about getting new owners in and this is a big step.” An EFL spokesperson said they welcomed the “positive development”, adding: “The league will continue to work with all relevant parties on finding appropriate solutions that will secure a long-term future for Derby.”A homeless woman who was sexually assaulted by a stranger as she slept in a tent has been awarded damages by police after she accused them of failing to investigate properly. The woman was sleeping rough in Manchester city centre in August 2020 when she awoke to find a man in her tent with his hand inside her clothes while he carried out a sexual act on himself. Despite reporting the incident to Greater Manchester police (GMP), the case was closed shortly afterwards without officers having taken a formal statement from the woman or a witness, according to the woman’s lawyer. The woman discussed the sexual assault with other homeless women in the days after and four others said they had also experienced a similar assault by a man of the same description, her lawyer said. Nicola Bailey-Gibbs, of Hudgell Solicitors, who represented the woman, said: “These sexual assaults on vulnerable homeless women in Manchester city centre were not minor offences and these officers should not have treated them as minor offences. “They were a series of disturbing sexual assaults that should have prompted concern amongst officers whose job it is to protect the public, whoever they may be and whatever circumstances they find themselves in. “This may well have been a serial sex attacker and Greater Manchester police officers appear not to have been open to that possibility. Sexual assaults cannot be ignored, by doing so the consequences could be catastrophic.” The woman was paid £2,800 damages by GMP in an out-of-court settlement. GMP did not accept any liability for the incident, the Guardian understands. The force has been contacted for comment. Bailey-Gibbs said the woman immediately reported the incident to police and officers arrived at the scene. However, she maintains they spoke to her only briefly in the back of a patrol car. CCTV footage was later reviewed by police and then the sexual assault case was closed. No formal statements were taken from the woman or her partner, who was a witness, and no other potential witnesses were interviewed. Hudgell Solicitors believes that had officers carried out a proportionate investigation they would have established a link to all five sexual assaults. “Formal statements should have been taken from all five women and other CCTV should also have been reviewed; had these appropriate actions been taken we believe the outcome could have proved more fruitful,” the firm said in a statement. Bailey-Gibbs said the consequences of the police officers’ actions in failing to investigate could have been catastrophic: “We know that Sarah Everard’s killer was exposing himself in public before going on to commit a murder, these offences simply cannot be taken lightly. “Investigations are under way into how police forces handled allegations that [Everard’s killer] Wayne Couzens indecently exposed himself and whether the appropriate actions were taken, including whether policies and procedures were followed. “My client and other vulnerable women deserve better, and I hope the Greater Manchester police force has reviewed the way it responds to and investigates reports of sexual assaults,” she said. Greater Manchester police have been approached for comment.What easy but impressive date-night dishes would you recommend for Valentine’s Day? Ben, Cardiff As Lara Lee, author of Coconut &amp; Sambal, sensibly points out: “Valentine’s Day is on a Monday this year, so it’s all about having as little washing-up as possible.” The solution? Turn up the heat with a Thai green or red curry. “I’ve been exploring the world of good curry pastes, which you can buy in Asian supermarkets,” says Lee, who favours the Mae Ploy, Maesri, Pantai, Nittaya and Lobo brands. “Fry it in a bit of oil, add a couple of cans of coconut milk, your chosen protein and vegetables, and – voila! – you have a curry.” Lee does, however, “pimp the paste”, throwing in a couple of makrut lime leaves (“I always keep a tub of them in the freezer”), bruised lemongrass and minced ginger. “It can then simmer while you’re sipping wine and listening to Kenny G.” Shareable food such as meze is a good way to go, says Ravinder Bhogal, chef/owner of Jikoni in London. “I also love seafood, especially scallops. They take mere moments to cook, or try them cured in a ceviche.” Emily Scott, chef-owner of Emily Scott Food at Watergate Bay in Cornwall, is also #teamscallops, which she fries before topping with a classic beurre blanc. “Make them more of a main course by serving with new potatoes and greens, or, if it’s for a starter, some nice bread.” A big pot of “comforting but delicate” fish stew is sure to make your night in (or any night, for that matter) special, Scott adds. While that might sound a bit of a faff for a Monday, you could always make the base (finely sliced onion and fennel, garlic, tinned tomatoes, a good pinch of saffron and fish or veg stock) the day before. “Then all you’re doing on the day is cooking whatever fish you want – mussels, clams, prawns, gurnard – in that sauce.” Oh, and knocking up a saffron aïoli (“or cheat and buy mayonnaise”) to spread on accompanying crostini. Mussels and clams are also perfect partners for linguine, Bhogal says: “You may have your Lady and the Tramp moment yet.” More spaghetti slurping can be found in puttanesca, which, Scott notes, earns bonus points for being red. Heat some olive oil in a saucepan, then “add tinned cherry tomatoes with a couple of finely chopped garlic cloves, capers, oregano, some chilli flakes or half a finely diced red chilli, black olives and anchovies.” Bubble away, toss in the cooked pasta and serve with finely chopped parsley. Valentine’s Day is, of course, a friend of the sweet-toothed. “I love making jelly,” says Bhogal, who suggests a rhubarb and custard number. “Gorgeously pink, like a just spanked bottom, with a shot of booze in it to keep it jolly but adult.” Happily, that can be made ahead of time, too. The same goes for old-school chocolate mousse or pannacotta, which Scott serves with figs that have been halved, sprinkled with sugar, and caramelised under the grill. “And things dipped in chocolate are always good, aren’t they?” And as easy to make for two people as they are for one, because, Scott says, “lovingly cooking something for yourself is also really important”. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comIt is almost Valentine’s Day, but that is not why I’m thinking about jewellery. Well, it sort of is, but it also really isn’t. Unfashionably, I love Valentine’s Day, but the spirit of Saint Valentine is very much one of card and flowers, to me. When did it get turned into expensive, sexy Christmas? Jewellery and Valentine’s Day go together like – I was going to say Romeo and Juliet, but only the dreamy first date bit. Both jewellery and Valentine’s Day are about love, but jewellery has always been, as Valentine’s Day is now, also about money. In the bronze age, rings were traded as an early form of currency; the ancient Egyptians had wedding rings, a habit adopted by their Greek conquerers. Roman wedding rings were forged from iron, sometimes with a key motif to symbolise a wife’s control over household finances. For women who could neither work nor own property, jewellery given by a husband or a parent was both a love token – and a potential running away fund, to be squirrelled away just in case the love part didn’t work out. So, while it is fashionable to blame modern hypercapitalism for everything, jewellery was about money as well as love long before De Beers invented the diamond engagement ring with its 1947 slogan, “A diamond is forever”. Jewellery, like underwear, is more deeply connected to the personal than the rest of our wardrobes. Shifts in how we live and how we think matter more than changes on the catwalk. The hopes and dreams for the future that have always been symbolised by a diamond are measured, increasingly, in ethical credentials rather than carats. Lab-grown diamonds have made sparkle accessibly priced, and sustainability credentials have boosted their status. The brand Pandora claims that one of the smaller diamonds from its human-made Pandora Brilliance collection has a carbon footprint equivalent to that of a litre of milk, although the traditional diamond industry argues that ethical production of natural diamonds is more socially responsible than abandoning communities in Africa who rely on mining for their livelihoods. That most jewellery is now bought by women for themselves (in 2018, 78% of purchases were made by women, according to Lyst) has changed everything. A world that was once gold, silver and white (with rose gold for the daring, woo-hoo!) has exploded into colour. Laura Lambert, the young founder and CEO of ethical fine jewellery brand Fenton, told me recently that the popularity of coloured gemstones reflected for her customers a feeling that modern love comes in many forms. The diamond engagement ring is rooted in an era when a woman was allowed to dream of having a husband, but not of having a wife. (Me, I go weak at the knees for an emerald every time.) And if rainbow shades aren’t your thing, look out for a collection created by ethical fashion designer Amy Powney with British jewellery legend Monica Vinader, out next week, which mixes sustainable natural “galaxy” diamonds, which are grey, with seed-shaped keshi pearls. Jewellery is about status and values, but it is also about the little things. Literally, at the moment. Have you tried wearing a mask with large earrings? Take off your mask and the ear loop catches in your earring and pulls it out, sending the butterfly fastening flying so that, even if you can pick up the earring, you can’t put it back in. Or the earring stays in, but the ear loop gets twisted into it, so that you are left clumsily trying to extricate mask from hoop. I have admitted defeat, and retreated into huggie hoops: doll-sized sparkly hoops which are small enough not to get in the way. And small jewellery, for daytime at least, also feels more practical now that the world is opening up and outfit planning is increasingly complicated, with pilates classes jigsawed between meetings and stuff to do after work. The old me would have worn big earrings and taken them off for pilates, but if the new me did that she would almost certainly leave said earrings in the changing room. Jewellery that adds sparkle but is small enough not to get in the way feels right for now. That’s what I’ll be wearing on Valentine’s Day.Steven Knight is no stranger to good reviews. After all, he co-created Who Wants To Be a Millionaire?, received an Oscar nomination for his second movie (Dirty Pretty Things) and is a sought-after screenwriter with credits including Spencer, starring Kristen Stewart as Princess Diana. But when he launched Peaky Blinders nine years ago, the reactions were less positive. The stylised gangster drama, set in the Small Heath area of Birmingham between the wars but shot like an apocalyptic western, initially left critics sceptical. They couldn’t, however, agree on what they were watching. The Telegraph bemoaned a mood of “unrelenting gloom” whereas this newspaper’s lukewarm review saw the show as “a break from tortured angst and depressing realism”. The New York Times decided the series didn’t “have quite enough juice”. Knight smiles magnanimously. “You can’t pretend a good review isn’t nice,” he says over video call from his London home. “But if you can enter the culture, that’s the greatest compliment.” Peaky Blinders has done exactly that. Far from running out of juice, it moved to BBC One and Netflix, amassed a large, devoted following including rappers (Snoop Dogg, A$AP Rocky) and Hollywood royalty (Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt) and became a platform for established stars (Cillian Murphy, Helen McCrory, Tom Hardy) as well as thrilling newcomers (Anya Taylor-Joy, Joe Cole, Josh O’Connor). Its influence even permeated fashion. A mere three episodes had been broadcast when Knight first heard that barbers were getting requests for “a Peaky Blinder” – a mop on top with shaved back and sides. “I thought: ‘Bloody hell!’ Because a haircut is a very personal thing.” This month brings the sixth and final series. “The characters really go through it now,” he says. “They’re up against demons, enemies, fascists. The scale is bigger, and there’s a dark energy. It’s the most jeopardy they’ve faced.” So closely guarded are the show’s secrets that when I allude to the use of a Black Sabbath song, Knight eyes me suspiciously. “How do you know?” he asks. I explain that I was referring to series five, which features War Pigs on the soundtrack, though under the circumstances Paranoid might have been more fitting. “Oh, right,” he laughs, reassured that I haven’t seen – or said – too much. When we left Tommy Shelby, the soldier turned gangster turned MP played by the glowering Murphy, he was pointing a gun at his own head, his plan to assassinate Oswald Mosley in tatters. The leader of the British Union of Fascists is one of a handful of real-life figures – others include Winston Churchill and Charlie Chaplin – who pop up in the drama like plums in a pudding. “We were shadowing current events in the last series,” says Knight. “The rise of nationalism, populism, fascism: it all started to look eerily relevant.” I mention Tommy’s remark on life as an MP – “For those who make the rules, there are no rules” – and he gives a knowing smile. “Yes, you can have your parties,” he says. Production on the new series was a fortnight away from starting in March 2020 when the country went into lockdown; even the Shelbys couldn’t shoot and slash their way out of a pandemic. During that time, McCrory, who played Tommy’s indomitable aunt Polly, became increasingly ill; she died from cancer last April. “The issues of production pale into insignificance compared to that,” says Knight. “I’d written a version with Polly, then another one with a bit less Polly. Events overtook her, and us. It was such a terrible, terrible tragedy.” The opening episode of the new series is dedicated to McCrory. Along with the other female characters, Polly (named after Knight’s great-aunt, who worked as a welder) has been a pivotal figure in a genre that has not always accommodated women. “I wasn’t thinking: ‘Let’s be modern about this,’” he insists. “In the environment I grew up in, women ruled the roost. Many men after the war were quite damaged and spent a lot of time getting drunk, so women controlled the money and organised things. There was even a pub in Small Heath where only female factory workers went in. If a man set foot in there, he’d be assaulted and thrown out!” Peaky Blinders emerged from tales such as these, passed down to Knight from his parents, who grew up in Small Heath. “They were there in the 1920s and 30s as little kids looking up at these incredible people. And when they told me about it, I was a kid myself so it was doubly mythologised. The idea with Peaky was to keep that mythology, to print the legend.” The Garrison pub, which Tommy buys in series two, never looked that way in real life, he explains. “But to a kid sitting outside when the door swings open then closes again, it’s like a cathedral in there.” The series had been simmering away in Knight’s head for decades. He first tried to write it as a novel in the 1980s, then pitched it unsuccessfully to Channel 4. All along it hinged on the same questions. “Is it possible for someone like Tommy Shelby to escape? Can he ever get out? He can earn as much money as he wants but he’s still in the same place socially. In England, is it ever possible to really change?” His own life provides a test case. The youngest of seven, his father was a blacksmith’s farrier. “We’d go to these scrap metal yards – my parents were related to Romany people – and the gates would open on this incredible world that no one else knew about. There was always a fire going, eggs frying in a pan over the flames. There’d be horses, statues, lampposts. I remember saying to my dad: ‘Is this stuff stolen?’ He said – and I used this line in Peaky – ‘No, Charlie just finds it before it’s lost.’” How did Knight make himself useful? “I’m nine years old taking the shoes off this bloody great carthorse! Only off. That’s the easy part.” Did he imagine he would grow up to work in that world? “No because I knew I couldn’t shoe a horse. One of my brothers took on the trade but I was no good at it. And still to this day it feels like a failure. It does, honestly. There’s a Gypsy word, ‘nesh’ – it means when someone looks really crap knocking in a nail with a hammer. I wasn’t quite nesh, but I wasn’t un-nesh enough to become a farrier.” What he did have was literary talent. A teacher praised his writing, so he kept at it. Later, he became the first person in his family to attend university; he got his break in TV, penning material for Jasper Carrott. Has his experience answered the question at the heart of Peaky Blinders? “I don’t think you really change, because those early years are so formative,” he says. “I strongly believe it’s about what you expect of yourself. To begin with, I just wanted to work indoors – to not get soaking wet. And because that expectation is quite low, you carry that on. I think there’s a 20-year lag where you don’t believe you’re capable of doing certain things. If it wasn’t for Harold Wilson and the comprehensive system I probably wouldn’t have done what I ended up doing.” Listening to Knight, who has written a new BBC version of Great Expectations, it can sometimes seem as though Pip from that novel has just stepped off the page. His typical hero is a lone warrior shouldering an unthinkable burden. This applies not only to Tommy but to the tattooed, taciturn Russian heavy played by Viggo Mortensen in Eastern Promises – whose screenplay he wrote – and to the protagonists of films Knight has directed as well as written. These include Locke, a one-man movie with Hardy juggling crises by phone as he speeds along the M40, and Hummingbird, a lively crime caper starring Jason Statham, who was in the running to play Tommy Shelby. Even Princess Diana, holed up at Sandringham for three days over Christmas in the early 1990s, feels like one of his classic, cornered heroes. “She and Tommy have isolation in common,” he agrees. “They’re in an environment where they have to trust their own judgment because they can’t trust those around them.” With Great Expectations going into production, Knight’s series SAS Rogue Heroes, starring Dominic West and Jack O’Connell, arriving later this year, and a longstanding project to build a film and TV studio in Birmingham’s Digbeth finally coming to fruition, his plate is full. Beyond that, the future looks Peaky. “I’m calling the sixth series ‘the end of the beginning’ because there’s so much more to come,” he says. First is a ballet, Peaky Blinders: The Redemption of Thomas Shelby, which will open this autumn in Birmingham before touring next year. A movie, which he has mapped out in his head, will begin shooting in the next two years, before an unspecified array of spin-offs to usher the story into the 1950s. “The writing and making of the film will tell us where we should go next,” Knight says. Whatever happens, the Shelby criminal dynasty won’t be hanging up its hats – the ones with razor blades in the brim, that is – for a good while yet. Series six of Peaky Blinders starts on BBC One in FebruaryThe UK’s equalities watchdog is facing calls for it to lose its status as an internationally recognised human rights body amid claims of politicisation and taking a “determinedly anti-trans stance”. A coalition of 19 LGBT+ organisations led by Stonewall and supported by the Good Law Project says the Equality and Human Rights Commission has taken a “recent and significant” shift on trans rights that has prompted them to make a submission to the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions calling for the body to lose its “A-rating”. The chief executive of the commission, Marcial Boo, said Stonewall and others were “aiming at the wrong target” and urged them to “work with us to identify discrimination against LGBT people so we can take action together to stop it”. The call follows two interventions by the commission at the end of January, in which it recommended that the UK government’s proposed ban on conversion practices not extend to trans people, and it wrote to the Scottish government asking it to pause plans to simplify the legal requirements for gender recognition, reversing its previous position. At the time this was met with fury by some Scottish campaigners who railed against “UK government appointees telling us in Scotland how to legislate in devolved areas”. The commission insisted impartiality was “a core value” and that all decisions “are made independently of any government”. The 19-page submission outlines what the Stonewall-led coalition claims is evidence of “the numerous ways the EHRC now finds itself falling short of international standards”. This includes a “complete absence” of financial autonomy from the UK government and “excessive” governmental interference, including “politically motivated” appointments to the chair and board, “many of whom have repeatedly and publicly demonstrated their opposition to the expansion of human rights, and whose appointments have drawn widespread criticism from NGOs”. A spokesperson from the commission said it took all decisions “impartially, based on evidence and the law, both in the UK and internationally”, that its independence was “guaranteed in statute”, and that all appointments were made through “a fair, open and transparent recruitment process”. “Our statutory mandate and role as a national human rights institution is to protect and promote equality and human rights for everyone – and that includes trans people. Where rights may conflict, our role is to advise on striking an appropriate balance. We uphold fairness for all, and our work is rigorous and impartial.” Calling on the UK government to “revive” an independent EHRC, Nancy Kelley, the CEO of Stonewall, said: “The politicisation of the UK’s human rights body has placed trans people in the firing line, but this attempt to create a hierarchy of human rights in the UK is a very real threat to everyone, particularly those of us protected by the Equality Act”. The submission comes amid growing concerns about the role and independence of the EHRC. Last year its former head David Isaac suggested the watchdog was being undermined by political pressure to support the UK government’s shift in equalities priorities away from gender and race.As governments across the world loosen pandemic restrictions, Beyoncé’s new powerbob is being hailed as the definitive “back to the office” look. Unveiled by the singer as part of a new collection in her Ivy Park fashion line, the haircut comes as Jennifer Lopez, Selena Gomez, Kesha, Kourtney Kardashian and Alexa Chung have all adopted a sharp and short look. “Historically, when you think about the bob’s first real moment as a fashion trend, it’s in the 1920s during changing, unstable times,” said the hair historian Rachael Gibson. “It reappears again in the 1960s and 80s as a powerful, no-nonsense, very strong cut – the perfect antidote to any uncertainty. People often cut their hair during times of economic downturn.” At the beginning of the pandemic, a wave of buzzcuts signalled a change in economic fortunes, but also the shift towards work-from-home culture and an abandonment of fussy corporate style. Now, Beyoncé’s powerbob has been declared by members of the Beyhive – an ultra-dedicated group of superfans – as giving a “CEO of the company” look. Beyoncé’s new look also includes the exaggerated shoulder pads of a 1980s power suit. “It definitely reflects the idea of a return to work,” said Gibson. “This is a total boardroom boss look and the bob feels integral to that.” Gibson draws a comparison to Shiv Roy, the “alpha female” of the HBO drama Succession, who debuts a fresh bob cut in season two. “Shiv’s hair oozes quality and money: it’s really expensive-looking hair, both in terms of the cut and its super-luxe condition,” said Gibson. “The cut also suggests that she’s a strong, businesswoman – or is at least trying to come across as one.” Beyoncé’s powerbob was also a nod to some of the black female icons who inspired her work, said the fashion historian Darnell-Jamal Lisby. “Diana Ross and Tina Turner… were known for their bob wigs,” Lisby said. “Therefore the hairstyle has this history of sensuality as a form of strength in femininity that is at the core of Beyoncé’s artistry. “Having a power suit in the collection subtly celebrates the expanding presence of Black people in professional fields and their continued elevation in corporate America,” Lisby added. Wonky-bob hairstyles may be predicted to be this year’s “it” haircut (see: the shaggy “boyfriend” cut, the Mob-mullet/bob hybrid), but Amy Abramite, creative director of Maxine Salon, said that her most requested cut was a conservative “shorter bob without an angle or layers”. Abramite added the ideal length of cut “hugs the chin” and was worn “with the ends turned slightly under”. So new you, new bob? Gibson sees the powerbob as the ultimate fresh start. “It’s literally cutting away the dead weight and presenting a new version of yourself to the world,” she said. “It’s the hair equivalent of switching your working-from-home joggers for a really well-fitted piece [of clothing].”Each February the rich and famous descend upon St Moritz, not just for the slopes and après-ski but for one of the world’s most exclusive horse races, held on ice. Though the luxury resort has a nearby airport mainly catering to private jets, and visitors can be seen being ferried around in helicopters and Ferraris, moneyed guests are beginning to think about the climate emergency. This is because the White Turf race, the only such event in the world held on a frozen lake, is under threat. It is held on the vast expanse of water directly under the Swiss resort, and because of global heating, the lake is melting. St Moritz was created as a ski resort by Britons, and since then it has been a popular place for extreme snow sports, from the breakneck-speed Cresta Run toboggan race to skijoring, which is standing on skis and being dragged along by a horse on the frozen lake. The White Turf has been held for 114 years, with spectators, musicians, caterers, horses and their trainers all gathering to stand on the ice. Until now, no one thought anything of riding horses, ice skating and dancing over a frozen lake – the ice was always known to be steady and thick. Last weekend, 7,000 people from around the world once again descended upon the lake to watch the race. But organisers watched in horror as water “pushed up” under the ice, putting the races in jeopardy. Organisers of the race say they have had to limit the weight of attractions on the ice as the climate heats and the lake melts. This includes giving instructions to luxury kitchens serving oysters, lobster and venison not to bring too much equipment. Last year those running White Turf were horrified as the ice under the VIP tent cracked, meaning it had to be dismantled and rebuilt on thicker ice. This year the race had to be shortened because ice on parts of the lake was melting. A spokesperson for White Turf said: “With enough ice and not too much snow on Lake St Moritz, everything seemed perfectly prepared for this year’s 114th edition of the White Turf. However, over the past week, water pushed through from below in the finishing area, so that the races could not be held as planned. All racing events – flat and trotting races as well as skijoring – were shortened to 800 metres. Since the starting boxes were not in use either, all races were started with the flag.” Because of this, only four horses took part in the main race of the day, competing for a prize of 20,000 Swiss francs (£15,900). All the Swiss trainers snubbed the race because of the shortened distance. The race was further marred by the death of a horse, Echo Beach, which fell after the start and was believed to have suffered an aortic tear after intense exercise. While for now the races go ahead on the ever-creaking ice, visitors joke that one day the White Turf will become a swimming race. As the winters grow warmer, the future of the race is in doubt.France against Ireland promises to be a blockbuster and without wishing to be overly anglocentric about a match between the two leading sides in Europe, there is an irresistible narrative as Shaun Edwards and Andy Farrell lock horns again. They are two legends of rugby – winning dozens of major titles during their careers – and I have had the privilege of playing under both. Shaun was the only coach who created a personal relationship between me and defence. If I missed a tackle he almost had a look about him that said: “Why would you do that to me?” Sometimes it is just a case of a bigger man running over a slightly smaller man, but I feared the feedback and the repercussions of not doing my job. Shaun, now France’s defence coach, was able to instil that feeling in me. To this day I cannot comprehend how the Rugby Football Union has not written him a blank cheque. His mantra is ‘defence wins you championships’ and throughout his coaching career he has proven it to be the case. Similarly, Andy is an unbelievably good motivator. He would have me ready to play Saturday’s game on a Tuesday just by knowing what buttons to press in the team meeting room before going out to train. He got off to a slightly rocky start as Ireland’s head coach, which in many ways was inevitable. He was still learning on the job and it was always going to take time for Ireland to transition after having someone like Joe Schmidt at the helm, but to me Ireland look the most settled team in the tournament. I’m a huge fan of Andy’s. He’s someone who understands his people extremely well which is such an important quality as a head coach who oversees so many players and staff. I get fed up when I hear that good people can’t make good coaches so I’m delighted to see Andy proving them wrong. Shaun and Andy know how to manipulate the emotions of their players and get them ready. That’s all you can do as a coach. Good coaches get you believing and doing things that might not be second nature to you. Take France as an example. Their DNA is the manner in which they attack, which is great when they have their tails up, but can they be as desperate in defence as they are electric in attack? That is where Shaun comes in because Ireland have that under Andy. I believe that this Ireland team, in terms of cohesion and clarity of gameplan, are ahead of France at the moment. The potential in the French team is astronomical but I’m not sure they are at the same level of togetherness yet. In a condensed tournament such as the Six Nations where you have five matches back-to-back, or a World Cup where it is seven, I would always look to teams who can bank on their set-piece and their defence. There are so many moving parts in attack and there are times when it just does not function. I look at Ireland and see a team built on defence and set-piece. France, on the other hand, are trying to twin defence and attack but with a greater emphasis on the latter which is why I’m leaning towards Ireland on Saturday. If anyone can prove me wrong though, it is Shaun Edwards. Had you asked me on Monday I’d have been even more confident backing Ireland but then came the news that Johnny Sexton would be absent. When we talk about Sexton we often focus on things like leadership, experience and temperament but we can often forget just how talented he is. The best way to illustrate how important Sexton is to Ireland is that famous drop-goal in Paris four years ago. It all started with his pinpoint 22 drop-out. Of course going through 41 phases, when one mistake means it’s all over, requires remarkable effort and execution from everyone in the team but Sexton was the conductor. The composure and accuracy he showed to win the match sums him up. Joey Carbery is a fine player in his own right. He has been badly hampered by injuries but this weekend gets his shot. He is helped by the fact that Ireland have a very robust and considered game plan and he will be slotting into a side that feels familiar. The challenge is that he is not coming on to the pitch with Ireland already having established dominance as was the case against Wales. He has to hit the ground running from the word go. Ultimately small margins are going to decide this match. We often talk about “No Talent Required” – things like how quickly you get up off the floor, how hard you work in the back of the field or making good decisions at the ruck. I have more confidence in Ireland doing that for 80 minutes than I do France but Gabin Villière’s second try against Italy was a great example. Can they show that sort of effort on both sides of the ball for 80 minutes? If they can then they could find themselves in the box seat for the championship and as much as they are a delight to watch, they desperately need a Six Nations title this year or next, before they host the World Cup. They can take a major step closer to that on Saturday.The UK government has given its strongest indication yet that it will agree to calls to extend its visa lifeboat scheme to cover Hongkongers aged between 18 and 24 who were at the heart of recent civilian protests. The current scheme, opened a year ago, is available only to British national (overseas) (BNO) passport holders born before 1997, the date of the handover of the city to China and the ending of the BNO scheme. A campaign that has the support of senior Conservatives including the former foreign secretary William Hague and the last governor of Hong Kong, Chris Patten, has been under way for months. It calls for a route to citizenship in the UK to be opened to younger Hongkongers if they are the children of BNO passport holders who do not wish to come to the UK. In a debate on Thursday on the nationality and borders bill, the Home Office minister Andrew Sharpe said for the first time that the government was looking at this age group and would come forward with proposals. The minister said: “We have heard concerns raised, and are very sympathetic to the circumstances of children born on or after July 1997 with BNO parents.” He said he hoped to have an update for this cohort ready by the bill’s report stage. Ministers had previously proposed this age group could apply to reach the UK through a youth mobility scheme and have said they are expecting up to 300,000 Hongkongers to come to the UK over the next five years. Sharpe said 88,000 BNO holders and their family members had applied to the UK by the end of September and 76,000 applications were granted. The net value of the migrants to the UK Treasury is estimated to be worth £2.4 to £2.9bn over five years. Making the call a relaxation of the rules, the crossbench peer David Alton said: “These are courageous young people that need a lifeboat out of the city. These are the very people that flooded the streets and stood up for freedom in 2019.” Research published last year found 93% of the defendants in street protest cases were between the ages of 18 and 25. Speaking to fellow peers, Lord Patten praised the BNO lifeboat scheme, saying it had already brought many talented young professionals to the UK, including health specialists and teachers. He said the proposal would be a wonderful way “to mend a hole in the lifeboat”, pointing out there had been a comprehensive assault on fundamental freedoms in Hong Kong. He accused China of “the destruction of one of the great free cities in the world”. A previous version of the proposal in parliament tabled by Damian Green was supported by 30 Tory MPs but rejected by the government. Ministers instead proposed an alternative youth mobility scheme, but this does not provide the same route to citizenship. An estimated 200 young people from Hong Kong have applied for asylum, but some face protest-related criminal charges, making it harder for them to apply for asylum. Some have been waiting for a year.François Ozon made a breakthrough in his film-making career in 2000 with an adaptation of an unproduced stage play by Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Water Drops on Burning Rocks. Now, to open this year’s Berlin film festival, he has returned to the dark master of New German Cinema with a gender-switched version of Fassbinder’s 1972 movie The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant, that strange, angular, claustrophobic drama in which only women appear on screen. Fassbinder’s film is set entirely in the apartment of a fashion designer who has an emotionally abusive relationship with her live-in assistant, and then conceives a mad and despairing love for a beautiful young woman who openly cheats on her. Ozon makes some of these characters men, but only some of them. We have to hope he doesn’t get the kind of grief that Paul Feig got for his all-female Ghostbusters, from Fassbinder fans claiming he has trashed their childhoods. Ozon has removed the bitter tears from the title and also the film itself. For all the histrionics, this is a lot more genial, campy and comic than Fassbinder’s gaunt ordeal. And that is down to it being (mostly) male. The female fashionista is now a male movie director, Peter von Kant, boisterously played by Denis Ménochet – with hints that he’s sort of supposed to be Fassbinder himself, though Fassbinder was a lot tougher and more unsentimental than this guy. Peter has a deadpan houseboy-slash-amanuensis called Karl (Stefan Crepon) who hilariously (as opposed to tragically or erotically) is the intimate witness to all the passionate confrontations between Peter and his lover. Petra’s bitchy female frenemy from the first film is still female: Sidonie, played by Isabelle Adjani. Also still female is Peter’s teen daughter, home from boarding school, played by Aminthe Audiard (grandniece of Jacques). Her pert presence is what makes this (like Water Drops on Burning Rocks) resemble something by Noël Coward. Peter’s beautiful, duplicitous lover Amin is played by Khalil Ben Gharbia and Hanna Schygulla, who played the lover role in 1972, has been brought back to play Peter’s mother. The dynamics are definitely different now that there are both men and women on the screen: it is less airless and crazed, although just as theatrical and artificial. Ozon often gives his characters stagey entrances by framing them self-consciously in a doorway. Ozon’s chief coup is making Peter a film director, meaning Peter can give Amin a screen test then and there in his apartment, during which he asks Amin about his parents’ tragic death as the camera is rolling and responds with the intensity – part sadistic, part empathetic – of the killer in Peeping Tom. Both Ménochet and Gharbia are very good in this scene. Yet there is something lighter, almost flippant and French-farcical about this new Von Kant: a man brought low by l’amour, inviting from the audience hardly more than a worldly, sympathetic shrug. • Peter von Kant screened at the Berlin film festival.This may be the perfect time to revive a play about the consolations of the imagination, and of theatre, in the aftermath of apocalypse – and one written by the godfather of the absurd. In Eugène Ionesco’s 1952 tragic farce, a pair of ancient performers create entertainment out of the nothingness of their living room to fend off fear of the destroyed world outside. Director Omar Elerian’s translation (with added meta elements) reaches for all its laughs and is woven into sparkling gold by husband-and-wife team Marcello Magni and Kathryn Hunter. The latter comes fresh from playing the witches in Joel Coen’s The Tragedy of Macbeth and the pair are as magnetic as each other. She is a comic grotesque with the disconcerting movements of a ventriloquist’s dummy, while he looks like a Marx brother. Despite their wizened appearance they are childlike, speaking in Edward Lear-esque nonsense verse and clasping hands for comfort in the pauses. Their elliptical story of loneliness and the necessity of fantasy foreshadows Beckett’s Endgame (1957) and Happy Days (1961): this couple could be either Nell and Nagg, or Winnie and Willie, if Beckett had turned them into music-hall double acts. The production builds deftly to the central premise of the play: they are throwing a party for nonexistent guests and seeking comfort in the unseen. Every time the doorbell rings, the couple spring up and shadow-play shows them letting no one in. He flirts with one of the guests; she simulates sex with another. It is a gloriously fizzy cocktail of slapstick, physical theatre and silliness; we are left rapt to drunkenness, caught in their illusion and aware of its madness. It is not arch, head-scratching absurdism but scintillatingly sad comedy. The invisible guests’ arrivals build to ominousness and laughter gives way to confusion, despair and suicide. The play was written in the aftermath of the second world war, and the couple’s trauma and underlying desolation is only caught in snatches at first (“water water everywhere”), but Jackie Shemesh’s warm lighting gradually turns harsh, and they appear whey-faced and ghostly as the script shows glimpses of the obliterated outside world (“London is now dead” and “the sky is red with blood”). They refer to a lost son, clashing in their accounts of his fate, and we see how the “truth” is only what is palatable for each of them in this bombed-out landscape. Just as TS Eliot’s wartime Four Quartets, recently performed by Ralph Fiennes, resonates for now, Ionesco’s drama does the same, while reaching backwards and forwards, too. The play spirals into ever bigger circles of absurdism as the stage is turned into a theatre of empty chairs and then dismantled, the god-like “Speaker” at the end bringing a Godot-like void. The play’s three actors have a shared history in Complicité whose influence is clear here in the meta aspects. We begin with a dressing room conversation “accidentally” broadcasting Magni’s refusal to go out on stage, and there is the presence of an anxious stage manager (Toby Sedgwick) wavering in the wings and furtively creating sound-effects. This brings much delightful humour – there is a “cup of tea” gag and, later, an “invisible table” gag, whose absurdism resembles a Magritte painting. Cécile Trémolières and Naomi Kuyck-Cohen’s set is made up of lush layers of curtains to denote dramas within dramas, and Elena Peña and Pete Malkin’s music is orchestral, spooky and cutely comic. After the couple leave the stage, Sedgwick’s character reflects on what Ionesco intended and how it relates to today. This carries a self-conscious irony – but the couple are an impossible act to follow and the atmosphere sinks, the ending drawn out. It’s still a hugely exciting revival, exciting to watch, with two spine-shiveringly good central performances. At the Almeida, London, until 5 MarchNelson Mandela’s granddaughter has launched an augmented reality project to help people understand more about the stories of black Britons. On the 32nd anniversary of Mandela’s release from prison, Tukwini Mandela said the initiative would “make black history more visible, so it’s never forgotten”. The technology also allowed her grandfather’s statue in London – which is in Parliament Square but was originally intended to be situated in Trafalgar Square – to be “brought to life”, she added. People looking at the statue will be able to listen to a Make Poverty History speech Mandela made in front of a packed crowd in Trafalgar Square in 2005. The aim was to transform Trafalgar Square into a permanent and immersive history lesson, educating people of the true legacies behind black British history, said Snap, the parent company of Snapchat, which has created the project in partnership with Black Cultural Archives. Snap’s research showed that 53% of people say they do not know enough about black history. Twice as many people learned about black history from television and streaming services (43%) as did at school (21%). The AR “Hidden Black Stories” Snapchat experience also shows a boxing ring to represent Bill Richmond and Tom Molineaux, two black boxers who lived in the 1700-1800s. A gym where Richmond trained was situated in Trafalgar Square, and was demolished around the time Nelson’s Column was erected. Molineaux, an American, was his protege. It highlights a black sailor depicted on Nelson’s Column, believed to be George Ryan, in recognition of the role black sailors played in Nelson’s victory at Trafalgar. Its users will also be able to learn more about Mary Seacole, whose statue stands in the grounds of St Thomas’ hospital, opposite the Houses of Parliament. Seacole, who cared for wounded soldiers during the 19th century Crimean war was voted the greatest black Briton in 2004. After a 12-year campaign, her statue was erected in 2016. Lisa Anderson, of Black Cultural Archives, said: “The opportunity to recognise these stories through cutting edge AR technology that reaches younger audiences is exciting and powerful. British history is full of incredible black people and hidden stories that deserve to be told.”The chief financial officer of the oil and gas company BP, Murray Auchincloss, told investors this week: “It’s possible that we’re getting more cash than we know what to do with.” Oil and gas companies have reported bumper profits, as the gas crisis raises the price at which they can sell their fossil fuels, without raising the cost of their extraction. While they are being showered with cash, households in the UK are suffering the biggest fall in income in three decades, with one in 10 households not having enough money for food and food bank use soaring. This week, BP reported a profit of $12.8bn (£9.4bn) for last year, following Shell’s announcement last week of $19.3bn in profits. Little of the money is going to taxpayers: Channel 4 revealed that BP has paid no tax on its North Sea oil and gas for five years. Bernard Looney, the chief executive of BP, told analysts he was “not seeing increased pressure” for the company to pay more tax, despite calls in the UK for a windfall tax on fossil fuel profits, to ease the burden of energy bills on the vulnerable. Instead, Looney and other senior managers in the fossil fuel industry have sought to justify their bonanza on the grounds that the billions of extra cash is needed to pour into their transition to low carbon companies. The facts of oil and gas company investment do not bear out the claim that the massive returns are being poured into green projects and the race to net zero greenhouse gas emissions. Chris Venables, of the Green Alliance thinktank, said: “The time for oil and gas companies to have invested in the clean energy transition was two decades ago – when they were peddling climate change denialism. If they were serious about renewable energy, they would be doing it right now, but instead their investments are largely going to new oil and gas. So this is a disingenuous argument.” Investment in clean energy by oil and gas companies was about 1% of their capital expenditure in 2020, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA), a proportion likely to have reached little more than 4% for the whole of last year. Meanwhile, the companies are continuing to invest vast sums in exploration and new fields, which the IEA said last year could not be brought to fruition if the world was to limit global heating to 1.5C. BP plans to invest about £2bn-£3bn in renewable energy by 2025, but its overall capital investment will be £60bn, most of which is likely to go into new production that will raise greenhouse gas emissions. The company is estimated to have spent about $3.2bn on clean energy since 2016, and $84bn on oil and as exploration and development over the same period. Looney claimed the “vast majority” of investment in the UK would be in “the energy transition”, but then admitted that this amounted to 40% of its spending budget by 2025, rising to 50% of the budget by the end of the decade. The “green” spending is likely also to include projects such as “blue hydrogen”, derived from fossil fuels, that critics say produces substantially higher carbon emissions than natural gas. Shell’s plans involve an estimated near-term investment of about $2bn-$3bn in low-carbon activities, which is about 10% of its investments, while spending at least $8bn on upstream fossil fuel production. Richard Black, a senior associate at the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit thinktank, said: “The key point about oil and gas majors arguing that higher profits are needed to invest in greening their operations is: prove it. If they argue that is why high profits are justified, they should pledge publicly that a sizable proportion will be invested in proven technologies like wind, solar and storage, rather than blue hydrogen or carbon capture and storage, which are either of unproven potential or several years off.” He was sceptical of whether oil and gas companies would do so. “Past experience suggests that the oil and gas industry is strong on rhetoric when it comes to cleaning up their act, but investment is still inadequate. If they were to make these commitments, with a timeframe for spending, and set up an independent panel of arbiters to verify their commitments, then maybe it would have some credibility.” Labour has called for a windfall tax to ease pressure on energy bills, but oil and gas companies have claimed it would discourage them from investing in low-carbon technologies. Green campaigners doubted these claims. Charlie Kronick, a senior climate adviser at Greenpeace, said: “Shell certainly doesn’t need the threat of a windfall tax to discourage them from properly investing in renewables – they’re already failing to do so. ‘Funding the transition’ is a convenient excuse to protect their bloated profits. There’s no guarantee that any oil company will use the extra cash [from this year’s bumper profits] for the green transition unless they’re forced to do so, yet the UK government continues to talk up new production of oil and gas, which will only make the climate emergency worse.” Part of the problem was government failure to shift the balance of economic incentives away from fossil fuels, according to Connor Schwartz, the climate lead at Friends of the Earth. “It’s clear that oil and gas companies don’t intend to divert their eye-wateringly excessive profits to fund the green transition we need. They have no profit-based reason to do this, because drilling for oil and gas is more lucrative than investing in cheap, green energy,” he said. “This is partly due to government handouts in the form of subsidies and tax breaks, which reward huge multinationals for exacerbating climate breakdown instead of penalising them.” He added: “It’s wrong that they are making billions while so many are struggling to eat and heat their homes. People know injustice when they see it. Any government that genuinely wants to help people out of a national crisis would introduce a windfall tax on these profiteering, damaging companies.”India’s largest garment company has paid out an estimated £3m in unpaid wages to tens of thousands of workers, after two years of refusing to pay the legal minimum wage. Last month Shahi Exports, which supplies dozens of international brands, agreed to pay nine months of back pay to about 80,000 workers, with further payments expected in the coming months that will increase the total paid back to workers to £7m. Shahi and other garment companies across Karnataka, which collectively produce clothing for international brands including Puma, Nike, Zara, Tesco, C&amp;A, Gap, Marks &amp; Spencer and H&amp;M, have been refusing to pay an annual cost-of-living increase to the minimum wage set by the Indian courts in April 2020. More than 400,000 workers were left without their full legal wages for more than 20 months, in what international labour rights groups claimed was the biggest wage theft to hit the fashion industry. In December, garment workers making clothes for the UK high street told the Guardian that they were going hungry and were unable to feed their children as the cost of living increased. The Worker Rights Consortium (WRC), which has been working with the Garment and Textile Workers Union and other labour rights groups across Karnataka, said that Shahi’s decision to pay back missing wages to its workers was a significant step forward. WRC said that after international pressure from brands, who have been criticised for not ensuring workers in their supply chains were being paid properly, Shahi and other garment companies across the region had committed to pay around £19m of the £41m owed to workers. “The dam has broken. The big players are paying and others will have no choice but to follow,” said Scott Nova, executive director at WRC. “Yet this went on for two years in broad daylight. The lesson from Karnataka is clear. ” Since April 2020, garment companies across the region had been refusing to pay the annual cost of living increase to the minimum wage, the “variable dearness allowance”, which was increased to 417 Indian rupees (£4.10) a month. Garment suppliers argued that the Ministry of Labour &amp; Employment issued a proclamation suspending the minimum wage increase shortly after it was implemented in April 2020 and that a legal complaint relating to the requirement to pay the increase was still progressing through the courts in Karnataka. However, in September last year, the Karnataka high court ruled that the labour ministry’s proclamation was illegal and that the minimum wage, including all arrears, must be paid to workers regardless of any other court proceedings. In a statement, Shahi said that it was still awaiting the outcome of ongoing legal proceedings relating to the full payment of minimum wage but that it was paying workers due to concerns about how long the court process was taking. The company said it stands by its legal assessment that it had been granted a deferment and disagreed with the claim that it, along with the rest of the garment industry, was noncompliant with minimum wage laws.There was a moment last Sunday morning when the size of the opportunity rugby league is presented with this weekend hit home. Channel 4’s Sunday Brunch is not usually the first place you would look for a chat about rugby league, but when Adam Hills seized the chance to champion the channel’s coverage of Super League in 2022, it became obvious what a defining moment this is for a sport that has constantly courted mainstream attention. Rugby league is no stranger to free-to-air coverage, with the BBC’s long-standing coverage of the Challenge Cup, and this autumn’s World Cup will be on terrestrial television. But for the first time Super League will be shown live, achieving a bigger audience than ever before on Saturday afternoon, when Channel 4 screens the first of its 20-game commitment across the next two seasons as Leeds Rhinos host Warrington Wolves. “I’m hopeful we can take this sport to a broader audience,” says Channel 4’s head of sport, Pete Andrews. Sky Sports had held a monopoly on Super League coverage since the competition began in 1996, which is why for those associated with the game, this truly feels like a watershed moment. The goal for Andrews and Channel 4 is to satisfy ardent rugby league fans while, perhaps more importantly, hooking in new fans. “That’s the tightrope we’re walking,” he says. “We don’t want to annoy the existing fans but we have to strike the right tone with potential new audiences too.” Channel 4’s determination to make its product different to that of Sky or the BBC is underlined by the appointment of Hills as host presenter. Hills, known for presenting The Last Leg and Channel 4’s coverage of the Paralympics, is a boyhood rugby league fan and he represents Warrington’s physical disability side as a player. “I want to convey the joy I get from watching rugby league but we’re going to make it cooler,” Hills says. “We’re thinking of doing things like getting celebrities who’ve never experienced rugby league before to experience it. We also want closet rugby league fans to come out of that closet. But Channel 4 will be trying to give it an edge like we have done with our coverage of the Paralympics.” Free-to-air television has the ability to boost a sport’s reputation and standing like nothing else. Cricket can attest to that, with the boom in popularity from the 2005 Ashes series and the 2019 World Cup final, both of which were on Channel 4. “It’s remarkable Super League hasn’t been on terrestrial television before,” Andrews says. “We’ve found rugby league to be very inclusive and it fits with a lot of Channel 4’s values. We can’t wait to get started.” The broadcaster has committed to 10 games a season for the next two years, which takes the sport through to the end of its longstanding and lucrative contract with Sky. Saturday is a seminal moment for the sport’s immediate future, with the prospect of more people than ever before watching Super League, but it also creates a new dynamic for the competition to consider long term instead of renewing with Sky. Channel 4 has called on the former Great Britain international Leon Pryce to add insight to its coverage, and the importance of the occasion is not lost on those directly involved in the game. “We’re really privileged and really proud to be involved,” the Leeds coach, Richard Agar, says. “It’s an awesome opportunity for the sport. We want to get out there and really put a show on. I just hope I can go home Saturday night and watch it knowing we’ve delivered a good performance.” With Hills as lead presenter, there is also scope for crossover too, which is arguably the most exciting aspect of this new venture. The Last Leg, Sunday Brunch and many other Channel 4 shows will now mention rugby league for the first time; in terms of profile building, there has never been a moment like this. “To talk about rugby league to people who may not know it, that’s exciting,” Hills says. “But there’s also a hell of a lot of pressure. Channel 4 wants to find a way of opening rugby league up to a new audience. We want to show everyone about this secret and showcase rugby league to the world.”When I was 16, I asked my best friend, Kerry, why she was so into piercings. Because I was young, naive and suburban, I did slightly subscribe to the “you’d be so pretty if you didn’t have all that metal in your face” attitude – echoing my mother, probably. Kerry explained that she refused to let her body be arbitrary. At the time, I didn’t know fully what “arbitrary” meant, but I did not want to appear dense, so I waited until I got home to look it up. For the most part, our bodies are arbitrary. We get the body we get at birth: our eye colour, our hair colour, our skin colour. We have no say in those things at the moment we are born but, talking to my friend, I realised that subsequent changes are within our grasp. We can go against the grain. My first act of defiance came in 1999, when I bleached my hair. Rather than platinum blonde, it turned the colour of Berocca piss. I quickly dyed it fire engine red instead; why would I want to look like my peers when I could look like Ginger Spice? Later, in my 20s, dissatisfied with my body, I went further. I threw myself into health and fitness, and got my first nose job. It made me feel like my body belonged to me – not the other way around. I could harness and shape it as I saw fit. By the time I confronted my gender identity, I was almost 30. One of the big transphobic “gotchas” is that transgender people are somehow unaware of basic biology: we are thick, confused or deluded, if you believe a certain subsection of Twitter. On the contrary, it was my relationship between self and body that told me that I was a trans woman. I was painfully aware of the body I had, but I learned – eventually – that I didn’t have to accept it. None of us are beholden to our bodies. That is not to say that our bodies aren’t vital; they are. Being a woman – cisgender or trans – can feel like you are being set up to fail from the start, and our bodies often affect how well we are able to function within society. But I believe in individual bodily autonomy; a refusal to let the system predetermine or limit your choices is one of the ways we attack patriarchal structures. Although the physical transformations I have made have increased my sense of self-ownership and self-worth, I have remained the same person, on a fundamental human level. With each act of bodily rebellion – some superficial, some life-changing – I have preferred my exterior, but it is not the greatest source of joy in my life. The interior – call it consciousness, soul, self or personality – has remained consistently me, and it’s that part that has experienced love and contentment, heartache and despair. If my body is a vessel, I am its captain. Juno Dawson is a writer and activistPink fizz is such a Valentine’s Day cliche, but sometimes cliches are cliches for good reason. And, these days, pink wine deserves to be taken seriously, whether it’s sparkling or still. That’s certainly reflected in the price of most rosé champagne, which is almost invariably more expensive than its colourless counterparts – in the case of Krug, a whopping 250 quid, and that’s on special offer at Ocado. When you ask why, there’s usually a lot of mumbo-jumbo spoken about the skill involved in blending, and how it’s more expensive to make, yadda yadda yadda, but it’s hard to see quite what justifies the size of such a premium, other than that they can simply get away with it. Unlike rosé, which is generally made from lightly pressed red grapes, pink fizz is made by adding a small amount of red wine, generally pinot noir, to a white wine base. As well as champagne, there are some particularly pretty examples in the UK, including Digby’s Leander Pink and the Woodchester Valley Brut Rosé I recommended a couple of weeks ago, though neither of those is inexpensive, either. The good news, however, is that there is some great-value pink bubbly around: rosé prosecco, which was relatively recently approved as a denomination, cava rosado and crémant are all affordable and, in the case of prosecco, which doesn’t have much flavour of its own, usually preferable to the standard version. Cava, which is also less dry and fruitier than champagne, deserves a revisit, too. You can also cut the cost by popping the cork on a half-bottle rather than a full-sized one. Exton Park (see today’s pick) is one of the few English sparkling wine producers to do one – let’s have more, please – but if you want your loved one to know you’re spoiling them, there’s always Bollinger, whose half-bottles of rosé are currently on sale at Waitrose at £28, with the full bottles on offer at £39, should you feel like splashing out. You’ll easily pay more elsewhere. The other advantage of pink fizz is that it goes with such a wide range of Valentine’s Day food. Smoked salmon, sushi (with which it’s particularly good), lobster, heart-shaped cheeses such as coeur de Neufchâtel, white chocolate, macarons … Even a packet of prawn crackers, which is maybe all you’ll get round to eating. So, even if you’re not celebrating V Day, take advantage of the special offers and stock up for spring drinking. Happily, that’s not that far away now. Five pink drinks to pour for your Valentine La Gioiosa Prosecco Rosé 2020 £8.99 (on offer) Waitrose, £10 Tesco (or £8 for Clubcard members), £9.99 (on mix-six) Majestic, 11%. One of the best rosé proseccos I’ve tasted, certainly at this price. A cocktail of summer fruits. Roche Lacour Crémant de Limoux Rosé Brut 2019 £15.49 (or £13.89 by the mixed case) Laithwaites, 12.5%. Pretty bottle, pretty fruit in this attractive pink fizz from the south of France. Exton Park RB 23 Rosé £25 a half-bottle extonparkvineyard.com, £40 a full-size bottle Highbury Vintners, 11.5%. Stocked at Simon Rogan’s and other top Michelin restaurants, this lovely rosé has a touch of white peach. You can pick it up from the vineyard, if you live near Hampshire. Laurent Perrier Rosé Champagne £59.99 (on mix-six) Majestic, 12%. Bit spendy, but probably cheaper than going out to dinner. And it’s widely available. Roebuck Estates Rosé de Noirs 2016 £42 roebuckestates.co.uk, £42.50 Hennings Wine, 12%. Delicate, summery, red berry fruit, like freshly picked raspberries and redcurrants. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comMy husband is one of four, and they all have children of their own. His parents divorced when he was young after his father had a long-standing affair with a woman he went on to marry. My mother-in-law was left worse off, while my father-in-law has gone on to live a fairly charmed life. She is still white-hot angry with her ex-husband and his now wife. She can’t bear to speak their names and we all go to a lot of effort to ensure they never cross paths. There have been times when she has stopped speaking to members of the family if she feels they have had anything to do with her ex and his wife. We’re a very close family, and I feel so lucky to have a mother-in-law who is devoted to my children. She’s the first we call in a crisis and we all see each other more than weekly. Recently, she has been upset by her ex-husband attempting to muscle in on her and her family. No amount of reassurance seems to help. We can see this is all coming from a place of pain; she’s stuck in a cycle of anger and injustice and we don’t know how to break it. I am so worried that this will break up the family for good. All four of the siblings are losing sleep over this, and I’d love to help. I can sense so clearly how, in wanting to keep your mother-in-law happy, you are all treading on eggshells. This is never a sustainable or relaxing option. And for her children and grandchildren, not seeing their father/grandfather if they want to is not an acceptable option. Psychotherapist Armele Philpotts (bacp.org.uk) and I had a long talk about your letter. We wondered what those “reassurances” you show your MIL look like? It can be easy to feel like we are reassuring someone when we may actually be shushing them, especially in response to family stories we sense we’ve heard before. I’m aware your husband and his siblings were very young when this happened, so there must be pain for them too, and maybe they learned to shush that away (or that mother’s pain was more important). Maybe no one has really seen or validated your MIL’s pain? Philpotts also explained how “anger is a good thing because it tells us that a boundary has been crossed; it’s really about figuring out which one”. In this case it’s pretty clear it’s the affair that has made your MIL so angry. “And it now seems like she is trying to hold a boundary by not talking about, or acknowledging, her ex and his wife,” she added. I wondered if your MIL feels that “having” the family is her recompense for what she lost, and this is why she feels so fiercely possessive of you all. Maybe she thinks it’s unfair of your FIL to have done what he did, have the “charmed life” and have his family. I also wasn’t sure what the set-up was – do you all see your FIL and his wife, but don’t tell her? “If you’re all going about it in a cloak-and-dagger way to protect her, that may replicate the secrecy of the affair,” said Philpotts, which may make her feel duped again. Philpotts wondered if it was coming to a head because some of her grandchildren are nearing the age her own children were at the time of the divorce? We wondered if there could be a time and a place where one of you, maybe the person she finds it easiest to talk to, could broach it with her and say something like: “We can see how much this hurts you, if you ever want to talk about the pain, we’re here for you, but we don’t want to have to hide things from you or lie to you, so how can we manage this?” Ask yourself this: if you’re constantly trying to keep the peace, do you actually have any peace? • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.When Little Simz invited her mum on stage to help collect her Brit award for best new artist this week, it quickly became the evening’s standout moment. “Look at what you’ve done, Mum!” she told her, kicking off a powerful acceptance speech that turned her journey from council estate to awards ceremony podium into an inspirational allegory. The 27-year-old said she was “living proof that if you work hard at something, no matter where you come from, your background, your race, you can be something extraordinary”. Yet fans of the rapper were confused by the prize for “new artist”. Having released her debut mixtape in 2010, Simz now has four critically lauded albums under her belt, including last year’s Sometimes I Might Be Introvert, a thought-provoking and utterly unique record that earned many five-star reviews and was widely considered a new high-water mark for British rap. It reached No 4 in the UK albums chart, the accomplishment that earned her Brit nomination – artists must have had a top 40 album or two top 20 singles to qualify. Before that, she had been endorsed by huge stars including Kendrick Lamar and Stormzy. In other words, the north Londoner, born Simbiatu Ajikawo, is far from a fledgling talent. It wasn’t solely her powerful speech, nor her mum, that made this year’s Brits Simz’s night. Her spectacular performance also provided the musical peak, outshining Ed Sheeran and Adele. She performed two recent singles: the imperious Introvert, in which she was held aloft by swathes of dancers, and the gleefully groovy Woman, a celebration of Black womanhood. In between was a spoken-word interlude from Emma Corrin, AKA The Crown’s Diana, Princess of Wales, who also appears on the album. Other artists were keen to congratulate Simz when picking up their own awards. Dave, who took home the best hip-hop/rap/grime prize, said he was “so proud” of the musician, while Adele wished her “a massive congratulations”. Adele’s crowd-pleasing balladry and Simz’s uncompromising hip-hop may seem worlds apart, but they have something crucial in common. Both have drawn on the talents of the producer Inflo, leader of the mysterious musical collective Sault and the winner, unsurprisingly, of the Brit award for producer of the year. Simz grew up with her Nigerian mother, a foster carer, in Islington, north London, and attended school in nearby Highbury. It was at Mary’s Youth Club that her talents for music and dance were nurtured, and where she first met Inflo. The youth centre has been described by Simz as “the place where it all began for me … a second home”. Aston Wood, who runs the youth club, says Mary’s provides a “safe space for young people to hang out and have fun”, particularly those without the money to afford other leisure activities. It also helps students fulfil their ambitions by connecting them with otherwise inaccessible opportunities and by introducing them to “other adults that could inspire them”. After her Brits win, Simz is one of them. “It’s really helpful for us to be able to speak about Simbi and how hard she worked when she was at the youth club and the years after,” says Wood. “Our young people can relate to her. We can say she did it and you can too.” At Mary’s Simz also met the actor Letitia Wright, the star of Marvel’s Black Panther who also appeared in Charlie Brooker’s Black Mirror. The pair have remained close friends and collaborators: in 2019, Simz photographed Wright for the artwork for her single Selfish. Wright says she has been a fan of her friend’s music “since I was a teenager. Her growth, dedication to the craft and impact through her talent is beautiful to witness.” Simz, too, initially found success as an actor. At 16 she starred on the BBC children’s fantasy series Spirit Warriors; three years later she appeared in Youngers, an E4 comedy-drama about a group of aspiring musicians. Acting is still an important element of her career: in 2019 she played the carer Shelley in the Drake-assisted Netflix reboot of the organised-crime drama Top Boy. She will reprise her role when the show returns in March. Ronan Bennett, Top Boy’s creator and writer, cites Simz’s “stillness, poise and integrity” as key to her success in the role – qualities familiar to fans of her thoughtful, idiosyncratic music. The series, a naturalistic depiction of life on a Hackney estate, has been lauded for its subtle, realistic performances. It is also known for its ensemble cast, featuring the rappers Kano and Dave. Bennett describes Simz as “quietly confident and good with directors and her fellow cast. She doesn’t have to try to project or impose herself in a scene. She’s there, and you can’t miss her.” While Simz is clearly multi-talented, music is her primary form of self-expression. In 2015 she released her debut album, A Curious Tale of Trials + Persons. Sonically ambitious and lyrically dense, it would set the tone for Simz’s eccentric, genre-bending future output. Other artists quickly began to take notice: in 2016 she was picked as tour support by Lauryn Hill. The following year Kendrick Lamar called her “the illest doing it right now”. In 2019 Stormzy – who had collaborated with her years before and guested during her live shows – said she was a “legend”. Despite her embrace by the rap scene at large, Little Simz’s individuality has nonetheless resisted categorisation. She prefers to recount the intricacy of her inner monologue than embrace the humour and sexualisation of rap’s biggest female stars. And although affiliated with grime, her work ventures beyond the genre’s austere sound, taking reggae, blues, video game soundtracks, synth-rock and jazzy R&amp;B. But like many of her UK rap peers, Simz has resisted signing to a label, releasing her music through her own Age 101 records. This staunch independence and singularity – coupled with the fact that British female rappers have long struggled to find commercial success on home turf – may be why Simz’s rise has been so protracted. But there is an upside: the long haul has allowed her to hone her craft and cement her identity, making her perfectly primed for mainstream success.As dank, sticky and heady as the weed that has famously fuelled them, there’s a particular quality to a Cypress Hill track – one that has endured in a career of more than 30 years. To mark the release of 10th album Back in Black, the trio’s MC B-Real will be joining us to answer your questions. He joined the coalescing group in south-central Los Angeles in 1988, and their 1991 self-titled debut album was an instant hit. B-Real is of Mexican and Cuban heritage and mic partner Sen Dog also has Cuban roots, and the pair, backed by producer DJ Muggs, brought Hispanic lyricism and slang into their songs of gunplay and peacocking; their flow was simultaneously laid back and propulsive, and B-Real’s nasal, needling timbre was particularly novel. The breakthrough teed up second album Black Sunday, which went straight to No 1 in the US, powered in part by signature track Insane in the Brain. Other tracks, such as I Ain’t Goin Out Like That, with its eerie guitar feedback, showed how DJ Muggs was drawn to rock textures, and the group further marked themselves out with collaborations with Pearl Jam and Sonic Youth, and a tour with Rage Against the Machine. In 2000, they gave this impulse full rein on Skull &amp; Bones, a double album that featured an entire side of rock tracks. Its single Superstar – recorded in rock and rap versions with Eminem and Deftones’ Chino Moreno among the guests – became their biggest UK chart hit, reaching No 13. This summer, they’ll further underline their rock affinity by touring with Slipknot in the US. Cypress Hill stretched their genre boundaries further with the reggae-influenced Till Death Do Us Part in 2004, and later stepped into dance music with collaborators Rusko and Deadmau5. DJ Muggs has come and gone over the years – Back in Black is produced instead by Black Milk – and B-Real spent time in supergroup Prophets of Rage with members of Public Enemy and Rage Against the Machine, but Cypress Hill have never gone on hiatus, and that mic-swapping between B-Real and Sen Dog is just as gleeful as it’s ever been. Post your questions about their long career in the comments below by 6pm GMT on Monday 14 February, and B-Real will answer as many as possible. His answers will be published in the 18 February edition of the Guardian’s Film &amp; Music section, and online.On Wednesday Boris Johnson announced plans to end all Covid regulations in England, including the requirement to self-isolate if you are infected with the virus. Five people who work in public-facing jobs share their reaction to the news and what ending of all Covid restrictions will mean to them. GP: ‘My main concerns are for the medically vulnerable’ My particular concern is the suggestion that people will no longer have to isolate if testing positive for Covid, for which I haven’t seen any clear arguments or evidence given. Having recently had Covid despite being triple vaccinated, it’s not a very pleasant experience. My main concerns are for the medically vulnerable – of which there are many – and the unvaccinated. We have quite a few patients who we have been unable to persuade to be vaccinated and they remain at risk. I appreciate that we cannot expect people to isolate indefinitely with Covid, but think we should wait until the infection rates and warmer weather indicate that this would not be such a risky strategy. It should also, in my opinion, be accompanied by advice to people to not circulate freely if Covid positive, and unwell, but to be considerate to others in the community – the same should apply if people have flu or significant respiratory infections. Marta, GP, London University professor: ‘I will just have to accept students in the classroom who know they have Covid’ I am deeply concerned about the prime minister’s decision. Most people of course are not touched too badly by Covid these days, if they have been boostered. But some still get very ill, or attract long Covid, and the long-term implications just do not seem to count, at all, nor vulnerable people and how to protect them well. I have to teach groups of students in poorly ventilated rooms, and it looks as if beginning the week after next I will just have to accept that there might be students in the classroom who know that they have Covid and yet have chosen to come to class, and cannot even be forced to wear a mask. I might be able to protect myself to some extent by wearing a mask, and of course everybody is free to wear one should they so desire. I’ve been lucky enough to have students this term and last term who have accepted that I prefer them to wear masks, so all my students have done so in class. But I know for some colleagues this hasn’t necessarily been the case throughout. And messaging from government impacts how people behave, and so if the message is “it’s all over and fine”, I think that will have an impact. Jane*, university professor, south-west England Music and live events producer: ‘I don’t think society can be put indefinitely on hold’ Regardless of the motivations for lifting restrictions, I think it’s good news for the live music industry. Those of us who work in industries that have been decimated by the restrictions of the last two years are eager to get back to our careers, passions and social lives. Money is often quite tight in the music industry, and there’s a limited capacity to reschedule. One positive lateral flow test can derail a project and cost a lot of money. Restrictions have been a huge necessity throughout the pandemic, and I’d never downplay Covid’s severity, especially in the UK. But if these industries are throttled any more, things like such as music events and tours are going to become unviable for anyone without a huge production budget. I don’t think society can be put indefinitely on hold. Just because I want society to resume, doesn’t mean I don’t care about vulnerable people. I have an optimistic view that most people will continue to be reasonable without the legal guidelines, and stay home if they’re unwell. The kind of person who goes to a concert with symptoms is already ignoring the rules. But I think most people aren’t like that, and will do the responsible thing. Harry, music producer, east London Primary school teaching assistant: ‘I worry that staff will feel obliged to come in with coronavirus’ I have lots of high-risk colleagues who are understandably worried about the risk of coronavirus legitimately entering the workplace once restrictions are lifted, and we don’t have the luxury of being in a job where we can work from home. Isolating also felt very legitimised when the government said it was illegal to leave your house when you had Covid. Whereas now, particularly for education, if the government has not mandated something, it will not happen. So I worry that staff will feel obliged to come in with coronavirus, even if they are sick. Since December we’ve always had about 20% of our teaching staff off with Covid. We’re down to the bare bones. We can’t get supply teachers in either, so at the moment we’ll have two teaching assistants teaching a class, because there’s no teachers and no supply teachers. Ending restrictions will mean we will have more staff available, but we’ll also have to manage poorly children who shouldn’t be at school, but are because it is no longer essential to isolate. Sarah*, primary school teaching assistant, the Midlands Youth carers service manager: ‘The onus on disabled and sick to avoid society underpins concerning attitudes’ I work supporting children aged six to 17 who are the main carer for someone with a physical or mental health difficulty, a disabled person or someone who misuses drugs and alcohol. Many of these caring roles are with clinically vulnerable or immunocompromised people. Many of these young people have already been forced to isolate longer than others to keep their cared for ones safe. We’ve continued to follow our own protocols around wearing masks, testing, group sizes to mitigate risks even as restrictions have lifted. We felt the route the government was taking just wasn’t safe for our young people. The alternative for them is they cannot come out. The respite breaks [we offer] are really important in terms of their wellbeing and mental health and creating a social network. I don’t quite know what we’re going to do going forward because we normally take them out to do things such as bowling or laser zone, but once the restrictions are lifted, they’re potentially mixing with people who have Covid and we can no longer reassure their families that we’re mitigating risks. The onus on disabled and sick people to have to avoid society just underpins some already concerning attitudes towards disabled people. Ruth, youth carers service manager, southern England *Names have been changedSo much for the NBA’s most recent incarnation of The Big Three. On Thursday afternoon’s trade deadline, the Brooklyn Nets shipped James Harden to the Philadelphia 76ers for Ben Simmons, Seth Curry, Andre Drummond and two draft picks. The Nets had hoped that adding Harden to a mix of players that included another former MVP, Kevin Durant, and seven-time All-Star Kyrie Irving would make them title contenders. Instead, the group flamed out in little over a year. That the mix didn’t work, frankly, was not shocking. Acquiring Harden, who arguably deserved to win more than one MVP award during his time with the Houston Rockets, was always a barely calculated risk. Harden is one of the great scorers in NBA history, but he came to Brooklyn having worn out his welcome in Houston. Irving, meanwhile, forced a trade from the Cleveland Cavaliers and had spent his time with the Boston Celtics secretly plotting a move to Brooklyn alongside Durant. The Nets had hoped that the talent on the floor would win out over any potential personality clashes. It wasn’t an utterly ridiculous notion, but the mix only occasionally worked. Harden’s arrival paid instant dividends for the Nets but he was limited by hamstring issues during last year’s playoffs, where the team lost to the Milwaukee Bucks in the second round. Any hope that the team would come together this season was dashed when Irving’s refusal to get vaccinated for Covid-19 ensured that he wouldn’t be able to play any home games. According to The Athletic’s Joe Vardon, Harden’s second-straight forced trade was at least partly because he and Irving – literally for much of the time – couldn’t play together. In the piece, Vardon quoted anonymous sources that there was tension between the two, partly because Irving’s vaccine status was effectively harming the team. With Durant out with a sprained MCL, the Nets have now lost their last 10 games and are eighth in the Eastern Conference. As a result, the Nets were forced to bite the bullet and do what no other team has been willing to do all season long: trade for Simmons. Simmons, an exceptionally gifted defender with an inexplicable disdain for shooting the ball, has sat out the entire season so far after a disastrous performance in last year’s playoffs ended any chances of him staying in Philadelphia. He is still just 25, a three-time All-Star with plenty of upside, but the Nets may have merely traded one headache for another. This is what the Nets do, however. They gamble. It was a high-risk, high-reward strategy to bring Harden into the mix in the first place, but they did what they think NBA teams need to do to win a championship. That’s what you do in the league: you try to land multiple superstars by all means necessary, surround them with affordable talent and then hope everybody’s healthy come playoff time. The Big Three concept was born in Boston in the 1980s when Larry Bird, Kevin McHale and Robert Parish led the Celtics to three championships. For our purposes, the modern-day conception dates back to a later Celtics team, the 2008 champions that included Kevin Garnett, Paul Pierce and Ray Allen. They provided a blueprint for the LeBron James-Dwyane Wade-Chris Bosh Miami Heat teams, who went to four straight NBA finals between 2011-14, winning twice. James replicated that success with the Cleveland Cavaliers, where he teamed up with Irving and Kevin Love. The Golden State Warriors then went above and beyond, adding Durant to a roster that already included a homegrown Big Three in Steph Curry, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green. Barring the San Antonio Spurs’ win over the Heat in 2014, the three franchises accounted for every championship from 2012 to 2018. Winning championships by loading up on star players isn’t an NBA-centric concept. It’s been around in US sports at least since the New York Yankees were treating other MLB franchises as their own personal farm teams – and further afield Real Madrid’s Galácticos are perhaps the most famous example in soccer. It even happens in the NFL, as the Los Angeles Rams have proven by making this Sunday’s Super Bowl in part through a series of win-now trades. Still, the 2010s arms race in the NBA seems to have cemented the Big Three Concept as the only workable model in the league, even though that’s no longer the case. The Toronto Raptors, after all, ended the Warriors Dynasty in 2019 on the back of Kawhi Leonard. Last season, as great as Khris Middleton was for the Bucks, the reigning champions were highly dependent on Giannis Antetokounmpo’s NBA finals performance for the ages. Given the constraints of the NBA salary cap, it may actually be preferable to surround a single superstar with the right supporting cast rather than throw big names together and see what happens. The Harden-era Nets aren’t the first time a basketball team has flunked a chemistry test and it won’t be the last. There’s even a case to be made that the success of the Big Three model was an illusion. The Miami Heat weren’t just dominant because they had three superstars, it helped that one of them was James, who is at worst the second-best player in league history. James carried even more of the load with the Cavaliers team that won in 2016. The Warriors built their juggernaut around Curry’s league-altering three-point shooting. Even in the Original Big Three, Bird was clearly on top of that pecking order. For this reason, the Nets, who signed Durant to an extension last offseason, have reason to believe that the Harden trade isn’t the end of their long-term title hopes, even if this season seems a wash. With a healthy Durant, the Nets know that they can still compete for a championship if they surround him with the right pieces. Who knows, if Irving and Simmons actually manage to regularly appear in basketball games, it could even end up being them.Pressure is mounting on the Catholic church in Italy to face a reckoning on child sexual abuse amid unofficial estimates that the country could have the highest number of victims of paedophile priests in the world. Damning investigations into the scale of sexual abuse and cover-up allegations have dealt a severe blow to the church’s reputation in the US, Ireland, Chile, France and, more recently, Germany. But in Italy the issue has been mostly buried. A group of religious and lay associations have now come together to push for an independent inquiry and to urge the Italian state to enact tougher laws to bring paedophile priests to justice and come up with a plan to protect children from sexual abuse by clergy. The group is using the hashtag #ItalyChurchToo and will outline its objectives during an online event on 15 February. “The problem in Italy is enormous but it has been hidden,” said Cristina Balestrini, who leads a group for abuse victims and their families. “For example, two of the priests who celebrated my marriage turned out to be paedophiles. Then there was the priest who … raped my son. So that makes three paedophile priests, just in my small world.” The appeal has been given impetus by the publication of independent reports in France and Germany, where the former pope Benedict was criticised for allegedly failing to take action against four priests accused of child sexual abuse when he was archbishop of Munich between 1977 and 1982. Benedict this week apologised for “grievous faults” in his handling of those sexual abuse cases, but his legal team denied any personal wrongdoing, provoking fury from victims. Hans Zollner, a German priest on Pope Francis’s commission to protect minors, has on several occasions in recent months called for the spotlight to be turned to Italy. “We need these investigations to be done and published in an objective way,” he told La Stampa. “And we need it in Italy too, that way we can look reality in the face and not continue to deny something that gets continuously denied.” Although the issue is being discussed by the Italian church, bishops are divided over whether the investigation should be independently commissioned. Gualtiero Bassetti, who steps down as president of the Italian Episcopal Conference in May, has spoken in favour of an investigation, as have two of his potential successors, albeit an internal one. “The reason they’re now saying ‘oh, we’re thinking about doing something’ is because they want to control the narrative,” said Robert Mickens, the Rome-based editor of the English-language edition of the Catholic daily newspaper La Croix. “The initiative by the associations is scaring them to death, and they’re thinking ‘let’s do something that we can contain’, because they know that if they open it up to the outside world, they’re screwed.” There are no official figures on the number of clerical abuse victims in Italy, but the main victims’ association, Rete L’Abuso, has recorded 360 cases of priests accused or convicted over the last 15 years. A treaty between the Italian government and the Vatican means the majority of child abuse investigations in Italy are carried out behind a wall of secrecy within the Holy See’s jurisdiction. If found guilty by a Vatican court, most priests end up being transferred to a new diocese rather than being defrocked or jailed. Of those found guilty by an Italian court, few are imprisoned. France’s inquiry found that 216,000 children had been abused by clergy over seven decades. By comparing the number of priests in France, about 21,000, with Italy’s 52,000, Francesco Zanardi, who set up Rete L’Abuso, said the number of victims in Italy could be three times that of France. “It’s obvious that Italy is the country where the scandal could be worse, because it’s one of the countries with the highest number of priests in the world,” said Zanardi, who says he was abused by a parish priest from the age of 11 to 15. “There are also many foreign priests accused of paedophilia who have been given shelter in Italy. We need an independent inquiry; if the church does an internal one, it won’t be credible.” Meanwhile, the Italian government is yet to deliver on a request by a UN commission, which in 2019 accused it of being complicit in protecting paedophile priests from criminal charges, to devise a national plan preventing the sexual abuse of children. Campaigners are asking the government to enact a law, similar to one in France, that obliges citizens to report knowledge of clergy abuse. Although the number of churchgoers in Italy has been in steadily declining, the Catholic church still wields a considerable influence in society. The topic of clerical sexual abuse, at least when it comes to Italy, is rarely covered in the press. An Italian TV talkshow was criticised for failing to question Pope Francis about the issue during the pontiff’s first interview on Italian TV last week. “I think Italians might be able to accept an inquiry, but the media would have more difficulty as there’s this kind of reverential fear, especially in state TV, in terms of the Vatican and in general the pontificate,” said Emiliano Fittipaldi, a journalist whose 2017 book Lussuria accused Pope Francis of doing “close to nothing” to stop clerical sexual abuse in Italy. “The only way for an inquiry to happen would be if Francis orders it.” The Vatican has been contacted for comment.At London St Pancras, a ghost station for much of the past two years, the sun was shining through the glass roof and Elton John’s piano, sealed up for Covid, was ringing out again. Happily for Eurostar, the start of the half-term getaway brought the return of queues of passengers snaking up along the shopfronts, heading to Paris and Amsterdam. “I’m so excited, I’m like a child!” said one woman lining up with her boyfriend for the 10.22am departure, a 22nd birthday present of a trip to Paris. She was not the only one feeling that way. On the day many schools in England broke up and Covid travel restrictions lifted, tour operators and airlines have seen the first mini-boom of 2022. With families heading abroad on ski holidays and city breaks – and summer bookings flooding in – the battered travel industry expressed cautious optimism that this year normality is returning. Business has taken off since the announcement in late January that England’s Covid test requirements for the vaccinated would be removed, saving costs and hassle, and giving customers confidence to book after the uncertainty of the traffic light regime that changed permitted destinations weekly. The need for post-arrival or day two tests officially lifted just hours earlier at 4am Friday, and Eurostar, whose survival has been in question, was buzzing again. The cross-Channel service’s station staff were busy urging passengers to move along, prepare their negative Covid tests – still a requirement for France – and wear their masks. “Avancez, c’est bon, juste-là – it’s great to see that it’s so busy, but …” said one happily stressed Eurostar employee, herding people into the right queue. This is the first day, she says, in a long while that trains have been so packed, with 700 or so people on each. Several of the nine departures to Paris were sold out entirely. In the depths of the pandemic, the solitary daily train was barely occupied. Now there were couples off to Paris – “it’s Valentine’s, our first,” one said – as well as groups heading to the ski slopes, and families taking their first holiday since Covid. Kelsey Burdon, from Chelmsford, was heading with her partner and two children to Disneyland. “It’s our first trip in two years. We booked a long time ago.” Not having to test on return was a happy bonus: “We’ll save a lot on the day two tests.” Pete Hovden, from south London, who works in IT, was taking his son Charlie to see Paris Saint-Germain play football. The rule change hadn’t been a factor, he said: he had recently managed to go on a skiing trip that was rescheduled three times, and travelled round Europe during the pandemic. “I don’t think people worry so much after two years of this – they book and accept they might have to cancel,” he said. Travel agents say that the uncertainty has left many looking to experts to arrange their holiday. Hays Travel, which took over the collapsed Thomas Cook high street agencies in 2019, took a third more bookings the week after the change was announced, up to the level just before coronavirus first hit. Dame Irene Hays, the firm’s chair, said it was “remarkable to see”. Greece, Spain and Turkey were booking as ever but there was “phenomenal interest in destinations further afield”, from Mexico and the Caribbean to Bali and Dubai. Customers were spending an extra £500 for an average family holiday, she said, for better accommodation and a longer stay. EasyJet said ski, city and beach holidays had sold well, with Geneva, Amsterdam, Tenerife and Málaga the top destinations for a busy half-term. Spain, Portugal, Greece, Switzerland and Germany had all recently lifted travel test requirements for vaccinated UK travellers, giving “completely test free holidays options”, the airline said. MAG, owners of Manchester and Stansted airports, expects 1.5 million passengers over the next 16 days (with schools in some regions breaking up next Friday) – more than 20 times the number a year ago. “There’s a real sense of excitement for travel as we head into the summer season,” said chief executive Charlie Cornish. Gatwick was set for its busiest day of 2022 with about 50,000 passengers on Friday – and also announced it would reopen its South Terminal on 27 March, when British Airways will restart short-haul flights from the airport. Gatwick mothballed one of its two terminals in June 2020 when numbers had fallen by 95%, but now anticipates a busy summer, welcoming 5,000 more people back to work at the airport. Its chief executive, Stewart Wingate, said: “Things are shaping up quite nicely – this is remarkably different. Airlines want to fly and passengers want to travel. In a little over six weeks we’ll be starting to grow again.” BA will operate more flights to cities such as Barcelona and Lisbon this half-term after seeing a “boost to bookings” from the Covid test changes. At both Gatwick and Heathrow, unnamed volunteer employees were donning Peggy the Pegasus and Leo the Lion outfits ready for family check-in. Tenerife, Madeira and Lanzarote were the most searched for destinations, BA said, with holidaymakers flocking to the Canaries. One Canary Island exodus may not make a summer, some warned. Heathrow airport said it had seen an “Omicron hangover” affecting demand. And Abta, the travel association, said that half-term was promising but not a key moment for most tour operators. A spokesperson said: “Quite a few things still need to change and remain stable for us to get back to pre-pandemic levels – but it’s definitely improving. “There’s very much a feeling this year that people are going to jump on every opportunity to travel. A lot of people have decided, great, we’re finally going to go away – and [they] are off.”Toy Story has become one of those Hollywood franchises that will never die, like Star Wars, Batman or James Bond. Some of us wondered if stretching out the much-cherished adventures of Buzz, Woody and the gang to a fourth instalment in 2019 was pushing it too far, only to be proved completely wrong by the geniuses at Pixar all over again. But now there’s Lightyear, the latest trailer for which dropped this week. And we find ourselves peering at it like the crew of the Nostromo inspecting Alien eggs. What is this strange concoction that appears to be a Toy Story movie of sorts, but one stretched out of all natural proportions, as if the movie screen has been dumped in a hall of mirrors? Where are Tom Hanks’s Woody, Slinky Dog and Mr Potato Head? Why does Buzz sound like Captain America instead of Tim Allen? And who are all these space ranger types he seems to be hanging around with? Sunnyside Daycare this is not, even if Lightyear’s nemesis Zurg looks reasonably familiar at times. As has now been firmly prefaced by Pixar, the Buzz Lightyear of Lightyear is a very different figure to the one essayed by Allen, even if his costume and general air of heroism are somewhat recognisable. This Buzz is the real-life space ranger that inspired the toy bought by young Andy to be his latest plaything way back in 1995. He is therefore not the lovably hubristic figure of fun we meet in the first Toy Story movie, nor the still pretty silly but at least vaguely self-aware character from subsequent episodes, but a real-life, bona fide space hero, or at least a fictional one. Still with me? No? Well that’s hardly surprising, because for the best part of three decades, in fact since the very birth of CGI animated feature films, Buzz Lightyear has been defined by his very toy-ness. To expect us to reimagine him entirely after 26 years is a stretch indeed. There are certainly going to be a lot of kids with furrowed brows in multiplexes come June (if Disney, as we must hope it will, allows cinemas to show the movie). But perhaps I’m being a bit mealy mouthed here. This is, after all, Pixar. The last time they took us beyond Earth’s borders in a big way we were treated to the nostalgic cosmic joy of Wall-E, a paean to 1970s and 80s space and sci-fi movies with an environmentally conscious message 100 times purer and more vivid than the likes of Avatar. If anyone can work out how to completely reinvent one of the defining figures of an entire animated genre, it is Pete Docter (the film’s writer and Pixar’s chief creative officer). Moreover, Pixar is only doing the opposite thing to the makers of The Lego Movie. And if Buzz can be brought back as a real, live human (or at least an animated, fictional take on one – stay with me!) there ought to be scope for endless further meta-reimaginations. Perhaps Quentin Tarantino can be persuaded to make a bloodthirsty, B-moviesque prequel based on the rip-roaring adventures of the Roundup Gang, or someone else can develop a Disney+ show based on the animated, fictional porker that inspired Hamm the talking piggy bank. Maybe the whole thing can work in reverse (again) and a toy version of Luke Skywalker could maybe turn up in Toy Story 5! The only question here is how many Russian doll Buzzes we have to open before we find the real one … At what level of the Toy Story metaverse do we find the genuine article, and not just another copy of a copy of a copy? Think I’m making this stuff up? There are two versions of Zarg in the new trailer alone, for chrissakes, a robot one and an apparently real one. Do they play with the toy version when done conquering planets for the day? It’s all so bewildering, and it seems highly unlikely that the release of Lightyear this summer will do anything much to clear up the mess. Grownups, prepare for confused but happy questions as the credits roll. But be aware at the same time that all these heady, self reflexive twists and turns won’t stop junior asking for a Buzz Lightyear next Christmas. There’s just one question: do you buy the toy based on the toy, or the toy based on the guy who inspired the toy?It is the kind of news that calls for a stiff drink: the cost of a home-poured G&amp;T is bubbling up due to a jump in tonic prices at the supermarket. Shop price data from the research firm Assosia suggests that the price of mixers made by major tonic brands such as Schweppes and Fever-Tree has risen sharply this month. In Morrisons, the UK’s fourth largest supermarket chain, a number of Schweppes mixers, including bestsellers such as Indian tonic water, have increased by 10p to £1.75 for a litre. The cost of some Schweppes drinks sold in Sainsbury’s and Tesco has also increased. The data also reveals widespread price increases for Fever-Tree’s upmarket tonics. Since the start of 2022 Assosia has tracked 15 price increases for the brand in Morrisons, 16 in Tesco and Asda, and 21 in Sainsbury’s. A 500ml bottle of its Indian tonic water now costs £1.95 in Morrisons, a 15p increase. It costs the same higher price in Tesco and Sainsbury’s. With inflation running at a near 30-year high, tonic is just one of many products going up in price on supermarket shelves as supply chain bottlenecks and soaring energy costs put upward pressure on prices. This week, Lord Bilimoria, the founder of Cobra Beer, relayed bad news for beer drinkers, warning that soaring costs would push up the cost of a pint, too. “Our input costs in every way – bottling, energy – are up,” he said. The cost pressures bearing down on businesses were also highlighted by Unilever, the consumer goods giant behind Hellman’s mayonnaise and Marmite, which said further price rises were on the cards for shoppers as its own input costs were expected to jump by as much as £3bn this year. As well as rising ingredient, transport and energy costs, soft drinks makers have also had to contend with the rising cost of carbon dioxide amid supply issues linked to soaring wholesale gas prices. A spokesperson for the Schweppes owner Coca-Cola Europacific Partners said it had faced significantly increased costs in haulage, packaging, ingredients and utilities. With those pressures set to continue, it had “been necessary for us to increase some of the prices at which we supply our products to our customers”. In a recent trading update, Fever-Tree told investors that it too was facing significant cost headwinds However, it isn’t all bad news for gin drinkers, according to the supermarket industry bible the Grocer: the pricier component of the drink – the gin – does not appear to have been subject to any major rises.My uncle, Michael Alms, who has died aged 99, was an orthopaedic surgeon born in Japan who spent his childhood and youth in Britain. Told his racial background precluded him from becoming a consultant in the UK, he went to live in Canada. There he invented a device called the Alms retractor, for use in hand surgery. At his birth in Kyoto, he was named Tadashi Kubo. His mother, Naka Kubo (known as Kimi), was from a samurai family; his father, George Alms, was a captain and translations officer for the British Army engineering battalion stationed in the city. The marriage was felt by Kimi’s family to bring shame and disgrace, and they rejected the young couple. George returned to Britain, but Kimi remained to care for her dying mother, and Tadashi went to live with Kimi’s aunt and uncle. Their daughter, Masu, six years older than Tadashi, became Tadashi’s playmate. When Kimi and Tadashi left Japan in 1924 to join George in Britain, the family tried to erase all memory of them. Arriving in Taunton to join George, Tadashi became Michael Alms. He was told little about his family history – his mother never wanted to talk about it. A sister and brother were born. Michael was educated at Bembridge school on the Isle of Wight. He studied medicine at Bristol University, graduating with its gold medal in 1945. In 1946 he married Beryl Norris (known as Goo), a nurse. He trained in general surgery (specialising in orthopaedics) at the United Bristol hospitals and, after further orthopaedics training at Liverpool University, and obtaining his MCh Orth in 1955, he became a senior registrar in orthopaedic surgery at the United Bristol hospitals. Despite his ample qualifications, he was told that because of his racial origins, he would never be appointed as a consultant surgeon. As a result, Michael, Goo and their four children emigrated to Canada in 1960. He worked as an orthopaedic surgeon at University hospital and St Paul’s hospital, Saskatoon. Later, he went into private practice. To aid with surgery of the hand, Michael invented an adjustable and self-retaining surgical retractor, designed to hold back the skin and soft tissues to maintain a clear surgical field. It is still widely used and is known as the Alms retractor. After Kimi’s death in 1990, Michael managed to trace some of his family in Japan from an old photograph. Seventy years after leaving Japan, he returned to meet the daughters of his cousin Masu. They had been told that her friend, a little boy called Tadashi, had disappeared and no one would tell her where he went. He introduced himself to them with the words, in Japanese, “I am Tadashi Kubo”. He remained in touch with them, visited Japan several times, and created links between the Japanese and British sides of the family. After finishing his private practice, he volunteered for Care International, first in the Dominican Republic, and later in Peru, before retiring properly in 2000 and settling in Vancouver. Michael was a keen sailor, golfer, photographer and potter. He was a founding member of the Saskatoon sailing club and sailing school and a member of West Point golf club in Vancouver. Goo died in 2000. Michael is survived by their children, Harriet, Richard and Georgie, and by five grandchildren and a great-grandchild. Another daughter, Charlotte, died in 2004.Earlier this week the Winter Olympic skating finals dished up one the most heartbreaking things you’ll ever see in sport. Zhu Yi is a 19-year-old Chinese figure skater. She was born and raised in California, and called Beverley Zu until she switched allegiance to her parents’ homeland four years ago. The day before Zhu had skated in the women’s short programme team event. It was a disaster. She’d fallen on her first jump, crashed into a wall, and finished 10th in a field of 10. True to a discipline that is always poised on the edge of some horribly poignant collapse, she’d done all of this to the sounds of Mick Jagger singing about flowers, girls dressed in their summer clothes and a cloud of toxic black despair consuming all human hope. Zhu had been inconsolable afterwards. She was duly scorned and ridiculed overnight on Chinese mainstream and social media (“Zhu Yi has Fallen” was trending on Weibo), with some casting her selection ahead of an “authentic” Chinese skater as an affront. And Zhu looked horribly bruised and fragile at the start of Monday’s free skate, as she paused, took a breath, tiny in all that cold hard space, and immediately fell over again. Then she fell over again, landing splayed on her knee. At which point, with the day melting around her, she just had to carry on, this slight, tearful human in hopeful red weeds weeping along to her own routine as Sunset Boulevard soared and trilled. There were levels to this horribly tender theatre of pain. Towards the end something else began to happen. Zhu began to express her sorrow through her movements, horror seeping in to that perky choreography, because for all its craft this is a discipline the athletes feel. There were melancholic turns and heartbreaking shimmies. She ended with a series of sweeps, all stricken grace, then just kind of collapsed, gloved hands raised to her face. It felt as though three kinds of cruelty had collided here: the basic cruelty of elite sport; the cruelty of our shared digital world; and above all that hard, deathly quality that lurks behind these industrialised propaganda circuses. And yet in the middle of all this there was still that unplanned element of beauty, the spectacle of Zhu Yi painting it black. This was supposed to be the most heartbreaking story of the week in figure skating. It remained that way until Thursday morning. At which point another competitor, Kamila Valieva, found herself on the wrong end of the machine in a way that could provide its own deeply troubling tagline to these Olympics. It has now been confirmed that the delay to Tuesday’s team event medal ceremony was due to a failed drug test; and that the athlete concerned was Valieva, part of the Russian Olympic Committee’s brilliant gold medal-winning team. Valieva is 15 years old. She may already be, according to those who know this sport intimately, the greatest figure skater of all time. The initial finding is she tested positive before the Games for a banned drug used to treat coronary artery disease. The court of arbitration for sport will convene at the request of the World Anti-Doping Agency after Russia’s anti-doping committee lifted a provisional ban. No medical reason for the finding nor any medical exemption has yet been offered. There is no shortage of precedent for sweepings-under-the-carpet in such cases, some a lot closer to home. But should the positive test be confirmed (as a doping violation) the gold will go to the US, so no hard feelings there. And it is a mind‑boggling story on so many levels, Ben Johnson on ice with a helping of neo-cold war politics. A confirmed drug scandal of this scale would put a fist right through China’s Games, and do so at a time when the spectacle has basically become the Xi-Putin show, a summit on the sidelines to a soundtrack of shifting tectonic plates and pistols drawn at the border posts. What stands out for now is the basic cruelty here. This process automatically casts the athlete as the villain. Valieva will be banned, Valieva asterisked in the annals. But Valieva is also a child. If she was given a performance-enhancing drug then what we’re talking about here is abuse, an offence committed against Valieva not by her. The more urgent questions should be addressed to her coach Eteri Tutberidze of the high-functioning Sambo-70 school in Sochi, where very young children are taught to push their bodies to the limits, to live off “powdered nutrients”, to burn briefly as child‑puppet athletes in pursuit of that sweet, sweet, physically ruinous power-to-weight ratio. Valieva can do these extraordinary things. She is the holder of eight world record scores and an almost unbroken run of competitive golds. Mainly, though, it’s all about the performance. She came out last in the free skate, half an hour after Zhu, and danced to Boléro wearing leg-warmers. It was visceral stuff. She reeled off a triple axel and it didn’t feel like a planned technical element, more that weird thing these athletic superstars do where they seem to pause the moment, bending space and time to their will, reaching out into the higher human registers of balance and grace. There was so much content in the routine, so much surplus brilliance, Valieva could even fall over and spring up without it seeming to matter much. At the end she was utterly spent, although that state of extreme exhaustion suddenly feels a little uncomfortable. And right now Zhu and Valieva, first and last in the same field, both look like victims, collateral human damage in the game of sport as geopolitics, sport as toxic global circus. The after-drama is yet to play itself out. But there is a kind of zugzwang here. There is no happy way for Valieva’s situation to resolve itself; and no outcome that doesn’t leave the Olympic Games looking just a little bit more rotten.It sounds ridiculously harsh to say a new manager with a substantial injury list faces a “must-win” game in his third match in charge, but that is precisely the predicament Frank Lampard and Everton are in. Tuesday’s defeat at Newcastle enabled Lampard to see first hand what Evertonians have known for too long – they have an error-prone team lacking in character. An alarming mix for a relegation fight. Leeds, stirring in their recovery at Aston Villa in midweek, can open up a seven-point gap with victory over a side that have taken a pitiful six points from the last 45 available. Andy Hunter Saturday 3pm Venue Goodison Park Last season Everton 0 Leeds 1 Referee Graham Scott This season G7 Y25 R0 3.57 cards/game Odds H 5-4 A 23-10 D 11-4 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Patterson, Kenny, Gbamin, El Ghazi, Gomes, Alli, Dobbin, Tosun, Onyango, Rondon, Iwobi, Astley Doubtful None Injured Mykolenko (illness, 19 Feb), Gray (hip, 19 Feb), Godfrey (hamstring, Mar), Doucouré (groin, Mar), Davies (hamstring, Mar), Delph (thigh, Mar), Mina (quadriceps, Apr) Suspended None Discipline Y44 R1 Form LDLLLL Leading scorer Gray 5 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Klich, Roberts, Bate, Shackleton, Kenneh, Gelhardt, Hjelde, McKinstry Doubtful None Injured Phillips (hamstring, Mar), Cooper (hamstring, Mar), Firpo (hamstring, Mar), Bamford (foot, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y61 R1 Form LLWWLD Leading scorer Raphinha 8I got hooked on these when I worked at the restaurant Wild by Tart. I was sceptical at first, but soon realised that they are quick to throw together and make for sleek petits fours, and I soon started to make them more often. The arrival of high-quality peanut butter on our shelves now means you can make really good versions of this favourite American sweet at home. Chocolate peanut-butter cups You could swap the peanut butter for another nut butter of your choice – it just needs to be thick enough to hold its shape, which will help when portioning it out. You will need a mini muffin tin and mini muffin paper cups. Prep 10 min Chill 2 hr Makes 12 small individual pieces 40g smooth peanut butter 40g crunchy peanut butter A pinch of sea salt, plus more to decorate 10g maple syrup 100g dark chocolate, broken into small pieces 10ml olive oil, or a neutral oil Salted peanuts, to decorate (optional) Make the filling: stir the two peanut butters with the salt and maple syrup, and set aside. Put the mini muffin papers in the tin. Put the chocolate in a heatproof bowl, and melt it, either in a bain-marie or in short bursts in the microwave, stirring frequently. Once melted, stir in the oil. To assemble, put one teaspoon of melted chocolate into each muffin paper. Take another teaspoon and gently divide the peanut butter mixture in the middle of the chocolate in each muffin paper (don’t worry about being too neat). Top the contents of each muffin paper with another teaspoon of melted chocolate, so the sides and top of the peanut butter mixture are covered, then put in the fridge to set for two hours. Once set, sprinkle extra sea salt on top, or decorate each cup with a roasted peanut. Serve chilled: once made, these will keep in an airtight container in the fridge for up to a week. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoIf you’ve considered paring back your social media use, you are not alone. A 2020 survey found that nearly half of adults in the UK were thinking of quitting Facebook. But to truly disappear online is harder. I asked Alicia Mendonça-Richards, a solicitor with expertise in online reputation management, if we can ever delete ourselves completely. I told my mum I wanted to delete my accounts and she said, “What have you done?” It’s not true that only the crooked may need to disappear, right? Right – you could just be somebody who doesn’t want all their personal information online. But there are also examples where there’s false or very private information online, such as with revenge porn. And that is on the up. I worry that, if police are overwhelmed and it’s too expensive to hire lawyers, revenge porn will become the new normal. I wouldn’t say you always need a lawyer. Many porn sites have a simple process to take down non-consensual content. And there’s a national revenge porn helpline. But would it be possible to disappear completely? It would be difficult unless you’ve been extremely careful – no social media, no use of online public records such as the electoral register. What about cookies and advertising data? They used that to track someone down in the Netflix drama Clickbait. That’s different. Many apps sell personal data but, in the UK, it’s usually anonymised. It may be hard to delete yourself completely, but if there is private, false or out-of-date information about you out there, there’ll be a legal avenue for removal. Note to self: Netflix is not real life. You’re talking about the right to be forgotten: legislation that gives people the right to ask search engines to remove content about them. I often see “some links have been removed” at the end of Google results and wonder who had what removed. Actually, that’s just something Google puts at the bottom of all search results. I see! Can you give me an example of when Google might say no? There was a case in 2018 where two people sued Google for failing to remove information about their spent criminal convictions. Google argued people had a right to know. The judge disagreed for one of the claimants, because their conviction was no longer relevant to their life. Different from Axl Rose’s 2016 case to stop Google listing a fat picture of him. Maybe that’s why high-profile people aren’t doing it more? The US doesn’t have an equivalent law. There was a case where it was decided that Google did not have to block global search results, so something removed from Google UK could be found on Google.com. Ultimately, the best thing to do is be careful online. If you are not sure what’s out there, there are companies that can map your entire online presence for you. I just had a full-body cringe imagining all my terrible old haircuts … Well, you could probably argue that the information is outdated, and attempt to get it removed under the right to be forgotten. They should be forgotten! I have served my sentence for crimes against fashion. One last thing – if someone did ask Google to forget them, it’s a human being dealing with it, right? Not some dystopian algorithm? I’m afraid that’s for Google to answer.This time Ayumu Hirano would not be denied. Not by the judges. Not even by the greatest snowboarder in history. Instead, amid the most intense pressure and anger, the 23-year-old from Japan found the halfpipe equivalent of the holy grail. And as Hirano stood on the podium with his gold medal there was a sense of something else too. That a torch was being passed from one generation to the next, as if by osmosis, from Shaun White to Hirano: from the goat to the new breed of bucks pushing at the boundaries like the American once did. Without White, the Olympics might not have Hirano, or Chloe Kim, or Eileen Gu. The now 35-year-old finished his competitive career here, without a medal but with his legacy sitting above him in the medal table. The one-time teenage phenom known as the Flying Tomato, who brought the cool of the X Games to the Olympic arena and dragged the rest with him, finished fourth in his fifth Olympics. White, the defending champion who won three Olympic titles going back to 2006 among those five appearances, called it the run of Hirano’s young life. It was that and more. The triple cork 1440 is so fiendishly difficult that, until Friday morning in Beijing, no one had ever attempted it and gone on to finish their run. White had tried in training, in 2013, and it hospitalised him. Yet from the moment Hirano slid down the pipe and soared 5.5 metres in the air it was on. Over the next second or so, the Japanese rider then became a human gyroscope, spinning four full rotations while simultaneously inverting three times. More tricks followed and long before the judges conferred, and awarded him a score of 96.00, victory was his. “It hasn’t sunk in yet but finally one of my childhood dreams has come true,” he said. “It wasn’t nervousness, but I had a different feeling from usual. I was ready to take the plunge and give it my all, and it was great to finish it off cleanly.” It was some effort because at that point Hirano was in a controversial second place behind Scotty James. Wearing the red boxing gloves that have become his trademark, the Australian unleashed two double cork 1440s on his second run to score 92.50 and move into the lead. It was James who had promised it would take something epic to win an Olympic gold medal. Hirano immediately responded with exactly that: a huge run that looked to raise the bar but was given only 91.75 by the judges. The hashtag #robbed was soon trending on Twitter, but while Hirano admitted he was angry, he was able to channel it to win gold. As for White, he can be proud of his performance despite missing out on a medal. His best run, his second, included a front-side double cork 1440 and his signature double McTwist 1260. But he knew he needed more, and so he upped the ante in his final run by attempting the double cork 1440 combo that won him gold in Pyeongchang. Yet his body couldn’t quite deliver and he was unable to stick a landing. “I wish I could have landed my last run, but I was having some difficulty in my back leg for some reason,” he explained. “It was giving out on every run, I don’t know why. “Maybe it was the pressure, maybe it was just exhaustion. It was really challenging, but that’s OK, that’s it, I’m done.” Then, as it all began to sink in, White began to cry. “Sorry you’re going to get me ugly crying here, but I’m not upset about the result,” he said. “I would have loved to put it down. I made it happen for two runs and I couldn’t hold on for the last. It’s hard for me not to get hung up on that last run, I wanted it so badly. But you can’t always get what you want, you get what you need.” If there was any comfort from leaving empty handed in the final competition of his career, it came from the hugs and acknowledgements from his fellow competitors, who attempted to put into words White’s influence over the past two decades. “Like everyone else who was riding today, I look up to him as a huge idol,” said James. “When I was 15, he was just so much better than everyone else, and I feel he was probably the most dominant snowboard character in competition ever. He looks back on 20 years of riding at the highest level, and it was a huge pleasure to have him today in this competition.” As White heard the tributes he smiled. A new career awaits, and while he is not sure what he will do next, he won’t be short of offers either. “It’s been a journey, I’m just so happy, and thank you all from the bottom of my heart,” he said. “A lot of emotions are hitting me right now, the cheering from the crowd, some kind words from my fellow competitors at the bottom, I’m so happy. “Snowboarding, thank you. It’s been the love of my life.”SoftBank is facing a battle to float the British chip designer Arm, as it remains mired in a legal fight with the head of its Chinese joint venture, while London Stock Exchange chiefs try to persuade the company to reconsider its snub of the UK for the public listing. The Cambridge-based company has been in dispute with Allen Wu, the head of the joint venture Arm China, since 2020 when its board voted to remove him. Wu, who refused to stand down and retains control of the venture because of legal rights, has escalated the battle by launching a third legal action against Arm China, adding further red tape that SoftBank will need to overcome before floating Arm. SoftBank, which bought Arm for £24bn in 2016, has been forced to turn to its backup plan of floating the company after its sale to US-based Nvidia collapsed this week on regulatory hurdles. Widespread political and industry opposition in the UK, Europe, US and China scuppered the deal. Last month Arm, which holds a 47% stake in the joint venture, warned that it had been stopped from auditing the accounts. On Tuesday Inder Singh, Arm’s chief financial officer, admitted that the company had to resolve the issue in China to progress its plans. “[It’s] important for us to make sure that we have certain rights that will be important for our financials,” he said. “One of those will be the continuing right to audit revenues.” Wu’s latest legal action, first reported by the Financial Times, aims to get him reappointed to the board of Arm China, which contributes about a fifth of the company’s global sales. Meanwhile, the SoftBank chief executive Masayoshi Son’s decision to snub the UK for the listing of Arm has caused dismay among the financial and business community. “We think that the Nasdaq stock exchange in the US, which is at the centre of global hi-tech, would be most suitable,” Son said. The comments have not helped the view that London is not best suited for tech listings, with it struggling to compete against other financial centres, particularly the US, where valuations are higher. In July, Wise, an international payments transfer service, became the largest ever flotation of a UK tech company, but its share price has fallen from 800p to 570p since then. The London Stock Exchange is expected to make a lobbying effort to convince SoftBank of the virtues of a listing in London, or to at least consider a dual listing on both sides of the Atlantic, which Arm had before SoftBank acquired the business. The company had been a member of the FTSE 100 for 18 years before being bought by SoftBank. Winning it back would be a huge boost for the capital’s longer-term ambitions to have more tech flotations. Analysts are estimating that Arm would float with a market value of $30bn to $40bn, which would make it the largest tech company on the London Stock Exchange, more than twice the size of the current leader Ocado. At that scale, Arm would also rank between the 19th and 24th largest listed company in the UK. Last year new rules were introduced to try to make London more attractive to tech companies, including allowing dual share class structures, which give founders more control after they float a business, and reducing the amount of shares required to be offered to the public to 10%. The London Stock Exchange Group declined to comment on Arm’s flotation plans. Last month Hermann Hauser, who co-founded Arm in 1990 and was a vocal critic of the deal with Nvidia, said an independent listing of Arm would probably attract investment from some of its largest customers. Arm has been nicknamed the Switzerland of the semiconductor industry because of its neutral status supplying chip designs to almost every industry player. It has more than 500 clients globally, from Apple and Samsung to Qualcomm. “If Arm has an independent future, I think you will find there is a lot of interest from a lot of the companies within the ecosystem to invest in Arm,” said Cristiano Amon, Qualcomm’s chief executive, last June. Other clients that analysts have speculated could show an interest in taking a stake in a publicly listed Arm include Apple and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company.Windsor and Maidenhead council has ditched a plan to abolish arts funding after an outcry from residents and objections from the former prime minister Theresa May, the local MP. Instead of cutting funds to an arts centre and theatre to zero – a move that both organisations said would threaten their existence – the council has agreed a 17% increase in the next financial year. The comedians Russell Brand, Mark Watson, Rachel Parris, Stephen K Amos and Alfie Moore also supported the campaign against the funding cut. May said: “It is extremely welcome that the [council has] listened to the strength of local feeling … The arts play such an important role nationwide, helping to enrich our communities and expand our intellectual horizons.” The Norden Farm Centre for the Arts in Maidenhead and the Old Court theatre in Windsor are now set to receive £140,000 in the next financial year. A consultation launched by the Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead (RBWM) on its budget proposals resulted in 1,800 submissions from residents, community groups and businesses. “Investing in arts and culture was identified clearly as one of people’s key budget priorities,” a council statement said. Andrew Johnson, the council leader, said: “Taking onboard the community’s strength of feeling around arts funding … we amended the proposed budget.” Spending by English councils on cultural services has fallen from £118.93 per person in 2009-10 to £59.90 in 2020-21 – a cut of 50%. Councils are in the process of setting budgets for 2022-23 amid concern about the impact of further cuts in a sector that was badly hit by the Covid pandemic. Councils in England help fund a range of local cultural organisations, including 3,000 libraries, 350 museums, 116 theatres, plus castles, amusement parks, monuments, historic buildings and heritage sites. Jack Gamble, the director of the Public Campaign for the Arts, which organised opposition to the proposed cuts in Windsor and Maidenhead, said: “This remarkable turnaround is the result of people joining together to champion the value of art and culture in our lives and communities.” Norden Farm, which has a 220-seat theatre and organises a range of community activities, said continued council funding was essential to keep the centre open. It had already taken steps to reduce costs and increase income. Jane Corry, the centre’s artistic director and chief executive, said: “We could not be more delighted about the decision last night from RBWM … We are so very grateful to our amazing supporters for showing such love and determination to get sustained arts funding returned, and to the council for showing how much they value the arts.”Cressida Dick absolutely despised Line of Duty. The endlessly promoted Metropolitan police chief really crossed the road to tip on the BBC smash hit – so tellingly incensed by a show about sidelined cops doing the painful and unpopular work of rooting out bad apples. As Dame Cressida finally resigns from the spoilt barrel of the Met, I couldn’t help but recall a 2019 Radio Times interview in which she expanded on her issues. “I was absolutely outraged by the level of casual and extreme corruption that was being portrayed as the way the police is,” Dick told the magazine. “It’s so far from that. The standards and professionalism are so high.” Mmm. It was left to the show’s creator, Jed Mercurio, to offer a little background. “My inspiration for creating Line of Duty was @metpoliceuk shooting an innocent man and their dishonesty in the aftermath,” he explained icily, “so thanks to Cressida Dick for reminding me of our connection.” Dick, of course, ran the bungled counterterrorism operation that resulted in Met officers fatally shooting Jean Charles de Menezes, an entirely innocent 27-year-old electrician. But oddly – indeed, bizarrely – that wasn’t the only Mercurio creation the Met chief had issues with. Both in the Radio Times interview and in an earlier outing on GMB, she added that she’d had to switch off the BBC’s Bodyguard – at the time, the most watched drama since current records began – because she couldn’t handle the mere idea of the two protagonists beginning a sexual relationship. As she put it: “The moment when the home secretary made a pass at the protection officer was just beyond me, I’m afraid.” And yet, beyond her how? Beyond her why? In recent memory, a police protection officer had been dismissed for allegedly having an affair with the wife of the then home secretary, Alan Johnson. At the time, the special operations directorate to which he reported was being run by one Cressida Dick. Forgive me for beginning by focusing on Dick’s outrage about entirely fictional events, when she appeared to experience only mild displeasure at so many hideously real situations involving her officers. But Dame Cressida’s telly critiques unwittingly revealed her most deadly flaws: a total failure of imagination, even in the face of overwhelming evidence, and a total loyalty to officers that superseded all else. The public came a very distant second, and increasingly knew it. As for the historic moment in which we currently find ourselves, you can be sure some future screenwriter will one day consider it more than ripe for dramatisation. Consider where we lay our scene. The under-fire Met police are – reluctantly and belatedly – investigating multiple alleged criminal breaches of the law by the denizens of Number 10 Downing Street, the very people who made those laws. That should be mindblowing enough, and certainly is for the majority of ordinary British people, who have spent many weeks now feeling deeply furious and unforgivably mugged off by their overlords, while they were living under the most draconian restrictions imposed in peacetime. But there is more. There really are Conservative MPs who have spent a lot of those past few weeks explaining, on the record, that members of the government breaking their own laws isn’t that big a deal. Mindblowing again – and yet there is even more. Off the record, some Conservatives are now saying that should the prime minister be found to have breached the law and be served with fines or multiple fines … well, that isn’t too big a deal either, and he could certainly carry on being prime minister afterwards. Still want more? You’re in luck! This morning, a senior ally of Boris Johnson warned that the Met would have to be “very certain” before it dared issue a fine to the PM for breaking lockdown law. “Do you want the Metropolitan police deciding who the prime minister is?” was the way this individual chose to characterise the mere idea of the Met doing their job without fear or favour. “They have to be very certain [before issuing a fine]. If he does get one, it would be odd if the discretionary action of the police determines the future of the country.” Would it? Would it not be more “odd” that the actual prime minister had allegedly repeatedly breached his own laws? Indeed, you might think it rather more “odd” that this was how very senior figures now characterised one of the most basic principles – applying the rule of law. Meanwhile, you’ll be aware there is even more. Also this morning, the home secretary, Priti Patel, denounced the mayor of London’s decision to effectively force Cressida Dick’s resignation as “rude and unprofessional”. Rude and unprofessional – both those words feel like high praise from someone who was found by a formal investigation to have repeatedly bullied her own officials, but who refused to do the honourable thing and resign. The only person to resign in despair was the prime minister’s adviser on standards. Patel herself was protected by the same prime minister currently under investigation himself, in his case by the police. There’s more – always more – but the above is a fairly stark summary of the state we’re in. If the BBC did ever commission a drama about the symbiosis between a fictional corrupt police force and a fictional corrupt government, it would probably be another huge hit. The national broadcaster makes pretty great television that is admired around the world – not that you’d know it from anything ever said by the government, which is itself not admired around the world. Yes, rest assured someone like Nadine Dorries would be straight out of the traps to dump on the corporation for disloyalty or bias or creating something more popular than her. And no doubt Nadine would be ably assisted by whoever Priti Patel appoints to replace Cressida Dick. It’s called sticking together, isn’t it? In the end, low calibre and underperforming politicians seem to like low calibre and underperforming public officials. Everyone gets something out of it, with the sole exception of the entire British public. Yet there is something not just deeply depressing but increasingly dangerous about ordinary people thinking: “If I behaved like the prime minister or those police officers, I’d be sacked.” Trust is the very hardest thing to get back, and trust in the police and in politicians is demonstrably nosediving. Both have only themselves to blame. If there’s some great moral difference between police officers making rape and domestic violence jokes, and politicians claiming it doesn’t matter at all if the prime minister breaks the law, then I’d love to hear it. But there isn’t. However much some Conservatives and some Met officers may strain against it, this shameful moment in both their histories should be an inflection point. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace Join Marina Hyde and John Crace looking back at the latest events in Westminster on Monday, 7 March, at 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book ticket hereSpain has announced it will loosen its border requirements, with children over 12 from non-EU countries no longer needing to be fully vaccinated. The Spanish government announced that it is relaxing its travel rules from Monday, which will be a boost for British holidaymakers planning to head abroad in February half-term. Children aged 12 to 17 will now be able to visit by showing a negative PCR test taken within 72 hours of arrival in Spain, as an alternative to presenting a Covid certificate with proof of having been fully vaccinated. Reyes Maroto, Spain’s minister for trade, industry and tourism, said: “As one of the world’s favourite tourism destinations, we are committed to making travel to Spain a safe and easy experience for our visitors, especially for families travelling with children.” All other UK travellers, excluding children under 12, will still need to present a Covid certificate showing proof of being fully vaccinated at least 14 days prior to arrival in Spain. If more than 270 days have passed since the last dose was administered, proof of a booster jab is also required. Prior to travelling to Spain, all passengers must also present a QR code which is obtained from filling in the Health Control Form (FCS in Spanish) available via Spain Travel Health (SpTH). Tourism bodies welcomed the move, with a spokesperson for ABTA, the British Travel Association, saying the changes to the rules will mean more families will be able to enjoy a break in one of the UK’s most popular overseas holiday destinations. “This, along with the UK also relaxing its travel requirements, means it is getting easier for people to set off on their long-awaited holidays abroad. “With two-thirds of families saying their holidays are more important to them now than before the pandemic, the latest changes should give more people confidence to book their much-missed foreign holiday,” the spokesperson added.The future of the 15-year-old Russian figure skater Kamila Valieva at these Winter Olympics remains in limbo despite the International Testing Agency (ITA) confirming that she tested positive for the banned substance trimetazidine on Christmas Day. Valieva, who captured the hearts of the world when she became the first female skater to perform a quad at the Games as the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) won a brilliant team gold at the start of this week, has appealed her provisional suspension and hopes to compete again in the individual competition next Tuesday. However whether she is allowed to compete or not – along with whether the ROC team can keep its team gold – will be contested in a courtroom after the world anti-doping agency requested the court of arbitration for sport to convene on the issues. Valieva was back practising on Friday, when she looked understandably nervous and fell three times during her free skate routine. Afterwards she covered her face when walking through the mixed zone and didn’t answer questions. However when asked by a journalist whether she was clean and had taken drugs, she appeared to shake her head. Olga Yermolina, spokeswoman for the Russian Figure Skating Federation, said that Valiyeva’s training had gone worse than usual because she was “nervous” and “in a bad mood”. “It is understandable,” she said. “She is not in an information vacuum.” Earlier the International Testing Agency had confirmed that a sample that was taken when Valieva competed at the Russian Championships on Christmas Day had been found to have trimetazidine, a banned heart medication, in it. But the results of Valieva’s sample, which was taken by the Russian Anti-Doping Agency (Rusada), were only reported as positive by a Swedish laboratory on Tuesday 8 February. That was a day after Valieva helped the Russian Olympic Committee to gold in the team figure-skating. She is allowed to practise after she challenged her provisional suspension and a Rusada committee ruled in her favour. However that decision is now being challenged by the International Olympic Committee and Wada, and her legal case is ongoing. In a long and detailed statement, the ITA stressed that Valieva is “a ‘Protected Person’ under the World Anti-Doping Code – this status applies to persons under the age of 16.” The ITA added: “To state the facts chronologically, a sample from the athlete was collected under the testing authority and results management authority of the Rusada on 25 December 2021, during the 2022 Russian Figure Skating Championships in Saint Petersburg, Russia. “The Wada-accredited laboratory of Stockholm, Sweden, reported that the sample had returned an Adverse Analytical Finding for the non-specified prohibited substance trimetazidine on 8 February 2022. Following this, the athlete was provisionally suspended by Rusada with immediate effect.” The ITA also confirmed that a provisional suspension would usually prohibit Valieva from competing, training, coaching, or participating in any activity, during the Winter Olympics. However Valieva can continue to train as she challenged Rusada’s decision on 9 February. Later that day Rusada’s disciplinary committee decided to lift her provisional suspension, thus allowing her to continue her participation in Beijing. “The reasoned decision, including the grounds for which the provisional suspension was lifted, will be issued shortly to all concerned parties,” the ITA said. The IOC has now exercised its right to appeal and not to wait for the reasoned decision by Rusada, as it says a ruling is needed before the next competition Valieva is due to take part in. However Stanislav Pozdnyakov, president of the Russian Olympic Committee, raised concerns about the length of time it had taken for the sample to be made public. “I have serious questions about the time that passed between 25 December, when the Valiyeva sample was submitted in St Petersburg, and 8 February, when it was made public,” he said. “According to the international standards for WADA laboratories, the deadline for uploading the A sample is 20 days from the receipt of the sample in the laboratory. The fact that it took almost a month to get from St Petersburg to Stockholm looks very strange. “This raises very serious questions for me, and it looks very much like someone was holding the sample until after the figure skating team competition was over.” At Friday’s IOC briefing, spokesman Mark Adams refused to be drawn on the specifics of the case but said he hoped it would be settled sooner rather than later. “What is clear is we want to expedite this as quickly as possible, it’s a legal issue and they can be complicated. Legal cases are difficult but it’s important that people get full justice,” said Adams. “For all concerned, not just the Russian athlete, we need a resolution and we are working as fast as we can to get that. “Such cases are not helpful to the Games, these cases need to be prosecuted properly and due process needs to be applied. People need to have confidence in the decisions taken.”This time Ayumu Hirano would not be denied. Not by the judges. Not even by the greatest snowboarder in history. Instead, amid the most intense pressure and anger, the 23-year-old from Japan found the halfpipe equivalent of the holy grail. And as Hirano stood on the podium with his gold medal there was a sense of something else too. That a torch was being passed from one generation to the next, as if by osmosis, from Shaun White to Hirano: from the goat to the new breed of bucks pushing at the boundaries like the American once did. Canada go 11-0 up against Sweden in the final period in the women’s ice hockey! That’s Canada beating Sweden 11-0. That match is definitely over (although they have seven minutes to play) and so is today’s blog ... See you tomorrow for much, much more. And here, for your viewing pleasure, is our daily roundup of some of the best images from the Winter Olympics: Barney Ronay on two tales which demonstrate the darker side of these Winter Olympics: With Canada crushing Sweden 9-0 in the women’s ice hockey, and Latvia and Finland seemingly inseparable at 1-1 in the men’s, we’re going to call it a day for the live blog. Switzerland wrap up a 5-3 win against Canada in the men’s curling. The top five in the round robin, as it stands, is as follows: 1. Sweden 2. Canada 3. Great Britain 4. Switzerland 5. USA Canada are hammering Sweden 9-0 after two periods of their women’s ice hockey encounter, and will be sailing into the semi-finals unless the Swedes can pull off the mother of all comebacks. You can catch up on Sean Ingle’s report here, from yesterday, as to the struggles of Great Britain’s skeleton team: Matt Weston, of the Great Britain skeleton team, speaks to the BBC after finishing 15th: “I think there’s quite a few questions that need to be raised ... but yeah equipment’s definitely going to be one of them. We’ll review everything from start to finish, how it went, the processes we went through to try and get here, but yeah, equipment’s definitely going to be on the list of something we’ll review. “Something’s not right ... I couldn’t have done much more today. I’m really happy with how I slid. Laura [Deas] put some good runs down, and my target was to try and slide as well as she did. We’ll go away and we’ve got to learn some lessons from what’s happened here. I don’t doubt that we’ll bounce back stronger but for the moment, it’s not where we want to be.” Grotheer as expected closes out the gold medal, and a glorious one-two for Germany. Axel Yungk second for silver, Yan Wengang of China finishes third for bronze ... that’s a full podium of history, as neither nation had won an Olympic skeleton medal before: and China had never before won a sliding medal of any sort. Over in the curling, Switzerland lead Canada 5-3 in the final end. Grotheer begins his final run. He has 0.8sec to play with. Silver guaranteed for for Axel Yungk! Germany’s first medal in this event! Yan Wengang will win bronze for China at least, in the men’s skeleton! History is made. It was a poor run from Tretiakov, who made a couple of obvious errors that cost him a decisive amount of speed. Bitter disappointment for the ROC athlete. Zheng Yin was top of the standings ... and now his compatriot, Yan Wengang, hits the top of the charts with a wonderful run of 1min 015sec! Pressure on Alexander Tretiakov, of the ROC team, who is up next. Links below to all the Winter Olympics pieces we have published today ... with more to come: Zheng Yin of China is the new leader with a lightning-fast run of 1min 028sec! Only Grotheer, the favourite for victory, has gone faster on a single run. The home faithful will be delighted to see Yin go that quick. China have never won a medal in any sliding event, so says the commentator on the BBC. A Ukrainian skeleton athlete flashed a small sign that read “No War in Ukraine” to the cameras as he finished a run at the Beijing Olympics on Friday. Vladyslav Heraskevych’s sign was printed on a blue-and-yellow piece of paper, matching the colours of his country’s flag. Alexander Gassner is the new clubhouse leader in the final run of the men’s skeleton. Just to explain (using my deep knowledge of this event) the leading sliders will be going out last. Germany’s Christopher Grotheer and his countryman, Axel Jungk, were in first and second place at the halfway stage. Switzerland now edge ahead, 4-3, against Canada going into the ninth end of their men’s round robin curling encounter. This is going to be a nervy one ... It looks like Matt Weston and Marcus Wyatt, the Great Britain competitors in the men’s skeleton, are set to finish 15th and 16th respectively. Wyatt, having finished his final run, says he gave it everything. Norway throw in the towel before the scheduled final end ... and that’s a thumping win for Bruce Mouat and co. As it stands that puts Great Britain third in the round robin standings. Sweden are top with three wins out of three. Canada second, having played one match fewer than GB. Jaclyn Narracott, of Australia, was fastest after the second heat of the women’s skeleton with a time of 2min 04.34sec earlier today. Hannah Neise and Tina Hermann were second and third for Germany. Not good news for Great Britain’s team, though: Laura Deas and Brogan Crowley are down in 21st and 22nd in that second heat ... Now, it’s time for the fourth and final run for the men – the gold-medal match. When Great Britain’s curlers are hot, they’re hot. They now lead Norway 8-2 in the seventh end. It’s much more exciting in the match between Canada and Switzerland, however: the score is 3-3 going into the seventh end. It’s now a 2-0 lead for Canada against Sweden in the women’s hockey. Brianne Jenner and Sarah Fillier with the goals. In the men’s hockey Latvia and Finland are 0-0 in the first period. In the men’s round robin curling, Norway have now pulled a point back against Great Britain. In the sixth end, it’s 5-2 to Great Britain. Hello again everyone, Luke here. I’m just watching the replay of the 1,000m short track skating final. Wow, that was eventful and emotional. VAR checks aplenty ... and devastation for Choi Min-jeong despite her silver medal. A fantastic win for Suzanne Schulting, who embraced the bronze medalist, Hanne Desmet, as she celebrated following the confirmation of the result. She defends her title, just as the Italian, in the 500m a few days ago. There’s a big ice hockey game getting under way: the women’s quarter-final, where Canada already lead Sweden 1-0. Earlier, the USA beat Czech Republic 4-1; it would be a big surprise if those two rivals don’t end up meeting in the final. Team GB have stormed into a 5-1 lead over Norway in the men’s curling. You know what they say though – four points is a dangerous lead with six ends to play. Elsewhere ROC lead Denmark 4-1 and Switzerland have a 2-1 edge over Canada. Back at the Yanqing Sliding Centre, ROC’s Alexander Tretiakov has edged into bronze-medal position behind the leading German duo, with Latvia’s Martins Dukurs in fifth behind Yan Wengang. The lower-ranked competitors are currently taking their third runs, so the top of the leaderboard is unlikely to change before the gold medal run in about 45 minutes. We’ve just seen Nathan Crumpton, American Samoa’s only representative at these Games, who should get a gold medal for the sickest lid. She set a world record on her way to the final, and now Suzanne Schulting has defended her Olympic title. The Dutch skater led from the front but was pushed to the line by South Korea’s Choi Min-jeong, who is in tears after missing out by 0.05sec. Hanne Desmet finished third to claim Belgium’s first medal at these Games, with 500m gold medallist Arianna Fontana (Italy) penalised as she tried to keep pace with the leaders. Team GB are back in curling action, with the men’s team taking on Norway. The British quartet have taken an early 3-1 lead, but there’s a long way to go. Heads on, lads. In the men’s speed skating 5,000m relay semi-finals, Canada, Italy, South Korea and ROC qualified for the final. China came fourth in the first heat after a fall, but have been awarded a place in the final after it was judged that a Canadian skater impeded them. On Wednesday, the South Korean team accused the short track judges of bias towards China after two of their skaters were disqualified from a semi-final. On social media, there is predictable division over whether this particular decision was fair. The third run of the men’s skeleton has just started; the sliders go in order of their time so far, with the fastest first. They go in reverse order for the final run, which will take place later today. Christopher Grotheer of Germany has widened his lead over compatriot Axel Jungk, with China’s Yan Wengang in third. Germany have been utterly dominant in the sledding events so far, winning all four luge golds – and that looks set to continue. Bryan Armen Graham has been speaking to Mikaela Shiffrin and believes that the all-conquering American will be remembered as much for the humility shown at her lowest ebb as for her sparkling successes. You can read the interview here: I’m off for a bit of lunch, so will hand you over to assorted colleagues to guide you through the next little while on a very busy day at the Winter Olympics. Ski jumping: At the conclusion of the Men’s Large Hill Individual Qualification Round, it’s a Norwegian 1-2 at the top: Marius Lindvik (135m / 136.4pts) and Halvor Granerud (133m / 131.6pts) in first and second respectively. Slovenia’s Peter Prevc in third, Kamil Stoch of Poland down in eighth. The top 50 athletes go through, and according to the results on the official site, that means six out of 56 starters are eliminated. Santos beats Fontana in the second semi-final in the women’s short track 1,000m! Great racing. Schulting, Desmet and Choi Minjeong will be the other finalists and the final will be coming up in about half an hour. The full list of qualifiers from the men’s 500m short track skating heats: Shaolin Sandor Liu, Hungary, 40.948 Sebastien Lepape, France, 42.081 Ren Ziwei, China, 40.669 Adil Galiakhmetov, Kazakhstan, 40.722 Steven Dubois, Canada, 40.399 Pavel Sitnikov, ROC, 40.591 Denis Nikisha, Kazakhstan, 40.482 Jordan Pierre-Gilles, Canada, 40.488 Stijn Desmet, Belgium, 40.585 Konstantin Ivliev, ROC, 40.272 John-Henry Krueger, Hungary, 40.407 Roberts Kruzberg, Latvia, 40.430 Abzal Azhgaliyev, Kazakhstan, 40.870 Hwang Daeheon, South Korea, 40.971 Ryan Pivirotto, United States, 41.018 Shaoang Liu, Hungary, 40.797 Vladislav Bykanov, Israel, 40.90 Sun Long, China, 42.871 Dajing Wu, China, 40.230 Petro Sighel, Italy, 40.350 I’ll wait for these men’s 500m short track heats to finish and will then bring you the full list of qualifiers. Peter Prevc of Slovenia takes the lead in the ski jumping with a mark of 131m and 128.3pts. Sadreev knocked down to second, Antti Aalto (Finland) third and Kamil Stoch (Poland) fourth. All change in the live standings for the men’s individual – large hill ski jumping. Danil Sadreev (ROC) leads. But Kamil Stoch of Poland is up any second now ... Behold, the daily Olympics briefing courtesy of Martin Belam: In the fourth 500m heat, Jordan Pierre-Gilles (Canada) is all over the back of Denis Nikisha (Kazakhstan) but he can’t get past. There’s a bit of argy-bargy on the way to the finish line ... at the Olympic version of Stockley Park, the officials have a look at the video. But soon enough confirmation comes of the result. Nikisha first, Pierre-Gilles second. That man again: Shaolin Sandor Lin (Hungary) and Sebastien Lepape (France) are the athletes to qualify from the first heat of the men’s 500m short track skating. Ziwei Ren (China) and Adi Galiakhmetov (Kazakhstan) go through from the second heat, and Steven Dubois (Canada) and Pavel Sitnikov (ROC) progress from heat three. Kristen Santos (USA) speeds away to a stunning win in the fourth and final quarter-final of the women’s 1,000m short track. Minjeong Choi goes through in second ... but hang on, the officials are having a look ... No penalties after a clash between Petra Jaszapati and another skater ... Jaszapati qualifies! Meanwhile, in the ski jumping ... Cestmir Kozísek tops the standings in the men’s individual - large hill qualifying round with a jump of 126m and 107.8pts. Light years ahead of Kevin Maltsev, of Estonia, who managed 113m and Vitaliy Kalinichenko (Ukraine) Lee Yubin (Korea) wins the second quarter-final in commanding fashion, with Maame Biney (USA) also progressing. Arianna Fontana of Italy, who’s already played a starring role at these Games, wins the third last-eight race with Hanne Desmet (Belgium) second. However, the officials are having a look at the result. Another interminable VAR check. The result stands: Fontana and Desmet are through. Right, here comes the short track skating ... And in the first women’s 1,000m quarter-final, Suzanne Schulting of the Netherlands sets a new world record, 1min 25.514sec! Her compatriot, Xandra Velzeboer, progresses to the semi-finals alongside Corrine Stoddard (USA) in third. Carl Klingberg makes it 4-0 to Sweden, before Juraj Slafkovsky registers a late consolation for Slovakia in the hockey. Defences remain on top in the ice hockey. Czech Republic 1-1 Switzerland, Sweden 3-0 Slovakia, both matches into the third period. Sweden will go top of Group C, above Finland, with their win ... Czech Republic and Switzerland will stay third and fourth in Group B respectively, below Denmark and ROC. The future of the 15-year-old Russian figure skater Kamila Valieva at these Winter Olympics remains in limbo despite the Independent Testing Agency (ITA) confirming that she tested positive for the banned substance trimetazidine on Christmas Day. Valieva, who captured the hearts of the world when she became the first female skater to perform a quad at the Games as the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) won a brilliant team gold at the start of this week, has appealed her provisional suspension and hopes to compete again in the individual competition next Tuesday. It’s never too late to sign up for Martin Belam’s daily Olympics briefing. Get it hot off the press, direct to your email inbox, right here: Medal table latest – Norway, Germany, Sweden, in that order: Winter Olympics mascots through the years – in pictures: Nils van der Poel of Sweden broke his own world record and captured his second gold medal of the Beijing Olympics with a dominant victory in men’s 10,000m speed skating. Van der Poel added to his victory in the 5,000m, which was a much closer affair. This time, it was just the outspoken 25-year-old against the clock. Swinging both arms to build extra speed over his closing laps, Van der Poel crossed the line in 12min, 30.74sec. The Swede easily broke the world mark of 12min 32.95sec he set in February 2021 and was more than nine seconds ahead of the Olympic record set four years ago by reigning champion Ted-Jan Bloemen of Canada. The silver medal went to Patrick Roest of the Netherlands, the same spot he took behind Van der Poel in the 5,000m, but this time he was nearly 14 seconds behind in 12min 44.59sec. Italy’s Davide Ghiotto, who skated in the next-to-last pair with van der Poel, grabbed the bronze in 12min 45.98sec. Van der Poel’s victory came after he criticised the Dutch federation over a report that it was trying to influence ice makers at the oval to set up conditions that benefit its skaters. While saying he had nothing against athletes from the Netherlands, Van der Poel called the report a sign of “corruption” that needed to be investigated by the IOC and the International Skating Union. Dutch officials shrugged off the complaints. (AP) Norway’s Marte Olsbu Röiseland hit a perfect 10 out of 10 shots before roaring to victory in the women’s 7.5km biathlon sprint race on Friday, taking her second gold of the Games. The Swedish 22-year-old prodigy Elvira Öberg skied a brilliant final lap to secure silver, 30.9sec behind Röiseland, with Italy’s Dorothea Wierer winning the bronze. Starting fifth in the field, Röiseland, who won bronze in the 15km individual race, had an excellent first lap on the skis and then hit a perfect five shots from the prone position to take an early 10.4 secs lead at the first shoot. Once she got her nose in front, there was no looking back and she piled the pressure on the rest of the field by again shooting perfectly, this time from standing, to cement her lead heading into the third and final 2.5km lap of the course. She never let up, crossing the line 1min 16.1secs ahead of then-leader, compatriot Tirill Eckhoff, as many in the rest of the field struggled to match her pinpoint shooting. Öberg, sister of 2018 Olympic champion Hanna, had other ideas, blazing through the first lap before rattling off five perfect hits and briefly taking a lead of 0.4secs after the first shoot. However, that lead quickly evaporated and, though she again shot perfectly from standing, she was left to vainly chase Röiseland’s superb time of 20min 44.3secs, coming in just over half a minute behind. Italy’s Wierer was also perfect with her shooting but slightly slower on the skis as evening crept in over the National Biathlon Centre, and Norway were soon celebrating again. “I wanted so badly to have an incredible run,” Röiseland said. “It was so wonderful to get that last shot, it was the best feeling ever.” (Reuters) Coming up a little later: Women’s 1000m short track skating (quarter-finals and semi-finals), men’s 500m short track heats, Men’s individual large hill ski jumping (qualification round) ... there is also men’s round robin curling, with Great Britain facing Norway, and men’s skeleton too. According to my some-time colleague Mikkel Condé on Twitter, Ukaleq Slettemark (who hails from Greenland and is competing for Denmark) hit 20/20 in the women’s individual biathlon and 10/10 in the women’s 7.5km sprint today. Which makes her the top shooting athlete across the Games. Sharp shooting. In the speed skating, that was Van der Poel’s second medal of the Games. He won gold in the 5,000m and now he takes the 10,000m. Incredible performance. No recent change in those ice hockey scores: Czech Republic 1-1 Switzerland, Sweden 3-0 Slovakia. There are still a few athletes out on the course, but no one is going to trouble the podium. Röiseland claims gold (her third medal of these Games) with a time of 20min 44.3sec, Elvira Öberg (Sweden) wins silver in a time of 21min 15.2sec, and Dorothea Wierer takes home the bronze in 21min 21.5sec. Drama in the speed skating, and then some: Nils van der Poel of Sweden grabs the gold medal in the men’s 10,000m with a world-record time of 12min 30.74sec! Patrick Roest (Netherlands) wins silver and Davide Ghiotto (Italy) takes bronze. Elvira Öberg comes home in silver-medal position in a time of 21min 15 sec! Wierer is now in bronze-medal position. Elvira’s sister, Hanna Öberg, finishes in 17th after missing three times. The Australian snowboarders Scotty James and Valentino Guseli say they’re part of a halfpipe trick revolution after Olympic champion Ayumu Hirano’s gold-medal performance. Japan’s Hirano nailed a triple cork during his thrilling final run at Genting Snow Park to win gold. The 23-year-old was the first boarder in history to land the trick - which involves three off-axis rotations - and complete the run, earning a score of 96.00 from the judges. He had attempted it twice leading into the Olympics but both times was unable to see the run through. “Obviously the triple cork will be something to work on a little bit more, to develop,” James said. “I didn’t get it done today but I think it’s quite a milestone, the triple, and you want to get it done to know it’s possible. I know what I can do moving forward and I will put that into action and be competitive for as long as I want. I’m really happy to even be at the forefront of doing the trick because it’s going to be obviously something that will recur a lot in the future.” Describing the trick as the “pinnacle” due the height of the halfpipe, James said it wouldn’t be easy. He stands 188cm while Hirano is 160cm, so the fast rotations required are more difficult for the Australian. “The risk and margin for error is even smaller and we have to be absolutely en pointe to really compete with the guys,” James said. Guseli, 16, said he would start working to nail his triple for competition. “I’m thinking I’d better learn those tricks to compete with the big dogs because triple corks are here to stay,” said Guseli, who finished sixth in his debut Games. His [Hirano’s] final run was beautiful - it was flawless and it’s going to be very hard to beat him for a very long time because he’s just insane.” Öberg misses twice on her next visit to the range. That should be it for her hopes of a podium. Elvira Öberg of Sweden hits 10/10 on the range in the biathlon! Can she unseat Roeiseland from the top spot? Dorothea Wierer (Italy) now sits in silver position, Lisa Hauser (Austria) finishes in 21min 31 sec and crashes to the snow in exhaustion. Sweden are now 3-0 up on Slovakia in the ice hockey, in Group C. Czech Republic 1-1 Switzerland in Group B. Latest from the men’s 10,000m speed skating: Patrick Roest of the Netherlands is fastest in 12min 44sec ... and his compatriot, Jorrit Bergsma, is second-quickest in 12min 48sec. Alexander Rumyantsev (ROC) is third with a time of 12min 51 sec. Marte Röiseland sets a clubhouse lead of 20min 44sec in the women’s 7.5km sprint biathlon. She has already won bronze in the individual event and gold in the mixed relay at these Games. The action keeps coming: The women’s 7.5km sprint biathlon is well under way. Marte Roeiseland of Norway has hit 10/10 on the shooting and is well placed to win gold if she can keep the speed up with her skiing on the way home. On to hockey, now ... in men’s Group B, Czech Republic and Switzerland are locked at 1-1 in the first period. In Group C, Sweden are 1-0 up on Slovakia, also coming towards the end of the first period. Eve Muirhead has a chat with the BBC after a 9-7 women’s round robin defeat by Republic of Korea: “We had control after the eighth end, unfortunately if my last in the ninth had curled another centimetre, millimetre, we were going to give up two max ... it’s frustrating that, it’s annoying, but that’s curling isn’t it? You win by inches and you lose by inches. So we’ve got to learn from our mistakes out there today, and come back out tomorrow firing. “The ice was a definitely a little straighter today ... and did get a little slower towards the end, but these are the kind of things that we need to be a bit sharper on and figure that out a little bit earlier ... We’re not on until tomorrow evening now, so we’ve got a lot of time ... I guess it’s learning from our mistakes in this game, and it’s probably switching off for a while, it’s essential that we do that. “We’ve got to remember we’ve had a very tough start here [against some of the best opponents] ... It hasn’t been an easy start but we know we can beat these guys.” Swizterland and USA top the women’s round robin standings in the curling, each with three wins out of three. Canada, Japan, Denmark, Sweden and Great Britain and Korea all have won win each. Quotes from Shaun White after he finished fourth in the snowboard halfpipe earlier today: “I’m not sad I’m proud of what I put down. And I can’t help but think if I would have hit the podium in third, I would have wanted second. And if I’d have gotten second, I would’ve wanted first. It’s just the fighter in me, and I’m always hoping for more. My leg, in my run, was just giving out on me, and I’m thinking, Wow, of all the days to have this happen,” he said. “I had something to prove [in my career], and my sport was pretty misunderstood,” White said as he choked back tears. “Everybody kind of thought I wasn’t really going to amount to much in my lifetime, in my career. Everybody’s been asking me what my legacy in this sport has been. And I’m like, You’re watching it.” Korea look in control in the 10th and final end in their match against Great Britain with their three-point lead ... Great Britain hammered Sweden 8-2 in their previous match but they have now registered two defeats and one win. Other final scores: Switzerland 8-7 ROC, Japan 8-5 Canada, USA 8-4 China. Switzerland’s Lara Gut-Behrami finally got her hands on super-G gold at the Beijing Games on Friday, completing her long journey from teenage prodigy to Olympic champion. Gut-Behrami has been the face of Swiss women’s skiing since bursting on to the World Cup scene as a 16-year-old but, while she has been a consistent force on the World Cup circuit, it was not until last year’s world championships that she was finally able to add major event gold to her list of achievements. The 30-year-old, who has now added to that haul at her third Olympics, credits the late career success to gaining perspective about life and the ups and downs of skiing. “I am really happy to have got that gold ... but you can’t build your life around winning gold,” she said. The Swiss had finished fourth in the past two Olympic super-G races - missing the podium by a hundredth of a second in Pyeongchang and seven hundredths in Sochi. The 30-year-old could be forgiven for thinking she was cursed at the big events with only a bronze in downhill at Sochi to show for her efforts. But after picking up another bronze, in the giant slalom here on Monday, she produced a fluent run to secure gold. “I just thought it was probably going to be my last Olympic super-G of my life and I just wanted to show something great. I just wanted to ski,” she said. “I am happy that this time I am fast enough because last time for sure I was fourth and it was always tight. It’s not bad to have the hundredths by my side this time,” she added. (Reuters) The curling pendulum, if such a thing exists, swings back to Korea ... they score four against Great Britain in the ninth end, and now lead 9-6. It’s not impossible that they could conjure a victory in the final end but it looks highly unlikely. In the other women’s round robin events, USA lead China 8-4, Japan are 8-5 up on Canada, and Switzerland lead the ROC team 8-6. The men’s 10,000m speed skating has begun at the National Speed Skating Oval. Patrick Roest of the Netherlands (where else?) currently tops the standings in a time of 12’44”59. The BBC just showed a moving interview with Shaun White, following the end of his Olympics career. ‘It’s not about today, it’s about my whole career ... Snowboarding has been my life,” he says, as he thanks his fellow competitors ‘for what they said to me at the bottom [of the run]’. Scotty James of Australia won silver and Ayumu Hirano took gold. White, who it feels like has been around forever and is finally hanging up his snowboard, finished fourth after falling on his final run. Here is our report: Thanks Geoff and hello all. Great Britain remain 6-5 ahead in the curling for now, during the ninth end. Some breaking news from overnight: The future of the 15-year-old Russian figure skater Kamila Valieva at these Winter Olympics remains in limbo despite the Independent Testing Agency (ITA) confirming that she tested positive for the banned substance trimetazidine on Christmas Day. That’s it for me today. Luke McLaughlin is taking over. Curling: Disaster for Korea! Final stone of the 8th end, with two British stones in the rings, and Kim gets a foul called for holding onto the stone too long. A Korean lead 5-4 becomes a deficit 5-6, with two ends to play. A really brave solo race from Iivo Niskanen, who led at every checkpoint, looked in the zone until the last couple of kilometres, then found enough to get home. Alexander Bolshunov for the ROC was the last possible threat, but his late push can only get him into silver position. Johannes Klaebo is in bronze spot. There are still some racers on course, but they’re lower-ranked racers who are four or five minutes behind Niskanen’s times at the various checkpoints, and can’t win. Niskanen finishes in 37:54:80. What a time! Cross-country: Niskanen hits the final 13.8km checkpoint well ahead of Klaebo. Klaebo and Hyvarinen are the only racers within a minute of Niskanen’s time. He doesn’t look as fresh and chill as he did, the work is showing. Does he have enough left to take it home? Curling: Great Britain take a point back, and trail Korea 5-4 after seven ends in the women’s event. The Norwegians start to arrive. Klaebo in 38:32:30, the new leader for now, carving nearly another 30 seconds off Hyvarinen. Holund can’t beat his compatriot, coming in five or six seconds slower. And Golberg has dropped away, coming in sixth behind Poromaa. But behind them, Niskanen is flying! He’s gone through the 10.5km mark nearly a minute faster than Golberg, who was fastest until then. Poromaa finishes and goes to the top, 19 seconds ahead of Maloney Westgaard in 39:42:5o, but he has Hyvarinen burning up behind him, finishing in 39:00:20. Finland, Sweden, Ireland the current top three, with the three Norwegians and the Finn Niskanen to come. Maloney Westgaard finishes the 15km in first place, at 40:01:50. He won’t keep top spot, but it’s his for now. I shouldn’t forget the Norwegians, mind you. Johannes Klaebo, with his wealth of past Olympic golds, world championships, and the like. Paal Goldberg and Hans Christer Holund, all clocking fast 10.5km times. Hyvarinen, Poromaa, and Niskanen look like our three contenders at this stage. Niskanen is further back, having just passed the 6.3km checkpoint, but he’s burning up the fake snow. Then Hyvarinen, the Finn, comes through five seconds faster than Poromaa. Cross-country: Poromaa shatters the time at the 10.5km, going through 37 seconds faster than Maloney Westgaard. Curling: Korea get the last stone in the sixth end, and use it profitably to seal another two points. It’s 5-3 to the ROK. Jouve has flagged, as expected. Several racers have now gone faster than his 10.5km time. All of the seeded racers are now on the course. Iivo Niskanen, another Finn, is one to watch. He’s the first racer today to hit the first timing mark at 1.8km faster than the sprinter, Jouve. Does it in 4:58:20. And Niskanen is a distance racer. He won bronze in the skiathlon a few days ago. Finally Jouve gets some competition at the 6.3km. William Poromaa of Sweden and Perttu Hyvarinen of Finland clock faster times by a few seconds. Jouve the fastest up to 7.5km. Nobody has got within 20 seconds of his 6.3km time, but Irishman Thomas Maloney Westgaard has got the gap down to 16 seconds at the 7.5km. Which is halfway, for the number enthusiasts. Cross-country: Jouve still has the fastest time up to 6.3km now, but he is a sprinter, and the seeded racers haven’t got into the mix yet. Curling: In the fourth end, the rings were littered, every stone was in play. In this fifth end, both teams are just smashing each other’s stones out of play. There’s one GB stone in the rings with three to play. Muirhead taps one of her guards back in there to join it. Kim has one stone left, and uses it to remove one British stone. But that leaves Muirhead with one point in the bag, and the chance to add another with her final stone. Does it, using the one Korean stone to take pace off her own, leaving GB with two in close. The score ties up 3-3. Richard Jouve of France hits the lead at the 3km mark by over 20 seconds. A blazing run so far. It’s a long event though. Cross-country skiing: The men’s 15km classic is underway. This has 99 racers on the same course, each starting 30 seconds apart, so it is measured as a time trial essentially, though some skiers end up in bunches depending on speed. Hirose Ryo of Japan has the fastest time at the 3km checkpoint, then gets caught by the impressive Finn, Remi Lindholm. Kim threads the needle between the various guard stones and short shots, sliding right to the target and knocking the British stones around a bit. But GB still holds the centre position. Muirhead curls in another defensive stone to guard the centre line. It falls a few inches short, touching the line but not crossing it. Kim produces an even better shot, sneaking between about eight stones and somehow easing right into the house! Nudging the British stone slightly further out. Muirhead has to try to replicate that shot, but hits her own guard stone. From GB looking at perhaps four points, ROK steal one. It’s 3-1 to Korea after four ends. A very involved game for GB women in the fourth end. They call their optional timeout to get their coach down to discuss tactics. They have four stones in the circles with three to play, and want to make sure they make the most of it. They try to land a defensive blocker just in front of the rings, but it runs very light and comes to rest two or three metres short. The tactical chats all come through the microphones on course. A lot of Scots accents in the British team, very pleasing to listen to. Another guard attempt comes up a bit short, but they’re not too unhappy with it. With one stone left, Eve Muirhead tries to nudge her centre-line guard stone back into the house, but puts too much on it and knocks it clear instead. EunJung Kim follows up with a simple draw to the middle of the house, joining a stone already there, to finish the third end with a lead 2-1. Curling: A bit of an escape for Great Britain in the second end. Eve Muirhead has the second-last stone and misses an attempt to nestle it near the button and knock out a Korean stone. ROK have a chance at three points. But EunJung Kim puts too much juice on her shot, knocking out both of her existing stones and leaving a British one. It’s 0-1 to GB. Right then, time for some curling. The Great Britain women’s team is starting off against the Republic of Korea. Second end, no score. Hockey: In the men’s prelim round, the Russians beat Denmark 2-0. Hockey: With 40 seconds left on the clock, the Czechs roll the dice one last time, taking off Peslarova and putting an extra skater on the ice, leaving the net unguarded. They attack the USA goal fiercely but can’t get through. With five seconds left, the puck is cleared and the Americans score from halfway into the empty net. The final score is 4-1 in the women’s quarter-final, but what a performance from the Czech team against the overwhelming favourites from the USA. Took a lead, held them level until the dying minutes, threw everything into this contest, and leave exhausted. The defensive effort especially, with 59 shots on goal to 6, yet holding that scoreline. They should be proud. Finally, the USA women kill off this game. Peslarova makes one more big save, off the pad from Knight’s shot, but the ricochet is powerful and lands right on the stick of Savannah Harmon, to the right side of goal. She slings it back in before the goalie can react. The score is 3-1. Forty seconds left on the American penalty clock, and one of the Czech players is sent off. So four on four briefly, then the USA will get the advantage. Just under six minutes to go, and another penalty against the Americans. Five on four for two minutes! 54 shots to 6, and yet the USA only lead 2-1. Radova is back on the ice, the player who had that big collision with the boards. Got the bridge of her nose taped over and kept going. USA score! The weight of probability finally, finally tells. But that was a bit dirty. Peslarova loses her stick, in the scuffle of keeping out a goal. She tries to get it a few times, but one of the Americans knocks it away. Not allowed, but not seen by the officials. A few seconds later, she still hasn’t got the stick, and there’s a powerful shot from Lee Stecklein. It takes a deflection and sneaks past the Czech tender. It’s 2-1. Murphy gets back on, and the Czechs couldn’t get a decent shot away in those two minutes. Shots on goal are 42-5 in favour of the USA. Czechs are back to full numbers, and now the USA get penalty pinged for two minutes. Abbey Murphy with a high stick. Just about every player on the ice just mashed together at the mouth of the Czech goal, like a rugby maul, and the USA still can’t score. Peslarova stands immovable. Third period starting now between the USA and Czech women. Now it’s the Czechs who have a player sent off, only for two minutes this time after a lunging trip. But as the second period ends, it is still 1-1 with the massive underdog Czech women’s team standing level with the might of the USA. Kara Peslarova is playing a blinder: the Czech goaltender has made some great saves today. None better than a one-on-one right now after the USA break away down the ice from a defensive position. The Czechs have been doing all the attacking in the last few minutes with a one-player advantage with Cameranesi off the ice. Lots of confidence, not enough polish in front of goal. Hockey: The American women keep pounding the Czech goal, but they’re defending like demons. Can’t get through, six minutes left in the second of three periods. Now there’s a penalty against the USA, Teresa Radova is pushed into the boards and hits her head. Dani Cameranesi gets five minutes in the bin. Radova probably won’t play on though, she’s on the bench and looking shaken. They wear helmets but that was heavy contact, big concussion risk. Hockey aside, it’s going to be a pretty quiet couple of hours at the Games. We’ve got some curling round-robin matches starting for the women in about an hour, and the men’s 15km cross-country skiiing in just under two hours if you like to watch people throw up at the finish line. This is some real Mighty Ducks territory here - the Czech women’s ice hockey players mostly play in small European leagues, they were considered an astronomically unlikely chance to compete with the USA, but they’re doing just that. Still 1-1 after the halfway mark of the second period. What’s up, snow bunnies? What should happen two seconds after Beau leaves the desk, but the Czechs score. That’s after 24 minutes and 59 seconds of scoreless play, in the second period. Michaela Pejzlova puts it away. And what should happen then? 48 seconds later, the US equalise. A scramble of a goal through traffic, via Hilary Knight. It’s 24 shots to 3. And 1-1. At this moment, there is literally nothing going on at the Olympics. Our two hockey games -- Denmark’s men vs. the ROC, the US women vs. the Czech Republic in a quarterfinal -- are at intermission after the first period. But these games will be worth monitoring when they resume. Somehow, they’re both scoreless. The USA has outshot the Czechs 18-0, but their scoring rut continues. With that, I’m signing off for the evening. Next up, live from Australia, it’s Geoff Lemon. It’s official: Ireland’s Tess Arbez didn’t catch Lara Gut-Behrami, so the Swiss skier is indeed the super-G gold medalist. Mikaela Shiffrin finished ninth. She’s not a speed specialist, but she still has quite a resume in the event. What’s interesting -- and inspiring -- is how she’s dealing with her difficult Olympics. Nothing changes her career record of Olympic, world championship and World Cup success. But what’s happened in these Games and the way she’s reacting has added something unique to her career and life story. She’s coming out of this as a hero, and deservedly so. Sean Ingle has the latest on the Russian figure skating doping case, in which we now have confirmation that the athlete in question is the phenom Kamila Valieva, who is still training in the hopes that she’ll not only get the delayed gold medal in the team event but also compete in the individual event, in which she’s a favorite. Sarah Schleper has made it down the super-G course. The 42-year-old skier is competing her sixth Olympics, dating all the way back to 1998. She competed for the USA in four of those Games, highlighted by a 10th-place finish in the 2006 slalom, and switched to Mexico before the 2018 Olympics. More interesting things about Katie Tannenbaum, the Virgin Islands athlete who is 25th out of 25 in skeleton. First, she had to go into isolation in Beijing after a positive Covid test that also robbed her of her chance to carry the flag in the opening ceremony. She barely got out in time to complete the training runs that are required before competition. Second, in a World Cup race, she slammed through a stray broom that had been left on the track in 2020. After all that, seeing her carry the flag around the track after her second run is a nice moment. The women’s hockey quarterfinals are underway, and the USA is outshooting the Czech Republic 10-0. The score, though, is what you get when you take away the “1” digit in that stat. The 2021 world champion in super-G and giant slalom will leave China with a gold and a bronze in those two events. The bronze she earned earlier this week is her second, following the downhill in 2014. The gold will be her first. She was fourth in super-G in 2014 and 2018. We say “unofficial” because the skiers who were seeded lower than 30th are racing now. The odds of them catching anyone in the top 10 are lower than the odds of Han Solo piloting through an asteroid field. Maybe lower than the odds of the Tie Fighters chasing Han Solo getting through the asteroid field. Silver medalist Mirjam Puchner of Austria is more of a surprise. She has never finished higher than third in this event in World Cup competition, though she has a pair of downhill wins. Switzerland’s Michelle Gisin, who won the combined in 2018, is the bronze medalist. Ester Ledecká finished fifth, missing out on another unique double in snowboarding and Alpine skiing but still a pretty good run. Mikaela Shiffrin is ninth. She didn’t look happy with her time, but it’s an improvement over her two DNFs. She’ll be a contender in the combined. The second run in women’s skeleton has wrapped up, and Australia’s Jaclyn Narracott has taken an 0.21-second lead over Germany’s Hannah Neise. Germany, which has more sliding tracks in use than any other country, has riders (sledders?) in second, third and fifth. The USA’s Katie Uhlaender remains in eighth, ahead of first-run leader Mirela Rahneva of Canada. Team GB’s Laura Neas won’t repeat her bronze-medal performance. She’s 21st, one ahead of fellow British rider Brogan Crowley. In 25th place, out of 25, is Katie Tannenbaum, who proudly waved the flag of the U.S. Virgin Islands after finishing her second run. Her bio lists her hobby (singular) as “acroyoga, the physical practice which combines yoga and acrobatics.” I sometimes had yoga teachers who went quite fast, a practice I called “yogaerobics.” Yes, John Shuster and company are the defending champions, but Team GB’s Bruce Mouat is ranked first in the world right now. Leading by two in the 10th end, but without hammer, Chris Plys played two solid takeouts, leaving only one Team GB rock in the house with few chances to get another one in there. Grant Hardie’s hit-and-roll effort didn’t pan out, and Shuster knocked out the last GB rock in play. Mouat came up and tried to freeze his rock to a US stone, but he came up a bit short, and Shuster coolly removed it to clinch the win. Time at last for a curling update ... Team GB’s Bruce Mouat answered John Shuster’s three-point fourth end by scoring two in the fifth. Then it got things went awry for the defending champions from the USA, giving up a steal of two. But Shuster’s resilient team bounced back with two points in the seventh, then piled up rocks in the house to hold Mouat to a single point in the eighth. Shuster nearly put the game away in the ninth. After a lively conversation with teammate Matt Hamilton to figure out what they wanted to do, Shuster tried to remove two GB stones to score four. He got one, but the other hung around, and Shuster took two. Sweden’s Niklas Edin, who lost to Shuster in the 2018 final but beat the Americans yesterday, routed Italy’s Joel Retornaz 9-3 and has opened with three straight wins. Switzerland beat the ROC 6-3. Super-G isn’t the U.S. star skier’s best event, but she’s still been better than nearly everyone in the world over the past four years. She won the World Cup trophy in the discipline in 2019 and won the world championship in the same year. She finished third in the world championship last year. This time around, she started well and was ahead of leader Lara Gut-Behrami at the first intermediate time. But she lost a bit of time later in the run and crossed the line in eighth place with a lot of skiers to go. Still, that’s better than not finishing, and perhaps it sets the stage for a good finish in the combined, where she can ... well, combine ... her slalom mastery with her solid speed event skills. Team GB took gold and silver in the 2018 women’s skeleton competition, but that looks highly unlikely this time. Canada’s Mirela Rahneva and Australia’s Jaclyn Narracott are first and second after the first run, separated by 0.02 seconds. Rahneva, who has also competed for Canada in rugby sevens, hasn’t won a World Cup race since the 2018-19 season. Narracott trains in England at the University of Bath. Other notable names after the first run: 4th: 2018 silver medalist Jacqueline Loeller (GER) 9th: 2012 world champion and fifth-time Olympian Katie Uhlaender (USA) 19th: Kelly Curtis (USA) 21st: 2018 bronze medalist Laura Deas (GBR) 23rd: Brogan Crowley (GBR) Ester Ledecká’s bid to repeat her feat of winning gold in snowboarding and Alpine skiing has come to an end. The Czech athlete, who already defended her title in parallel giant slalom, was second on the hill in super-G and was beaten by the next two skiers down the hill. Mikaela Shiffrin is 11th in the start order. Oh, that second run wasn’t enough for you, judges? Here. Try THIS. His final run features all the same tricks as the second, but it’s even better. Final score: 96.00. All commentators are relieved that they won’t have to talk about a judging controversy. And after two silver medals, Hirano has his gold. Australia’s Scotty James also has a second medal that’s one better than his first. He takes silver with a run that would’ve won almost any competition until now. Did Shaun White have a case for a bronze medal? Hard to say. He wound up with a best run of 85.00, just behind Switzerland’s Jan Scherrer’s 87.25. Judged sports will always have a bit of subjectivity. But Hirano did a run that was empirically more difficult than anyone, and he landed it perfectly. Scotty James bails on his third run when he realizes it’s not going to top his second. The final word goes to Ayumu Hirano, who may be first in the eyes of much of the world but is second in the eyes of the judges. How does he improve on what he just did? Here we go ... Shaun White’s last run ends with a fall as he goes all-out to try to find a few more points and get another medal. He takes off his helmet as he slides down the rest of the pipe, waving to an appreciative crowd. Ruka Hirano (the one who isn’t related to Ayumu) falls again. That means White will finish in fourth, as he did in 2014. In five Olympic appearances, he has never finished lower than fourth. Next up: the top two. Can James go even bigger and win gold with less controversy? “ROBBED” is now trending on Twitter. Switzerland’s Jan Scherrer will continue his nervous wait in third place after falling on his last run. Taylor Gold also falls and remains in fifth, which means the only U.S. rider with a chance of getting a medal is ... Shaun White. Japan’s Yuto Totsuka also falls and is stuck in 10th. Then it’s the Australian teen Valentino Guseli, who lets loose a roar upon finishing a strong run. His third-run score matches his second -- 79.75. He’s sixth. Now up, it’s the last run of a legend ... Third run, first four riders ... The USA’s Chase Josey improves to 79.50 and seventh place. Switzerland’s Patrick Burgener also improves to 69.50, but that’s 11th. Germany’s Andre Hoeflich does not improve and sits in eighth. Then it’s the big one. Kaishu Hirano, Ayumu’s younger brother, soars 24 feet, 4 inches above the lip of the pipe. It’s breathtaking. And then he falls after a double cork 1440. He’s ninth. Second run complete, and do we have a judging controversy? Japan’s Ayumu Hirano once again opens with the triple cork, which no one else has attempted. He follows with a double cork 1440, completing a combination that amazes NBC commentator Todd Richards. Three more double corks follow -- 1260, 1260, 1440. Richards says that’s our winning run. He says the torch has been passed. The judges say it’s a 91.75. Richards is flabbergasted. “There’s no WAY. 91.75??!!” After the commercial break, Richards is still stunned. “The judges just grenaded all of their credibility.” A deeper dive shows the Swedish judge gave a 96, which is dropped because it’s the highest. The US judge gave an 89, also dropped as the lowest mark. That leaves a 95 from the Japanese judge, 92 from France, 90 from Canada, 90 from Switzerland. So Scotty James maintains his lead. Hirano is second. Scherrer is third. Shaun White is fourth. Third run underway now ... And White is going to drop to third here, because Australian Scotty James, the 2018 bronze medalist, just blew up. He blew up big time. Two double cork 1440s, a good variety of frontside/backside tricks, and a couple of stylish tail grabs. He’s in first with a 92.50. But wait ... Shaun White is still pretty good at this. He does his best tricks first (1440 double cork) and fourth (1260 McTwist). The score comes in, and White moves into second place with an 85.00. And while we’re at commercial, Jan Scherrer of Switzerland all but clinches a spot on the podium with an 87.25, supplanting Taylor Gold in first place. That run doesn’t have a lot of big air, but he works in a lot of rotations and ends with an alley-oop. (I’ll refer you once again to the FIS code list.) Gold follows and falls. Then we get another change on the podium, as Germany’s Andre Hoeflich gets a 76.00, 0.25 points ahead of Australian teen Valentino Guseli. I don’t get it. Guseli’s first run looked better than that. Guseli responds with a run that mixes rotation speeds and yet flows smoothly. This is surely ahead of Hoeflich. Indeed it is -- 79.75. ANOTHER Japanese rider gets most of the way through a potentially legendary run but falls near the end. Kaishu Hirano gets nearly 23 feet, 9 inches out of the pipe and hangs on to his grab long enough to play Bohemian Rhapsody. The movie. He follows with four double corks -- 1440, 1080, 1260, 1080 -- but falls hard along the wall and seems to be shaken up. Meanwhile, John Shuster cleanly picks out the only GB stone in the house and picks up three points in the fourth end. 5-2 USA. Quick curling check -- Chris Plys tosses a nice hit-and-roll to leave the USA lying three. They have hammer in this fourth end, tied 2-2. Bruce Mouat tries a double takeout but only gets one. John Shuster checks out his options and delivers a rock through a small space to take out the remaining GB stone, leaving the USA lying four. We’ll get back to this ... Ayuko Hirano was five seconds away from one of the best runs in history. He opened with a triple cork 1440, then a double cork 1440. He follows with two 1260s but loses his balance on a landing falls in the middle of the pipe. Standings after first run 81.75 Taylor Gold (USA) 75.75 Valentino Guseli (AUS) 75.50 Kaishu Hirano (JPN) The best run out of three will count, and it’s unlikely those scores will stand as the top three when we’re done. Scotty James went for a 1260-1440 combination but didn’t have enough rotation on the second part of it, causing him to slide down the wall. Shaun White won gold in this event in 2006, 2010 and 2018. He took fourth in 2014. He dominated the X Games for 15 years or so and also won a lot of X Games skateboarding honors. He opens with a double cork 1440. That’s a stunner. He finishes with back-to-back 1260, one of them a McTwist. It’s not completely clean, though, and he gets a 72.00, good for fourth place. Ruka Hirano falls. He won’t count that one. Two more to go in the first round, starting with Australia’s Scotty James. Kaishu Hirano just raised the bar. And then jumped over it. Or, given that his height above the pipe was given as 22 feet, pole vaulted over it. The Japanese rider gets way up for a method grab and follows with three double corks. He gets a 75.50. How will Taylor Gold respond? How about two McTwists? (Description in the FIS code list: a “a forward-flipping backside 540.”) That’s an 81.75. Back to the Japanese contingent -- Yuko Totsuta opens with a 1440 but isn’t totally clean, landing awkwardly on the lip of the pipe a couple of times for a 62.00. The youngest rider in the field, 16-year-old Valentino Guseli of Australia, slips into second place with a 75.75. Next up, the oldest rider in the field ... The halfpipe competition is underway, and the USA’s Chase Josey reminds us that Shaun White and Taylor Gold aren’t the only hotshot Americans here. He gets a triple-double of sorts -- three double corks, the last also a 1280. That’s a 62.50. The second USA-GB end is more complicated, with the USA getting a couple of rocks behind guard until one is taken out. I have a “Coverage Will Resume Shortly” slide that is keeping me from seeing what Chris Plys is doing. Plys played mixed doubles as well. The ad interruptions are rather ridiculous, but it’s time to switch to halfpipe, anyway Thirteen straight simple takeouts, and we have a blank first end between John Shuster (USA) and Bruce Mouat (GB). Switzerland and the ROC also blanked their first end, as did Sweden and Italy. The only team to score so far is China, up 1-0 over Denmark. Time for curling, and my feed, the intro was interrupted by an ad. Anyway, the USA and Team GB are underway. Hammy McMillan put the first shot into the rings, which is often a no-no for the first shot of the first end. He guarded it with his second shot, though, which seems effective. It’s like a chess game that transposed into a different opening. And John Landsteiner took it out with his second shot, anyway. The defending champion US team is 1-1. Team GB won its opener against Italy. We have another ad. Good thing I can follow the shot-by-shot feed. On another note, how is Matt Hamilton nearly 20 years younger than I am? This, on the other hand, is a little disturbing. Found another case of cats watching the Olympics: Welcome back to virtual Beijing, coming to you live from an undisclosed location near our nation’s capital. (That would be the capital of the USA. I’ll hand off to Australia later in the Great Global Guardian Relay.) It’s Beau Dure here, and I wanted to clarify that I’m not the person who can’t wait for the men’s 10,000m speed skating. I will be asleep at that time. Or getting a jump on Wordle. I will be awake, however, to see ... USA-Britain men’s curling in 20 minutes Shaun White’s last ride in the halfpipe, where he, fellow American Taylor Gold and Australians Scotty James and Valentino Guseli will try to outpoint a powerful Japanese team. That’s in 50 minutes. Ester Ledecká’s quest for the ski-snowboard double-double and Mikaela Shiffrin’s quest to salvage something from these Games in the super-G. That’s in two hours and 20 minutes. We’ll also have the first day of the aforementioned women’s skeleton competition and the first period -- and probably the first four goals or so -- of the US women’s quarterfinal hockey game against the Czech Republic. Not a lot of parity in that sport. Also, please email Beau or tweet @duresport with cat videos and your take on your favorite and least favorite ads. I’m more than a little tired of the one in which the father boasts about all the cameras in his truck that will keep his daughter and her boyfriends from ... what, holding hands? Yeesh. Coming up today Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Diego is -16 hours. 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – just take it as read that there is men’s and women’s curling all day long every day now 🥌 9.30am Snowboard – there will be huge interest in the men’s halfpipe with Shaun White looking for one more gold in his last Olympics 🥇 9.30-11.00am and 8.20pm-9.55pm Skeleton – the morning sees two heats for the women, which will include Britain’s Pyeongchang bronze medallist Laura Deas. The evening features the last two runs for the men and the medals 🥇 11am Alpine skiing – Ester Ledecká attempts to retain her women’s Super-G title for an historic double-double 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – there are men’s preliminaries but the main attraction is the US v Czech Republic in the women’s play-off quarter-finals at 12.10pm. Canada’s women face Sweden at the same stage in the late session 🏒 3pm Cross-country skiing – the men’s 15km classic🥇 4pm Speed skating – it is the long distance of the speed skating. The men race over 10,000m and I can’t wait 🥇 5pm Biathlon – it is the turn of the women to do the 7.5km sprint 🥇 7pm–8.43pm Short track – the session culminates in the women’s 1,000 metres final 🥇Jimmy Kimmel On Jimmy Kimmel Live!, the host started by mentioning the scoop from Maggie Haberman’s upcoming book that Donald Trump allegedly tried to destroy state documents by tearing them up and flushing them down the toilet. Despite Haberman having two lengthy interviews with Trump, he claims her book is “mostly fictitious” and that the toilet story is not accurate. “This is a conversation you have with your three-year-old … not the former president,” Kimmel joked. He continued: “It’s toilet Watergate is what it is.” Haberman has also revealed that Trump had maintained a friendship with the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un since his presidency. “He held Kim Jong-un’s hand longer than Melania’s,” Kimmel said while showing pictures of the pair. He then joked: “Weird to think that the relationship between Kim and Trump could last longer than Kim and Kanye.” Kimmel also wondered how the right would have taken that news if it was Obama still staying friends with him. “I’m sure Fox would be super cool with that,” he said. This week it was also announced that Melania Trump would have a ‘“special arrangement” for the controversial app Parler, “social media for those who are somehow too awful for Twitter”. Kimmel joked: “The only parlour Melania cares about has the word beauty in front of it.” This week reports also emerged that the Academy would not be asking for proof of vaccination for this year’s Oscars ceremony. “Maybe they have some extra spots in the ‘in memoriam’ to fill,” he wondered. He joked that perhaps this year’s hosts would be “Rob [Schneider] and Nicki Minaj’s cousin’s friend”. The reports also suggested that a major reason was that some of this year’s nominees and possibly some of last year’s winners are not vaccinated. “So now it’s up to all of us to wildly speculate,” he said. “Let the witch-hunt begin.” He also wondered how Fox News would respond. “Is Hollywood a bunch of hypocrites or are the stars just like us?” he joked. Trevor Noah On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah also spoke about the allegations made against Trump and his destruction of documents via his toilet. If true then it would be classed as yet another crime alleged against the disgraced former president and is under investigation. “At this point I’m wondering if there are any laws that Trump hasn’t broken?” he said. “If there was a Guinness Book of World Records for crime, he’d probably steal the book.” Noah also joked: “In every scandal involving Trump and documents, none of them involve him reading them.” Like Kimmel, Noah reminded viewers of Trump’s obsession with complaining about how poor toilet flushing now is in America with a montage. “It also does explain why Trump was always complaining about toilets,” he said.Novices have won seven of the last nine runnings of the Betfair Hurdle, the big betting contest at Newbury on Saturday, and Broomfield Burg, Jetoile and Jpr One are among the lightly-raced runners with an obvious chance to make it eight from 10 this weekend. The least exposed horse in the field over hurdles, though, is Harry Fry’s seven-year-old Boothill (3.35), with just two runs over timber to date. He was an easy winner in a strong time on his only start last season and finished a close third behind Soaring Glory – last year’s winner of this race – at Ascot in October. He is 4lb better off with that rival and has had a two-month break since a slightly underwhelming debut over fences in early December. Back over the smaller obstacles, and with track, trip and going likely to suit, he looks over-priced in the overnight betting at around 8-1. Newbury 1.15 Refreshing though it is to see a top-notch novice like Bravesmansgame lining up for a handicap, the current form of the Paul Nicholls stable – one win from 37 before racing on Friday – is a concern as he attempts to give 16lb or more to some useful rivals. At the early odds, the progressive Pats Fancy is an obvious each-way alternative at around 5-1. Warwick 1.35 Put a line through Marie’s Rock’s run in the Lanzarote last time, when she was almost brought to a stop at the second flight, and she has an obvious chance at around 3-1 to upset Indefatigable, the likely favourite here. Newbury 1.50 Trip, going or both are among the question marks for several of these, so it may be worth chancing The Big Breakaway, placed at Grade One level over timber and fences, as he returns to hurdling after a wind op on what could be a very fair mark. Warwick 2.05 Edwardstone has made rapid progress over fences this season and should confirm his status as Britain’s best two-mile novice here. Newbury 2.25 Clan Des Obeaux is another favourite from the Nicholls stable that punters may want to handle with care. Royale Pagaille would prefer deeper ground but Venetia Williams remains in excellent form and the still-improving eight-year-old’s recent Haydock win was another career-best. Newbury 3.00 All four runners go to post with solid chances but Funambule Sivola put up a useful performance to win a Doncaster handicap last time and has scope for better yet at the minimum trip. Warwick 3.15 Our Power is still at an early stage of his chasing career and posted a decent time with something to spare when successful at Huntingdon last time. Raised just 2lb for that, he is a clear pick of the prices at around 6-1.Brentford are not in danger yet but five defeats in succession is a slide they will be aiming to arrest against Crystal Palace. The prospect appears a tricky one if top goalscorer Ivan Toney misses out with a calf injury. Palace on paper are the stronger side but failure to turn control of a game into victory reared its head again on Wednesday with a draw against Norwich. Patrick Vieira is doing a fine job but Palace’s inconsistencies give Brentford a good chance, especially if their fantastic support really turn the noise up. Brentford will leapfrog Palace if they succeed. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Brentford Community Stadium Last season n/a Referee Simon Hooper This season G8 Y26 R0 3.25 cards/game Odds H 7-4 A 2-1 D 28-13 BRENTFORD Subs from Fernández, Lössl, Thompson, Forss, Ghoddos, Peart-Harris, Baptiste, Roerslev, Toney, Janelt, Dasilva, Stevens Doubtful Toney (calf) Injured Jørgensen (hamstring, unknown), Fosu-Goode (hamstring, unknown), Jeanvier (knee, unknown), Eriksen (match fitness, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y41 R1 Form WLLLLL Leading scorer Toney 6 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Butland, Matthews, Milivojevic, Mateta, Benteke, Kelly, Banks, Hannam, Riedewald, Street, Rak-Sakyi, Clyne, Ayew, McArthur, Tomkins, Kouyaté Doubtful None Injured Ferguson (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y43 R1 Form LWLDLD Leading scorer Gallagher 7Yorkshire took an important step on the road to staging international matches again when the England and Wales Cricket Board lifted its Headingley suspension on Friday. The ECB has been impressed by the work done to change the culture of the club since the appointment of the new chair, Lord Kamlesh Patel, in November and said it had conditionally reversed its decision to strip the county of hosting privileges over their handling of racism and bullying allegations by former player Azeem Rafiq. If Yorkshire meet two further conditions by the end of March, the county will be able to host the third Test against New Zealand in June and July’s one-day international against South Africa. The news was welcomed by Rafiq who said the ECB had made the “correct decision”, but Yorkshire still need to comply with the ECB’s two outstanding demands which call for the club to resolve “issues relating to rules changes and decisions at the club which have been subject to procedural flaws”, along with the removal of Yorkshire board veto and observer powers held by the family trust of former chair Colin Graves. The first demand relates to the late-notice cancellation of an extraordinary general meeting of members due to take place last week, owing to a failure by the previous leadership to file rule changes with the Financial Conduct Authority. The role of the Graves Trust – a major creditor of the club which is controlled by Graves’ family – has been under scrutiny since another ex-chair, Roger Hutton, said it had vetoed his attempt to remove former chief executive Mark Arthur and former director of cricket Martyn Moxon over their response to the Rafiq investigation. Rafiq said: “This is the correct decision by the ECB – under Lord Patel the club has shown a real willingness to change and has already come a long way. His leadership has earned the club another chance, but the reforms must continue and we must see real change.” Lord Patel said: “I welcome this decision and thank the board of the ECB for supporting the return of international matches at Headingley. We have worked night and day to bring about tangible change at Yorkshire, and the removal of the sanctions has validated and reignited our drive for positive progress. “I would like to thank the ECB for its support and its robust challenge throughout the process. It has been a difficult period for Yorkshire County Cricket Club, and there remains a lot of work to be done, but the level of scrutiny has pushed us towards implementing action which will not only transform this club but can lead the way forward for the sport as a whole.” Barry O’Brien, the interim chair and cricket nonexecutive director at the ECB, said: “The board welcomed the hard work and actions taken by Yorkshire County Cricket Club towards putting the club on a new path. Alongside the progress already made, we considered many factors in reaching our decision. “Amongst them, the impact on fans who have bought tickets in good faith and the young people who will benefit from Yorkshire’s improved outreach and pathway provisions. Finally, the board was mindful that the return of international cricket will support continued change and progress at the club. “I very much hope that the traumatic events that have taken place at Yorkshire over the past several months and years will act as a catalyst for increasing the pace of change throughout the game.” Julian Knight, the chair of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee which heard harrowing testimony from Rafiq last November, said: “It’s right that Yorkshire should host international fixtures again but on the strict proviso that key governance reforms are voted through. Lord Patel needs the support of the ECB and the wider cricket community in his battle to change Yorkshire’s culture and I’m pleased that this seems to be happening.”Beth Kweeday really loves Greggs. The 23-year-old tattoo apprentice from Liverpool is such a fan of the high street baker that she got a tattoo of its signature sausage roll in branded packaging on her calf last November as an eternal reminder of the shop she visits more than five times a week. But what is it about Greggs that made her want to commemorate their produce on her body? “I really like beige food, so it’s pretty much a dream for me. And I like that it’s dead cheap as well.” Kweeday starts her mornings with a Greggs vegan sausage roll, sometimes pops back in for a cheese pickle sandwich for lunch, and if she’s feeling peckish in the afternoon she might return for a chocolate muffin. Surprisingly, Kweeday’s fierce love for the high street stalwart is not unique. She is one of many Greggs superfans happy to wear their passion for the chain loudly and proudly. The retailer is now hoping that fans and casual customers alike will snap up official branded merchandise as part of a high-profile collaboration announced this week with the budget clothing shop Primark. But fans have been finding their own ways to honour Greggs for some time. Independent sellers peddle pregnancy T-shirts with a Preggs logo, earrings painstakingly crafted to resemble Greggs pastries, Greggs-printed leggings, and any number of greetings cards, which typically convey how much the sender prefers Greggs to their recipient. Leah Bernard, 19, who runs the Etsy shop Bernard Bits, sells earrings resembling Greggs sausage rolls in branded bags. A prototype she posted on TikTok went viral, securing 1.6m views. They’re now one of the most popular items she sells, especially among the LGBT community. “I often get messages saying ‘this is a gift to my friend who’s obsessed with Greggs’,” she said. She thinks Greggs’ popularity is down to its heritage as a “typical British caff”. “If you spoke to someone not from the UK, that’s the first thing you’d mention. Nowhere else has it.” Pasty, a drag queen based in London whose Greggs-inspired burlesque routine – in which she bursts out of a branded paper bag in a sausage roll costume – launched her performing career, agrees that the chain’s appeal stems from tapping into British culture. Her Greggs routine went viral on TikTok, receiving plaudits from Kylie Minogue and Years and Years, with many commenters praising it as exemplary “British drag”, a self-deprecating, comedy-driven subversion of its glamorous American counterpart. “It’s funny and absurd. Someone said ‘try explaining this to anyone who’s not British’. I don’t think anyone outside of the UK would understand Greggs hype.” It’s perhaps this match of UK food culture with the down-to-earth, irreverent tone that is a hallmark of British humour that Greggs fans find so compelling. Tamsin McLaren, who runs the University of Bath’s prestigious marketing degree, said Greggs’ “tireless pursuit of understanding their customer” had made it an iconic brand. “Greggs honest and inclusive tone of voice chimes with many who are bored by false promises and inflated prices of premium brands,” she said. The partnership with Primark is a natural continuation. The fact they are “behaving like premium or luxury brands”, for instance by launching the clothing collection at an exclusive pop-up in Soho, “enhances Greggs’ image as a brand with humour and not afraid to be self-deprecating via irony”, she said. The brand’s success at a difficult time for the UK high street is testament to the strength of this approach. While there were several high-profile high street closures during the pandemic, Greggs plans to double the size of the business and expand from 2,115 to 3,000 sites in the near future. Greggs’ chief executive, Roger Whiteside, has said the secret lies in its savvy marketing and openness to new trends – exemplified by the carefully timed introduction of a vegan sausage roll. Greggs superfans agree. “They really go with the times,” said Pasty. “When my [show] was happening, they shared the clip on social media. I’m a drag queen and not many brands would do that.” Greggs’s appeal is as much rooted in familiarity as it is in novelty, she says. “For everyone in the UK, if you’re in town and you need something quick you get a sausage roll for a quid from Greggs. It’s cheap, easy food and a staple of everyone’s memory.”Like it or not, Mel Gibson’s professional rehabilitation is gaining momentum. Ever since his career exploded in a mess of drunkenness, antisemitism, domestic abuse and a string of genuinely horrifying voicemails, Gib has slowly set about clawing himself out from the hole he dug for himself. It started small, with bit parts in sequels like Machete 2, The Expendables 3 and Daddy’s Home 2. It picked up speed with his Oscar-nominated film Hacksaw Ridge, and then hit a pothole with Fatman, where he played a grizzled and embittered Santa Claus. And now it seems unstoppable. Gibson’s upcoming projects include a CIA thriller in which he stars alongside Jason Isaacs, a John Wick spin-off series and a Lethal Weapon sequel that he also plans to direct. But before all that comes Father Stu. And Father Stu will require some explaining. Based on a true story, Father Stu stars Mark Wahlberg as a cocky, womanising boxer who gets into a car accident, contracts a terminal illness and then becomes a priest. It seems like the sort of role that Wahlberg is seeking out these days to try to prove to the world that he’s a good person. He still gets to play a boxer and dress like it’s the 1970s (even though the film is set in the 1990s) but, like last year’s Joe Bell, it seems heavily weighted to counteract his negative public image. Joe Bell was about a father grieving his gay son; Wahlberg once angrily defended the homophobic remarks of Shabba Ranks and was “creeped” out by Brokeback Mountain. Meanwhile, this film is proof that people are able to change their ways for the better. And if the priest in this film can do it then maybe so can Wahlberg, a man whose history includes chasing black children while throwing stones and shouting racist epithets, and being charged with attempted murder after attacking a middle-aged Vietnamese American man. If this had been a one-man redemption bid, there’s a sliver of a chance that it might have worked. But it won’t, because it co-stars Mel Gibson. Gibson – at least judging by the trailer – plays a grizzled mechanic who hates God but, and this is only a wild stab in the dark, will probably eventually come to see the light. He too can do good things, just so long as you can ignore all the unquestionable bad he’s done. Now, Gibson isn’t playing the main role here. This is a supporting character, and one that initially doesn’t seem to add much to the story. And with the Oscars still smarting from all the accusations of racism it intermittently has to fend off, the last thing it will want to do is embrace a film starring a man who once told a police officer that “the Jews are responsible for all the wars in the world”. So, if the film has awards ambitions and the role could be played by anybody, why take the risk of hiring Mel Gibson at all? This one, at least, is easy to answer. It’s because the film was written and directed by Rosalind Ross. And Rosalind Ross is Mel Gibson’s girlfriend. This isn’t to do down Ross’s achievements at all. Although this is the first film she has directed, she was previously a writer on Matador, a show that aired in the states on the El Rey network that was about a soccer player who was also a spy. According to her IMDb page, she also has a Boudicca film in the works. By all accounts, she is an up-and-comer. And it’s hard to see how she could be riding Mel Gibson’s coattails, since he has spent the last 15 years as a toxic pariah. True, she might not have the best handle on Gibson’s career – he was 35 when she was born, and had already made three Mad Max films, three Lethal Weapon films and a Braveheart before she had even started school – but wouldn’t you cast the man you love in your film? Perhaps I’m slightly biased towards Father Stu as a film. It has long been my belief that any character named Stu or Stuart in a movie is bound to be an irredeemable dick. Pierce Brosnan’s horrible character in Mrs Doubtfire is called Stu. The guy who runs the Overlook hotel in The Shining is called Stuart. Matthew Lillard’s character in Scream was called Stu. There is a Minion called Stuart, for crying out loud. There is nowhere to hide. But Father Stu softens the blow a little. Its titular Stu seems like a truly inspirational figure, a man committed to helping people even in the face of an agonising death. He seems like he might be the One Good Stu. And, sure, the film he stars in looks terrible, like the sort of thing that will make the bulk of its revenue by playing in churches. And, sure, the director might be an untested 31-year-old. And, sure, it stars someone who has done so many bad things that it’s honestly hard to look at him. But, hey, Stus need to take what they can get.Scotland Yard’s crisis has deepened as it emerged that two officers and one former officer have been referred for potential criminal prosecution over their part in a WhatsApp group with Sarah Everard’s murderer Wayne Couzens where it is alleged that misogynistic and racist messages were swapped. The Metropolitan police is reeling from the resignation of its commissioner, Cressida Dick, after she failed to convince the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, that she could root out wrongdoing and transform the force. The Met has not suspended the two serving officers, who remain on restricted duties. Separately, the police watchdog, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC), announced that its investigation into claims the Met bungled a chance to identify Couzens, then a serving Met officer, for alleged indecent exposure days before he attacked and murdered Everard in March 2021, had intensified in seriousness. A Met officer is now under investigation for gross misconduct, the most serious kind of offence under the police disciplinary system. Previously the officer was under investigation for misconduct by the IOPC. A second Met officer remains under investigation for misconduct over allegations relating to Couzens and a fast food restaurant. Messages on the WhatsApp group involving police officers included alleged offensive and abusive terms about women. The messages recovered so far by investigators began in March 2019, two years before Couzens murdered Everard. The two Met officers and one former Met officer have been referred to the Crown Prosecution Service for alleged improper use of the public electronic communications network under section 127 of the Communications Act. The two Met officers referred to the CPS are alleged to have been part of a WhatsApp group involving constables from three forces and were placed under investigation after Couzens’ phone was seized following his arrest for Everard’s murder. The Met placed its officers facing criminal investigation on restricted duties. Two other officers who were investigated for potential police discipline offences, from the Civil Nuclear Constabulary and Norfolk police, were suspended by their forces. The IOPC said: “We provided a file of evidence to the CPS in December to consider potential offences against three individuals under the Communications Act 2003. We await its decision.” Extensive investigations by the IOPC continue into events surrounding the Couzens case. One investigation concerns claims to the Met of a man twice exposing himself at a south London McDonald’s days before the murder of Everard, with details of a car linked to Couzens passed to police. It is believed that details included a vehicle registration plate. A simple registration plate check, available to police on systems belonging to the Driving and Vehicle Licensing Agency, could have linked Couzens to the alleged offence, but officers failed to identify him, the Met has already admitted. Days later Couzens kidnapped and murdered Everard as she walked home in south London. The IOPC said: “Our investigation into how the MPS handled reports of alleged indecent exposure has been completed. Our report has been shared with the force prior to our decisions on any disciplinary outcomes.” Furthermore, the IOPC said, an officer with Kent police had been placed under investigation for misconduct over claims that a chance to identify Couzens as indecently exposing himself in Dover in 2015 was missed. The IOPC said: “We are finalising our investigation into Kent police’s handling of an alleged indecent exposure reported in Kent in 2015, subsequently linked to Wayne Couzens. Our report is at an advanced stage.” Couzens was handed a whole-life sentence for the kidnap, rape and murder of Everard. The judge said his crimes were as serious as a terrorist atrocity because he abused his powers as a police officer to commit them. Handling the fallout from the case is likely to be a formidable challenge for whoever is chosen as the next Met commissioner.The fixture list can be cruel sometimes. Just as Norwich have given themselves a chance of scrambling out of the relegation places, they are pitted against the Premier League’s top two. Next weekend they travel to Anfield but first Norwich welcome a Manchester City side that have taken 40 points from the last 42 available. At least Dean Smith’s side boast some form of their own with four wins and a draw from their past six league and cup games and will be boosted by the return of Josh Sargent from illness. Norwich also won 3-2 the last time City visited Carrow Road, in 2019. Stephen Hollis Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Carrow Road Last season n/a Referee Andre Marriner This season G11 Y44 R2 4.18 cards/game Odds H 19-1 A 2-11 D 38-5 NORWICH Subs from McGovern, Byram, Tzolis, Williams, Dowell, Gibbs, Rowe, Rupp, Sargent, Giannoulis, Zimmermann, Normann Doubtful None Injured Kabak (illness, 19 Feb), Krul (shoulder, 25 Feb), Sørensen (knee, 25 Feb), Omobamidele (back, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y40 R1 Form LLLWWD Leading scorer Pukki 6 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Fernandinho, Aké, Mbete, Egan-Riley, Wilson-Ebrand, Lavia, McAtee, Gündogan, Laporte, Delap, Zinchenko, Sterling Doubtful None Injured Jesus (knock, Mar), Palmer (foot, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y30 R1 Form WWWWDW Leading scorers De Bruyne, Mahrez, Silva, Sterling 7When The Power of the Dog took 12 Oscar nominations on Tuesday, the key question for this year’s awards became not what would win – a clean sweep for Jane Campion’s western is now looking inevitable – but whether anyone would watch it happen. Last year’s ceremony was a muted, socially distanced affair held at Los Angeles’s Union Station. Ratings for the US TV network ABC fell by more than half from the previous year, which itself was a record-breaking low. A new producer, Will Packer, has been drafted in to return the ceremony to the Dolby Theatre with enhanced pomp and pageantry on 27 March. A “super-event” loophole is being used to mean that even unvaccinated people can attend, with guests requiring only proof of a negative test within 24 hours to attend. It appears unlikely organisers will want A-listers to cover their faces. A no-Zoom mandate is also on the cards, although exceptions may be made in extreme circumstances to avoid a repeat of last year’s most memorable moment, when Joaquin Phoenix abruptly accepted the best actor award on behalf of Anthony Hopkins, then 83 and not permitted to video-call in from Wales. This year, 87-year-old Judi Dench is a contender in the supporting actress category for her role in Belfast. Should she win, she would become the oldest ever Oscar acting winner. Representatives for Dench did not comment on whether she would attend. The host for the awards will be announced in the next few days and the frontrunner is the 25-year-old British actor Tom Holland, reckoned to be a powerful draw for younger audiences. Spider-Man: No Way Home may have landed only two nominations (for costume design and visual effects), but producers are eager to harness the interest of cinemagoers who last month made it the sixth highest grossing film in history. Yet some suspect such measures are merely a case of deckchair rearrangement. “I don’t believe the host ever has an impact on ratings,” says Anne Thompson, the editor-at-large at IndieWire. Indeed, previous efforts to woo the under-30s with hosts such as Seth MacFarlane, James Franco and Anne Hathaway have been spectacular flops. “Ratings are going to rise from last year, there’s nowhere to go but back up,” says Thompson. Yet the economic model that relied on advertising spend for the awards telecast is almost certainly under urgent review by the Academy. “If you’re standing in the middle of a rainstorm, nobody has to tell you you need an umbrella,” says Steven Gaydos, executive VP of content at Variety. Gaydos believes that the Academy, caught unawares by the rapidity of change, will be scrambling to replicate the kinds of strategies now adopted by movie studios. Rather than concentrating on the box office performance of one headline movie, the focus is on the impact of a year’s worth of content. Cash-generation measures under consideration by the Academy are likely to include sponsorship deals, year-long awards clubs, social media monetisation – and belt-tightening. And while the Oscars – and many in the industry – were previously sniffy about ceremonies such as the Golden Globes, this year’s cancellation of that, after celebrities boycotted the event and NBC refused to screen it, may have been an unexpected blow. “The Globes was a drumbeat of awareness,” says Thompson. “They were a good thing, because they were promoting the movies, and the race.” Yet the Oscars’ difficulty in attracting TV audiences predates Covid. The advent of streaming had already caused a schism in the relationship between the awards and actual cinema-going, before the pandemic accelerated the trend. “There’s some very imprecise magic that happens when you go see a movie in a theatre,” says Gaydos, “It demands some part of you.” Even if the film disappoints, “you say: ‘Well, we got out of the house!’ It was part of the human social experience.” Those films that did lure people from their sofas were conspicuously absent on the award lists, with the exception of Dune, Denis Villeneuve’s sci-fi epic, but its 10 nominations were primarily technical. It did make the 10-strong shortlist for best picture but ABC’s hopes for the likes of No Time to Die, House of Gucci or even Spider-Man were crushed after space was instead made for Drive My Car (a Japanese meditation on grief), Flee (an animated documentary about a gay Afghan refugee) and Coda (an indie tearjerker with a predominantly deaf cast). The days of the Academy being criticised for being too mainstream are long past, thanks to the recent drive to increase inclusivity in the wake of #OscarsSoWhite and #MeToo. This largely involved increasing voter numbers from 6,000 to 9,500 with judiciously picked new recruits who have, accordingly, awarded best picture to Chloé Zhao’s Nomadland in 2021 and Bong Joon-ho’s Parasite in 2020. “There is now a built-in disconnect between the Academy’s choices and the demands of a ratings-driven show,” says Thompson. “They thought this was what they wanted. But now they’re pulling back on it.” The Baftas, which take place a fortnight before the Oscars, have also seen the fruits of backstage labours reflected in their shortlists. A review of practice in 2020 led to hundreds of rule changes to further diversity. That ceremony is also now back in person, at a full-capacity Royal Albert Hall with the “largest red carpet in Europe”. Hopes have been placed on the new host Rebel Wilson – a regular show-stealer – to engage audiences in the stalls and at home. “Things were tricky with distributors last year, and engagement wasn’t there,” says Emma Baehr, Bafta’s executive director of awards and content. Now that has returned, Baehr thinks, it calls for a ceremony which has “everything as it was before – but better.” Despite the negative publicity that accompanied their – now-withdrawn – special award for Noel Clarke last year, the Baftas do appear on confident ground. Their primetime BBC spot is locked in, and this is the 25th year of a headline sponsorship deal with EE, formerly Orange. Baehr points to the number of first-time nominees on their ballots and credits interventions such as those to ensure all voters watch a minimum of 15 randomly selected films. “Bafta has culturally shifted,” she says, “and part of that means that awards shows have to move on.” And the podium goes to … the contenders to host this year’s Oscars Tom Holland Earlier this year, the actor said that hosting the Oscars was something he’d “love” to do, reportedly leading to an approach by the Academy. As well as being incredibly famous in the demographic the Oscars most want to target, Holland’s musical background – he was once Billy Elliot – mean he could handle the song-and-dance duties. Jimmy Kimmel The ABC chat show host received warm notices from hosting stints in 2017 and 2018 but might look too traditional for a revitalised ceremony. Kimmel also attacked The Power of the Dog’s glut of nominations on Tuesday, which failed to endear him to the Academy and would make the predicted wins for Campion’s film awkward. Conan O’Brien could be a safer pair of old hands. Tiffany Haddish Incoming producer Will Packer was behind Haddish’s breakthrough, Girls Night – as well as numerous movies with Kevin Hart, who stepped down as host in 2019 after homophobic jokes emerged. Haddish, who recently starred in Paul Schrader’s The Card Counter, would be a fresh and credible bet, but her arrest last month on suspicion of driving under the influence may have ruled her out of the race. Pete Davidson Before the buzz around Holland, the Saturday Night Live stalwart and Judd Apatow collaborator was bookies’ favourite. Davidson’s infamy in dating a succession of well-known celebrities - currently thought to include Kim Kardashian - would certainly lead to an uptick of tabloid and social media interest. Amy Poehler and Tina Fey The duo whose Golden Globe hosting stints between 2013-2015 were the most celebrated in recent memory opened last year’s Oscars and left many bemoaning the fact they weren’t in charge throughout. But the Academy may balk at such a naked imitation of its closest awards season rival.The journalists who broke the story of Russian skater Kamila Valieva’s positive drugs test on Wednesday say they have faced death threats, abuse, and warnings they should check their tea. A separate British newspaper journalist who asked Valieva whether she was a doper on Friday has also faced intense criticism from Russian members of parliament and online. Such was the anger in Russia when Duncan Mackay and Michael Pavitt of the Inside the Games website initially broke the story that both men were deluged with messages dismissing their reporting as lies – until the Independent Testing Agency confirmed it was true on Friday. Pavitt confirmed to the Guardian that Mackay had faced death threats, and that he had also been subjected to “significant” abuse. Other members of the team said they were confronted by Russian journalists in the main media centre in Beijing. Meanwhile, Mackay was also told by one respondent on Twitter: “You will be positive when you discover some new substances in your tea”, an apparent reference to the fatal poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko in London in 2006. When he replied that he didn’t drink tea, and tended to avoid the Millennium Hotel in Mayfair [where Litvinenko was poisoned], he was told: “Fortunately, you know what bankruptcy is. Prepare yourself to ride this road again, bruh.” Anger among the Russian public and media also flared up again on Friday when a British journalist asked Valieva, who was found to have the angina drug trimetazidine in her body on a test taken on Christmas Day, are you clean and did you take drugs. The skater refused to answer and the journalist was then surrounded by Russian media figures who said his questions were inappropriate to a 15-year-old child. When the story then emerged in the Russian media, the reporter faced a wave of abuse, with one respondent telling him: “Our Russian journalists can tear you to pieces!” Svetlana Zhurova, an Olympic speed skating champion and now a deputy of the State Duma in Russia, also criticised the questioner and the western media in general. “We cannot expect anything else from them,” she told Championat.com. “It makes no sense to scold and accuse them of something, they will still behave this way. Even if the Russian athlete has any therapeutic permission, they will still blame us. “At the same time, they will be completely calm about the fact that their athletes have therapeutic permission in the same way. For them, this is normal, but for our athletes it immediately becomes doping.” A similar message was conveyed by Dmitry Svishchev, another deputy of the Russian State Duma. “Unfortunately, some journalists can find the strength to talk to a child as if they were their comrades somewhere in a pub,” he told the Russian website. “Let them sit in London and ask such boorish and provocative questions to each other. Let our athletes not be touched. And even more so young athletes like Kamila. We won’t let her hurt! Children should not be asked such questions, she is still too young. We believe Valieva, we believe in her – she did not use anything forbidden.”The call for a windfall tax on oil and gas companies, whose profits have rocketed over the last year, has now become something of a clamour. Originally proposed by Labour a month ago, the idea has been taken up by both the Liberal Democrats and Greens, and even some Conservative MPs. Jeremy Kyle’s conversion to the cause by the climate activist Tessa Khan has gone viral. The basic idea of a windfall tax is very simple. Over the past year the huge rise in global oil and gas prices has provided oil and gas companies with vastly expanded profits. BP has just announced 2021 profits of £9.5bn (compared with a loss of £4.2bn the year before) and Shell £14bn (a four-fold increase). If these additional profits were taxed, the revenues could be used to help reduce energy bills for hard-pressed consumers. Unsurprisingly, a fightback has now begun. BP and Shell have been explaining the importance of their North Sea investments and their commitment to renewable energy. Commentators on the right have attacked the windfall tax as “economically illiterate”. But the problem is that none of the arguments used by opponents of a windfall tax are very convincing. There are five being widely made. The first is that, as a retrospective measure – levied on past profits, when the companies could not plan for it – a windfall tax would be unfair, possibly illegal and certainly not the kind of thing we do in Britain. But it was actually Margaret Thatcher who first introduced a windfall tax – in 1981, on the banks, whose profits had ballooned after a rise in interest rates. In 1997, the New Labour government imposed a windfall levy on the inflated value of the utilities privatised under the Conservatives. Neither measure was ruled illegal. The second argument being widely made is that the oil and gas companies already pay twice the tax rate of other companies, so the Treasury will be raking in increased revenue. This is true in itself, but it paints a rather false picture. UK oil and gas companies pay total corporation tax on their profits at 40%. But they also benefit from a wide range of tax reliefs for investment and decommissioning. The result is that most UK oil and gas companies have barely paid any tax over the last five years. Nineteen North Sea oil and gas companies, including BP and Shell, have actually been net recipients of tax payers’ money. These rebates have made the UK tax regime one of the most generous in the world, with an average levy per barrel of oil of under $2, compared with, for example, $21 in Norway. This makes it hard to stand up the third argument against a windfall tax: that it would prevent much-needed investment in the North Sea, which is vital for the UK’s energy security. In the first place, no one is proposing a 100% windfall tax rate. Labour suggests a modest 10% increase, taking the total tax rate to 50%. The companies would still be left with plenty of money for investment. Investment in the North Sea actually contributes little to the UK’s energy security: 80% of North Sea oil and gas is exported, and its price is set by the global market. The only geopolitically secure forms of energy are renewables, nuclear and energy efficiency measures, which are not exportable. Further investment in the North Sea is also not compatible with the UK’s climate crisis commitments. Last year, the International Energy Agency warned that new exploration and development of oil and gas globally had to stop immediately if global heating were to be limited to the Paris climate agreement goal of 1.5C. But, say the windfall tax critics, BP and Shell are not just investing in oil and gas. They are both now committed to net zero, with major investments in renewables. Taxing their profits more highly will therefore hit their contribution to the low-carbon transition. Again, that could only be true if the proposal was for a 100% tax rate. But in any case, the claim that these companies are going green is seriously overblown. BP is certainly shifting the balance of its energy portfolio. This week the company announced that by 2025 40% of its spending budget would be in greener technologies, rising to 50% by 2030. But this will still leave half of its budget devoted to fossil fuels. Meanwhile, Shell is not even doing this. Its 2030 goal is merely to reduce the net carbon intensity of its operations (that is, emissions per unit of output) by 20% from 2016 levels. Far from accelerating the energy transition, this is entirely compatible with rising emissions. The final argument used by opponents of a windfall tax is that it would hurt pensioners. Much of the oil and gas companies’ profits go back to their shareholders, and BP and Shell shares provide important dividend income for many UK pension funds. Both statements are true, but they miss the point. Less than a tenth of BP and Shell’s shares are owned by UK pension funds; over 90% of their distributed profits will therefore go to their shareholders in the rest of the world. Far from being economically illiterate, a windfall tax is economically very rational. A huge spike in oil and gas prices is being passed on to UK consumers, with those on low incomes catastrophically hit. On the other side of the ledger, these costs appear as huge windfall profits to oil and gas companies, unrelated to anything they have done. This is grossly inequitable. Taxing some of these profits to provide help to low-income energy bill payers is an entirely sensible way of rebalancing the costs and benefits. But it will need political will to make it happen. Michael Jacobs is professor of political economy at the University of Sheffield, and managing editor of NewEconomyBrief.netSome teams carry the added pressure that comes with expectation like a tailored jacket slung over a relaxed shoulder. For others, anticipation of glories to come chafe like a pair of skinny jeans in early January. Wales and Scotland both fall into the latter category. These two rugby sides, these nations even, prefer to face up to challenges as underdogs. From Owain Glyndwr to William Wallace, the heroes of England’s neighbours are heralded for their willingness to charge into the maw of certain doom in honour of the cause. Come Saturday, only one group of players will enter the Principality Stadium with the familiar feeling of their backs against the wall. Their opponents have no such luxury. There’s no need to look at what the bookies are saying. Stuart Hogg’s team are unquestionably favourites. “If you look at last week’s performances why wouldn’t they be?” was Wales’ coach Wayne Pivac’s reply when asked about the disparity in expectations between the two teams. Indeed. Scotland’s win over England, although scrappy and perhaps lucky, was another major victory in a 12-month period that has also seen them win in London and Paris, as well as beat Australia and Japan at home. Such is the depth in Scottish rugby right now that Gregor Townsend could make five changes to the 15 that secured a second successive Calcutta Cup – including his entire front row – without setting off any alarm bells. Wales are traversing a different path. An injury to Josh Adams has further tested the squad’s resources and means Pivac is now without 659 Tests’ worth of experience from eight absentees alone. Their most experienced starting flanker is 22-year-old Taine Basham playing his ninth Test while his partner is the uncapped Jac Morgan, also 22. Pivac conceded that his loose trio, which includes Ross Moriarty, lacks height. All are shorter than their Scottish counterparts. Pivac is working with the tools he has but is also offering an insight into the way he believes he might pull off a chaotic upset. Scotland’s lineout was imperious last week, procuring clean ball from all 16 of their throw-ins. Pivac will therefore look to turn possession at the breakdown by unleashing two natural opensiders and a No 8 who likes it loose. Townsend all but relinquished the battle on the ground. “We don’t look at jackaling as something that is always required,” the Scotland coach said. If Wales are to disrupt Scotland’s rumbling pack and win the odd penalty then their captain Dan Biggar will need to be at his best, particularly with that metronomic right boot. Described as the team’s “general” and “one of the best goal kickers in the world” by his coach, Biggar will make his 100th Test appearance in front of a packed crowd. “We’re looking for a reaction,” Biggar said, eager to move the conversation away from the 29-7 loss to Ireland. “We’re looking to stifle the momentum they’ve built up. “But there’s a bit of pressure on them. They’ve been talked up and they have to go and try win a championship from what I’m hearing. So let’s see how they go and we’ll judge them at the end of it.” Biggar praised his opposite number, Finn Russell, emphasising his ability to methodically control a game as well as produce magical moments with deft cross-field kicks and covert passes. But both Pivac and his captain spoke of the psychological boost a partisan home crowd gives them. Even Hogg was gushing in his praise of Cardiff’s mighty arena in the centre of the city. The Scots won in Llanelli in 2020 but they’re winless in the capital since 2002. And though he finds himself in a difficult situation now, Biggar knows that a single game can shift the discourse. “History tells us when we have a poor performance we tend to respond quite well,” he said, referencing a rousing 30-10 win over France at home in 2014 immediately after a 26-3 loss away to Ireland. “We’re under no illusions and not papering over any cracks. It’s nothing new, responding to a tough performance. This time of the year all the experts come out and have all the answers. We’re keeping everything in-house and making sure we respond in the best way possible and that’s by fronting up against a team that is full of confidence.” Given the nature of the two nations represented, that may hand the advantage back to Wales.A Republican Senate primary candidate in Arizona has been condemned for a “disgusting” campaign ad in which he shoots at lookalike actors portraying Joe Biden, Nancy Pelosi and the incumbent Arizona senator Mark Kelly. Jim Lamon, an energy executive, shared the ad on Twitter, saying it would be aired at this year’s Super Bowl. Lamon would face Kelly in a general election in the autumn should he secure the Republican nomination. Kelly is the husband of the former Democratic congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords of Arizona, who was shot in the head in 2011 while greeting constituents outside of a local grocery store. In Lamon’s ad, styled as a western, figures identified as the “DC gang” enter a town wearing cowboy boots and carrying firearms, their faces half-covered by bandannas. Onlookers are upset by their presence, with one declaring: “We’re tired of being pushed around!” Lamon enters, along with Mark Lamb, a real-life local sheriff, and Brandon Judd, the current president of the National Border Patrol Council. Lamon addresses the three actors playing Biden, Kelly and Pelosi, saying: “The good people of Arizona have had enough of you.” “It’s time for a showdown,” Lamon adds. When the Democrats draw their firearms, Lamon fires his own gun, shooting the weapons out of their hands as the rest of the town cheers. The three Democrats run away. Criticism towards the ad has been swift, with many people pointing out other recent instances of violent imagery used by members of the Republican party. Last November, Paul Gosar, Republican representative for Arizona, was officially censured by the House after sharing an animated video depicting him killing the Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking Biden. Shannon Watts, founder of the group Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, called Lamon’s ad “disgusting”. A spokesperson for the Lamon campaign refused to respond to the Washington Post about criticism of the ad, but said it “shows the DC gang drawing on Lamon and he merely shoots the weapons out of their hands”. “Unlike Kelly, Jim Lamon will shoot straight with Arizonans and take the fight to Biden – and he damn sure won’t let the left bully him into backing down,” the spokesperson said.The newly opened Broadway revival of The Music Man is the first time Hugh Jackman has played brazen swindler Harold Hill (though, per the Playbill credits, he apparently played Salesman #2 as a teenager). But the role is such a natural fit for Jackman’s interests as an actor that the performance itself feels like a revival, too – a triumphant return, rather than a long-awaited teaming of superstar and role. Thanks to Covid, it can be both: this Music Man planned to begin its run in 2020, only to be pushed back repeatedly, finally beginning previews in December 2021, then shutting down for a week after Jackman himself caught Covid. It officially opens many months and two calendar years after its initial target. Throughout the swiftly paced production, Jackman looks like he’s been raring to go. As Hill, a con artist disguised as a traveling salesman who moves in on a small Iowa town, selling the promise of civic improvement through musical instruments, uniforms and band instruction, Jackman is appropriately snaky and cynical – when he’s not pretending to be an upstanding musical impresario, of course. But when he brings a signature number like 76 Trombones or a smaller one like Gary, Indiana to a close, there is unmistakable joy in his eyes; at times, facing the rapturous crowd reactions, he looked as if he might burst out laughing with glee. Though Jackman is best known for his nearly two decades playing the grim Marvel Comics superhero Wolverine, Harold Hill is of a piece with so much of his other film work: the smooth-talking embezzler of Bad Education, the carny-barker stylings of Real Steel, and his singing and dancing PT Barnum in The Greatest Showman. He’s obviously fascinated by the ways that flash and charm can give way to a different, more nefarious form of confidence, and whether or not that can circle back to a kind of honorable flim-flam for the greater good. That’s The Music Man all over; Jackman slips into its rhythms effortlessly. It’s tempting to say that for the rest of this production director Jerry Zaks can’t match the star power at its center, but that’s not quite it – not exactly. Sutton Foster plays the buttoned-up librarian Marion, who is immediately suspicious of Hill but starts to see the good in him even before he does, and she emerges as a formidable match for her co-star. This is particularly noticeable in the second act, which she periodically rescues the killer song score from its first-act front-loading. Jefferson Mays and Jayne Houdyshell provide ample support as the sputtering Mayor Shinn and his wife, respectively; beyond the marquee names and Broadway mainstays, the whole stage is packed with terrific young performers. They’re the real spectacle, more so than the sometimes overly fussy sets and costumes; even those with their own lines aren’t really playing fully realized characters here, but their big-group production numbers provide the passionate rush that Broadway audiences pay exorbitant prices to experience first-hand. That razzle-dazzle could explain the decision to invite critics to the glamorous opening-night performance, rather than having a press night during previews. With an appreciative star-packed crowd applauding not just every introduction and musical number, but the appearance of a pool table – warming up for the inevitable (Ya Got) Trouble – and the occasional semi-clever flourish of stagecraft, it’s easy to feel either like a fan giving in to the will of the crowd, or a grump who’s pointedly refusing to. In other words, it’s a high-energy con worthy of Harold Hill. If only this production acknowledged that shamelessness a little more directly, a little more cleverly. Much of the time, it attempts a mega-yet-modest balance of big-budget splashiness with a beating human heart underneath, and comes across like a high-energy cover rather than any kind of reimagining. Is there something, anything, The Music Man might say about how we think about attractive scams and manipulations now, over a century past its 1912 setting? Maybe the answers to that question could turn facile or labored; this version doesn’t show any interest in finding out. The original Broadway run of The Music Man opened in the same season as the original West Side Story, and though the recent Steven Spielberg remake of West Side Story is a film and not a stage production, it can’t help but make its fellow revival from the class of ’57 look a little staid and traditionalist by comparison – even allowing for the fact that it’s a less revolutionary text to begin with. That best picture nominee pays tribute to the show’s strengths while making tweaks, updates and recontextualizations that sometimes place classic songs in a new light. This Music Man is mostly playing Meredith Wilson’s hits. There are a ton of them – Trombones, Trouble, Marian the Librarian, Till There Was You, and so on, plus worthy deeper cuts like The Sadder But Wiser Girl – and Jackman, Sutton and company nail them all in the moment. As Broadway slowly regains its footing during a drawn-out pandemic, that might be more than enough. A few months down the line, though, and this might look more like an enthusiastic mascot for live theater than a great show. To his credit, Jackman probably wouldn’t mind.GLOBAL BRITAIN Let’s face it, the Fifa Club World Cup has never quite caught the public’s imagination here in Blighty. Not like the old Intercontinental Cup, which saw Celtic and Racing Club throw hands, and Manchester United exchange pleasantries with Estudiantes. Two thoroughly entertaining late-sixties donnybrooks that have gone down in sporting folklore, with the caveat that obviously nobody wants to see that sort of thing, won’t somebody think of the kids, etc. Still, come on. Bertie Auld refusing to leave after being one of six men to be sent off, instead playing the rest of the match? George Best bobbing and weaving in the middle of a comic-book cloud of fists and boots? You’d pay plenty of folding money for that sort of nonsense today, and throw in some coins too. But the Club World Cup? The Fiver for one remembers very little about it. It’s not exactly thrown up too many tales for the ages since its inception in 2000. Erm. There was that time Manchester United’s participation caused them to break the FA Cup, wasn’t there? Or how about that day Liverpool were forced to play Monterrey while also facing Aston Villa in a parallel dimension in order to maintain the integrity of a trophy with three handles? And, er, Chelsea have had a go as well, haven’t they. Did any of them ever win it? Probably. Or maybe not. Can’t remember. Chelsea are having another crack at pretending to care this year. They’ll face Palmeiras in tomorrow night’s Abu Dhabi final, a couple of days after seeing off Al Hilal in the semi thanks to Romelu Lukaku’s possibly-confidence-restoring-though-let’s-see-how-it-pans-out close-range poke. Thomas Tuchel missed that four-yard screamer, on account of being stranded at home with the Covid. The club hope he can post a negative test today, then win a 30-hour race to the UAE for the big one. While we’re almost certainly not going to remember the result of the game this time next week, never mind next year, here’s to Tuchel making it in time, thus creating another of those ripping yarns to file alongside United copping the flak for New Labour’s hubris and Villa thrashing Liverpool’s kids in the Rumbelows Cup. Godspeed, Thomas! Keep those Club World Cup anecdotes coming thick and fast! LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE There’s a table-topping battle in the Women’s Super League tonight – join John Brewin for coverage of Chelsea 3-2 Arsenal (7.45pm GMT). QUOTE OF THE DAY “When reality hits you and you’re alone in the room and everything is still dark, then it is difficult to keep that positive mindset. Even when I was totally down and felt my life was ruined, I still kept the discipline for the task. I could have felt sorry for myself, I could have cried and got very down, but I did everything I had to do” – Norway and Galatasaray defender Omar Elabdellaoui talks to Will Unwin about his remarkable recovery from a firework accident that left him unable to see. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Sandwiched in the 38 hours between the Premier League’s midweek and weekend action, it’s Football Weekly Extra! FIVER LETTERS “Re: West Ham’s sponsor woes: at what point do the Hammers return to this shirt?” – JJ Zucal. “My first thought after watching Wolves v Arsenal was: the Bundesliga may have Red Bull Leipzig, but at least the Premier League has Red Card Arsenal. Much more entertaining” – Guy Robert. “Re: Dion Dublin [Thursday’s Fiver]. If he can make a catchphrase out of ‘stairs going up to the bedrooms’, then he can make HABOUTYWENTDWHD work” – Jim Hearson. “Big Paper reported today on a South Korean academic who reads washed-up rubbish. I had no idea The Fiver was available there” – Ian Copestake. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Ian Copestake. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Kurt Zouma will be available for West Ham’s trip to Leicester on Sunday despite calls to drop the defender over a video of him kicking and slapping his cat. “We as a club took that decision and I stand by that,” said David Moyes. Derby have reached a settlement with Middlesbrough to end their ongoing legal dispute. Boro missed out on the 2018-19 Championship play-offs behind Derby, who were later found to have breached financial rules. Ralf Rangnick has called on Manchester United’s forwards to score more, and defended Harry Maguire. “I think he had an outstanding game against West Ham,” Rangnick mused as the centre-back stepped on several rakes behind him. Jürgen Klopp liked what he saw from new signing Luis Díaz on his first Liverpool start. “It was probably one of the best [first games] I ever saw from a new player, because he looked completely natural,” big Jürg trilled. Eric Dier will miss Sunday’s game with Wolves as he continues to recover from thigh-ouch. “Unfortunately he’s not fit,” sobbed the Spurs manager, Antonio Conte. “For sure, he’s a big loss for us. He needs a bit more time to recover.” Frank Lampard’s Everton will be without Yerry Mina for up to 10 weeks. “It’s a strong injury around his quad and disappointing for us all,” sighed Lamps. Wilfried Zaha will stay on penalty duties for Crystal Palace despite his woeful scuffer against Norwich. “People always remember the last penalty but when you look at his record on penalties it has been really good,” Vieira cheered. And Rúben Neves couldn’t resist a dig at Arsenal after the 10-man Gunners won at Molineux. “We saw the way they celebrated the win and that shows the level we are,” fumed Neves. “It was like they won the league.” STILL WANT MORE? Only nine Premier League games this weekend, but still 10 things to look out for. Find out how we did it, here. Manchester United ditched Ole Gunnar Solskjær but they have not really progressed under Ralf Rangnick, notes Josh Wright. Premier League match previews will be dropping here. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! LOVING THE BIG FROSTY SPORTS DAYA patient has died in Bedfordshire after being found to have Lassa fever, the UK Health Security Agency has said, as the confirmed case brought the total number of people diagnosed with the disease in England to three. The death comes less than 48 hours after it emerged that two people had been diagnosed with the potentially deadly infectious disease and a third “probable” case was under investigation. In an update on Friday, the UKHSA said the “probable” case had now been confirmed and had died. It is the first time cases of the potentially deadly infectious disease, caused by the Lassa virus, have been identified in the UK for more than a decade. The UKHSA said: “The UK Health Security Agency can confirm that the probable case of Lassa fever under investigation is now confirmed, bringing the total number of cases to three. Sadly, this individual has died. “We are contacting the individuals who have had close contact with the cases prior to confirmation of their infection, to provide appropriate assessment, support and advice. The risk to the general public remains very low.” A Bedfordshire hospitals NHS foundation trust spokesperson said: “We confirm the sad death of a patient at our trust, who had confirmed Lassa fever. We send our deepest condolences to their family at this difficult time. “We will continue to support the patient’s family and our staff and are working closely with colleagues from the UK Health Security Agency to undertake a robust contact-tracing exercise.” One of the two previously confirmed cases has recovered, while UKHSA said on Wednesday that the second patient was receiving specialist care at the Royal Free London NHS foundation trust. The three cases were within the same family in the east of England and were linked to recent travel to west Africa. Lassa fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic illness. People usually become infected with Lassa virus through exposure to food or household items contaminated with urine or faeces of infected rats. The virus can also be spread through body fluids. People living in areas of west Africa with high populations of rodents where the disease is endemic are most at risk of Lassa fever. Imported cases rarely occur elsewhere in the world. Such cases are almost exclusively in people who work in endemic areas in high-risk occupations such as medicine, or other aid workers. Most people with Lassa fever will make a full recovery. However, severe illness can occur in some individuals. Symptoms are usually gradual, starting with fever, general weakness and malaise. After a few days there may be headaches, sore throat, muscle pain, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, a cough and abdominal pain , according to the World Health Organization. In severe cases there may be facial swelling, fluid in the lung cavity, bleeding from the mouth, nose, vagina or gastrointestinal tract and low blood pressure. Deafness occurs in 25% of recovered patients. In half of these cases, hearing returns partially after one to three months. Before these cases, there had been just eight cases of Lassa fever imported to the UK since 1980. The last two cases occurred in 2009. There was no evidence of onward transmission from any of these cases.Fourteen goals in 11 matches tells a tale of Ralf Rangnick as Manchester United interim manager. His team may now start games quicker but a win, loss and draw from their past three games is poor. Southampton, with draws home and away against Manchester City, should present a challenge and as they also shut out the champions in the meeting at the Etihad Stadium United could again struggle to score, against Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side. Jamie Jackson Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue Old Trafford Last season Manchester United 9 Southampton 0 Referee Stuart Attwell This season G12 Y38 R1 3.25 cards/game Odds H 5-8 A 5-1 D 33-10 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Mata, Hannibal, Mengi, Lingard, Elanga, Jones, Cavani, Wan-Bissaka, Telles, Lindelöf Doubtful None Injured Bailly (ankle, Mar), Fred (Covid, Mar), Matic (shin, Mar) Suspended None Discipline Y46 R2 Form WLDWWD Leading scorer Ronaldo 8 SOUTHAMPTON Subs from Caballero, Lewis, Stephens, Long, A Armstrong, Small, Valery, Walcott, Djenepo, Smallbone, Redmond, Livramento, Diallo Doubtful Redmond (ankle) Injured Tella (groin, 19 Feb), McCarthy (hamstring, unknown), Lyanco (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y47 R2 Form WDWLDW Leading scorers Broja, Ward-Prowse 6What has happened to Keir Starmer, the seasoned anti-war protester? The Labour leader and I both marched on the Stop the War demonstration against the Iraq war in 2003. I remember reading with interest his Guardian article “Sorry, Mr Blair, but [UN resolution] 1441 does not authorise force”, questioning the legality of that war. Only two years ago, when he wanted to appear to be on the left of Labour as he sought election, I was happy to see him promise to bring forward a Prevention of Military Intervention Act. Starmer’s recent outburst about the Stop the War coalition – he claimed that we were effectively on the side of Vladimir Putin for opposing the march towards war over Ukraine – seems to be a critique of his former self. Does he now think he was not a “benign voice for peace” but “at best naive; at worst actively giving succour to authoritarian leaders”? Partly it is sad because he in all likelihood believed what he said then but has now joined the ranks of those politicians who will say anything, no matter how flatly it contradicts their previous statements, if it serves their current ambitions. However, everything we and Starmer thought at the time has been proved correct by events, and every criticism he makes of the anti-war movement now has been made before – and revealed as false. We were told more than 20 years ago that opposition to war in Afghanistan was the same as supporting the Taliban; then that we were aiding Saddam Hussein when we demonstrated against war with Iraq in 2003. When we opposed the Nato bombing of Libya in 2011, we were accused of backing Muammar Gaddafi. It was a lie then, and it is now. We opposed those wars because we believed they would worsen the situation – increase not decrease terrorism, cause greater instability, and leave millions suffering from the consequences. On all those questions we have been proved decisively correct. Our opposition to war in Ukraine is not based on any support for Putin – he has his own record of militarism and war – but because we recognise that such a war would be devastating and that a peaceful resolution can be found. The argument that we oppose war because we support the governments of those countries suggests that there can be no good reason for people to oppose war other than being beholden to another power. This is an insult to all those campaigning for peace, including in Russia, where no doubt pro-war elements claim their opponents are supporting Nato or the US. In order to justify his argument, Starmer has to argue that Nato is purely defensive. “There is no equivalence between a defensive alliance that has never provoked conflict and those who would inflict the appalling cost of war on to others,” he writes. Tell that to the people of Afghanistan and Libya, who have suffered so much as a result of the Nato wars. Stating that the organisation is a defensive alliance does not make it true. It has moved a very long way geographically from the North Atlantic, which was its original remit. Its origins were in the cold war; its role since the end of that war, in 1989, has been expansionist and interventionist, and it is now playing an active role in manoeuvres and arms provision in eastern Europe. It is increasingly looking towards the Indo-Pacific as another theatre of conflict. This military organisation is also putting huge pressure on member states to increase their spending on “defence”. Nato demands at least 2% of GDP from each country, which encourages further militarism and conflict. Meanwhile, in Britain millions of people are facing a serious cost of living crisis, an NHS in permanent emergency mode and record levels of inequality. The Boris Johnson government – whose foreign minister does not appear to know which provinces are in Russia and which in Ukraine – has been the most belligerent in its talk about war with Russia. No doubt this is a tactic to deflect from the prime minister’s own domestic crisis, but it could also lead to an extremely dangerous situation for people in Britain, as well as in Ukraine and Russia. Starmer should be opposing this government, not trying to bang the drum for war even harder. His invocation of the Attlee government in his defence ignores the foreign policy record of that government, which supported wars in Korea and Malaya and introduced the nuclear bomb with “a bloody Union Jack on top of it”, in the words of Starmer’s hero, Ernest Bevin. Starmer sees Nato and the NHS as twinned achievements of Attlee’s government, but a much closer and more meaningful comparison with the creation of the health service is the founding of the United Nations in 1945, rather than the cold war military creation he celebrates. Stop the War has been proved right over the previous wars, while those who mistakenly supported them seem to have learned no lessons from the terrible consequences of their errors. War over Ukraine, involving nuclear powers, could have much more damaging consequences. Diplomacy could lead to a way out, we believe, as even the French and German governments are trying to establish, in contrast to Starmer. We have become all too familiar with Labour politicians promoting wars. Stop the War will continue its campaigning against this threat and the British government’s connivance in it – with Labour acquiescence. Our message is simple: don’t get fooled again. Lindsey German is convenor of the Stop the War coalitionThe UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced this week that he aimed to abolish all Covid regulations, including the requirement to isolate after testing positive, in England from 24 February. Here’s what experts around the world think of that plan, which would make England something of an outlier when it comes to coronavirus precautions. France France is unlikely to follow England in abandoning all coronavirus measures before late March or early April, according to Arnaud Fontanet, a senior epidemiologist at the Pasteur Institute and a member of the government’s scientific advisory council. Fontanet said measures such as mask wearing, home working and quarantine remained vital in order to slow the number of infections and keep hospital admissions down. “Allowing the virus a free run would be a fundamental error,” he said. “Quite small changes in behaviour can really influence the dynamic. Reducing contacts now by just 20% – a bit of home working, wearing masks in indoor public spaces – will halve the number of hospital admissions in a fortnight; we know this.” Fontanet added that France’s vaccine pass, which has been needed since August to access leisure venues – including cafes and restaurants – and use long-distance public transport was also likely to remain in force until spring. “Vaccination, including boosters, is still key.” He said infections had been falling, “but hospitals are under very heavy pressure and will remain so for some time. It’s too soon to lift restrictions now.” Although societies will “need to learn to live with the virus”, he said, new variants will emerge and “we will have to decide what is acceptable. Do we accept 300 deaths a day, or are we prepared to reduce contacts again? Societies will have to decide, and different societies may decide differently.” Jon Henley in Paris Germany “Britain’s management of the pandemic is being watched with interest in Germany,” said Johannes Knobloch, an infection prevention specialist at Hamburg’s University Medical Centre. “It strikes me as quite brave to lift all restrictions at the same time. I would have thought it possible to keep in place some measures that aren’t too troublesome or intrusive – such as mandatory mask-wearing on public transport – but would still slow down the dynamic of new infections. “Britain’s vaccination rates are encouraging, but the big challenge in the coming months will be to protect those for whom vaccines don’t offer protection, such as people undergoing cancer therapy.” German states this week took steps to lift some restrictions, such as the rule whereby only those with proof of vaccination or recent recovery are allowed to access non-essential shops. Other rules, including FFP2 mask mandates in shops and on public transport and vaccine passport checks at restaurants and bars, remain in place. “I don’t see Germany going down the UK’s path quite so quickly,” said Knobloch. “But then you need to bear in mind there are broader philosophical differences in our health system, with avoidance of death still playing a fundamental part in the German system, while Britain’s system places more emphasis on maintaining the ability to work.” Philip Oltermann in Berlin Spain Prof Rafael Bengoa, a former World Health Organization health systems director who is now co-director of the Institute for Health and Strategy in Bilbao, said that while the lifting of restrictions in England would doubtless prove popular, it was premature. “Because of our bias to normalcy, people want to believe it’s over, which is what politicians are saying,” said Bengoa. “But most of us in public health across Europe are saying that it’s not quite over and it’s not like the flu.” He said lifting restrictions – especially the use of face masks in interior spaces – would slow down the descent rate of the Omicron wave because people would continue to get infected. Bengoa also said that people who tested positive for the virus needed to stay in home quarantine for five to seven days. “If you over-normalise the situation – if you lift everything and you say, ‘This is over’ – people will not stay at home for those five or seven days,” he said. “If you go out and infect children who are not completely vaccinated yet, and you go out and infect vulnerable people and immunocompromised people – and those three groups are not small in numbers – you’re going out to infect people who are still vulnerable. And since this is not like the flu, and it’s quite serious and you can also have long Covid with this, why is it that one needs to precipitate the lifting of restrictions so fast?” Bengoa said that restrictions could be lifted in two months’ time, but added that Spain’s decision to maintain the use of masks in interior spaces and require people who test positive to self-isolate for seven days would accelerate the containment of the Omicron wave. Sam Jones in Madrid Italy Italy has among the strictest Covid rules in Europe, with health passes required for everything from getting on a bus to going to work, and while the country is cautiously relaxing restrictions as infections and hospitalisations fall – the outdoor mask rule was dropped on Friday – scientists are perplexed by England’s plan to scrap quarantine rules for people who test positive for Covid-19, especially with the two countries still registering stubbornly high daily death rates. “These are political choices, not scientific ones,” said Roberto Burioni, a professor of microbiology and virology at Vita-Salute San Raffaele University in Milan. “We’ve never quarantined people who have the flu, but the flu doesn’t kill two or three hundred people a day.” Angela Giuffrida in Rome Greece In Greece, which has one of Europe’s highest Covid-19 death rates, reaction to the decision to end restrictions was relatively upbeat. “I think the situation in the UK allows for relaxation of the measures,” said leading epidemiologist Gkikas Magiorkinis. “Given the country’s good vaccination and epidemiological profile, it seems to be a reasonable move.” Magiorkinis, who sits on the committee of experts that advises the government, said Athens would likely follow suit if, at this point in the pandemic, Greece had similar rates of fatalities, hospitalisations and intubations. “We would end up doing the same,” he said. “If the health system is not under heavy pressure, we need to use the opportunity to try and return to normality, because if, in five months’ time, there is another mutation, people might not listen to us, and that would be serious.” Helena Smith in Athens China In the past two years, Britain has been used by Chinese media as an unsuccessful example in the fight against Covid. Some Chinese media outlets and social media users call the UK’s approach “lying flat” – tang ping - a term often used to describe individuals who strive for nothing more than what is absolutely essential. State media cite criticisms over Johnson’s announcement, but Chinese experts have tried to understand the logic behind it, with some expressing admiration. England is now the first country prepared to achieve herd immunity, said Prof Chen Wenzhi of Chongqing Medical University. “This is because their scientists have said the peak of the new variant had passed … and suggested the end of the pandemic is in sight.” Zhang Wenhong, one of the country’s best-known epidemiologists, recently used the UK as an example to persuade the Chinese public to get vaccinated as soon as possible. Citing data from the UK Health Security Agency, he said the reason why some countries could end restrictions was because vaccines had led to a dramatic reduction in hospitalisation and mortality rates. Vincent Ni New Zealand In New Zealand, the epidemiologist and public health expert Prof Michael Baker said the data on hospitalisations and deaths from Covid-19 in the UK told their own story. “The numbers, I think, are screaming out a message [that] the pandemic response has been very poorly managed – the waste of lives, the excessive periods under lockdown and the flip-flopping policies.” While death rates in the UK were down from their peak, he noted: “In New Zealand that would still be [equivalent to] 20 people dying a day – we would regard that as high mortality … On the face of it, it would certainly seem premature to be relaxing all safeguards.” Inevitably, Baker said, the results would be felt more harshly by some than others – frontline workers, elderly people, ill people, the immuno-compromised. “That partly reflects just how the virus behaves and who’s most vulnerable, but also the priorities of different governments. Most of us would regard that the balance is not right in the UK in that respect – that there’s a need for greater emphasis on protecting the most vulnerable.” “In terms of scientific depth, the UK is currently amongst the leading contributors to understanding [the] virus, and combating it at a science level … they gave us the AstraZeneca vaccine and some of the best large population studies in the world,” he said. “The science is absolutely top – it’s just the policy translation has been shockingly poor. That’s one of the frustrating things. We’d normally look to the UK … and they have not given us the leadership we’d hope for.” Tess McClure in Auckland Australia Stuart Turville, associate professor in the immunovirology and pathogenesis program at the Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, points out that the UK’s “base of immunity” is high and that “the waves of Delta and Omicron (albeit high) did not translate into the deaths that they observed in earlier waves”. But, he said: “There are always people in our community where vaccination is not an option – for example, because their vaccine response is not strong.” The virologist’s primary concern was that Omicron would be replaced by another variant. “We planned for Delta and got Omicron, and although we didn’t have the lockdowns of the past, it did create significant disruption, not to mention those that also sadly passed away. I have always said it is better to be vigilant and cautious.” He added: “It’s very difficult to predict this virus, though. It has made a fool of many of us.” Melissa Davey in Sydney • This article was amended on 12 February 2022 to remove the statement in the subheading that the UK is the first nation to lift restrictions; and to amend references to the UK or Britain where England was meant.Palmeiras fans have been out in force in Abu Dhabi this week. They have travelled thousands of miles to watch the Club World Cup and have been showing their colours with pride before Abel Ferreira’s side take on Chelsea, who will be making a big mistake if they show any complacency during Saturday night’s final at the Mohammed bin Zayed Stadium. This is a huge moment for Palmeiras; a chance, at long last, to silence taunts from rival Brazilian clubs about their barren record in this tournament. The Copa Libertadores champions understand what is at stake. They have long since had to accept that their triumph in the Copa Rio in 1951, the original intercontinental club tournament, is not enough to stop the chants of “Palmeiras não tem Mundial” – Palmeiras don’t have a World Cup – from fans of Corinthians, São Paulo and Santos. There is only one way to scratch the itch: by defying the odds and dashing Chelsea’s hopes of becoming world champions for the first time. History is on the line. This is the only major trophy that has eluded Chelsea during the Roman Abramovich era and the European champions do not need to be told how seriously this competition is taken in Brazil. They were beaten finalists when they faced Corinthians in 2012 and they know that Palmeiras’s fans are going to turn the stadium green. “Palmeiras are huge,” Thiago Silva, Chelsea’s Brazilian centre-back, said. “We know that with the presence of fans here, their team is much stronger.” It is not going to be straightforward, although it looks increasingly likely that Thomas Tuchel will be at the final. The manager arrived in Abu Dhabi on Friday after a negative Covid test, having had to stay in London after contracting the virus, and will be on the touchline subject to the result of a further PCR test taken after he landed. Chelsea could do with him there. They did not convince when they beat Al-Hilal 1-0 on Wednesday and will be in trouble if there is no improvement against Palmeiras, who were comfortable 2-0 winners against Al-Ahly in the other semi-final. “It is unfortunate Thomas was not here but we hope he will join us,” Jorginho, Chelsea’s vice-captain, said. “It gives you more because he is your coach and there is more energy in the changing room.” In the absence of Tuchel it has been up to the German’s assistants, Zsolt Low and Arno Michels, to take charge. The backroom team have had to take on more responsibility. Anthony Barry and Benjamin Weber were both talked up by Jorginho and there has also been help from Petr Cech, Chelsea’s technical and performance adviser. Cech has plenty of experience to offer Tuchel’s squad. He was in goal when Chelsea lost to Corinthians in Japan just over nine years ago and the memory eats away at him. These opportunities do not come around often and Cech has been telling this generation not to fly home with regrets. The issue is that this tournament is still not taken entirely seriously by European teams. It is often viewed as an inconvenience, an unwanted interruption in the middle of a domestic campaign, but that can level the playing field and give hope to the underdogs. Chelsea certainly had the wrong attitude on the only other occasion when they were Europe’s representatives in the Club World Cup. Too many of Rafael Benítez’s players were unhappy with the quality of their hotel and the negativity affected their performance, Corinthians winning 1-0 thanks to a goal from Paolo Guerrero. It has to be different this time. Chelsea are staying in a plush hotel, the sun is shining and there were concerns that it would feel like a pre-season tour when they landed in Abu Dhabi. Would the intensity be there? Or would the players see it as a chance to relax after a taxing winter period? It has not been an easy few months for Chelsea. Injuries have disrupted their momentum, their title challenge has faded away and Romelu Lukaku still looks unconvincing. This, though, is a chance to lift the mood. Lukaku scored against Al-Hilal, Kepa Arrizabalaga made two brilliant saves and the sense in the coaching team is that the players understand what it would mean to become world champions. Palmeiras, who have won back-to-back Copa Libertadores titles, are not to be taken lightly. Tuchel, who does not want to leave anything to chance, is considering whether to bring Édouard Mendy in for Arrizabalaga. Mason Mount and N’Golo Kanté could also return to the starting lineup and the message from Jorginho was that anything could happen. Palmeiras, who lost in the semi-finals last year, are going to be up for it. Chelsea must be ready.A vast windfarm off the Norfolk coast has been approved by ministers for a second time after a local man convinced a high court judge to overturn the first decision a year ago. The high court verdict last February forced the government to reconsider the plans by the Swedish renewables firm Vattenfall to build two offshore windfarms capable of generating enough green electricity to power the equivalent of 4m UK homes. But on Friday Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, reapproved the Norfolk Vanguard offshore windfarm, more than a year and a half after first giving the project the nod. His department approved the Norfolk Boreas windfarm, its sister project, at the end of last year. The projects were temporarily derailed last year after a legal challenge by a local resident, Raymond Pearce, raised concerns about the impact on the landscape and the view. Pearce, who lives near Reepham in Norfolk, argued that ministers had not taken into account the “cumulative impacts” of the two projects and had given “inadequate” reasons for not doing so. The concerns centred on Vattenfall’s plans for a substation for both projects about 40 miles from the coast at Necton, which would require cables to pass within 80 metres of Pearce’s house. The high court judge added that the plans had attracted “substantial objections” from the local community, too. Conservationists also raised concerns about the safety of endangered birds in the area. Work on the windfarms, located almost 30 miles off the coast, is now expected to begin in 2023 and would “help to cement and maintain East Anglia as a UK renewable energy powerhouse” that could support thousands of jobs in the local area, according to Vattenfall. Danielle Lane, Vattenfall’s UK boss, said the approval was a “major step forward for a project that will help to unlock the huge potential of offshore wind for the UK”. “We’ll be working even more closely now with local communities as we begin to take the project towards construction,” Lane said. “This will include preparatory works on the ground, but also work with our local partners to make sure we get our plans absolutely right to maximise benefits to the region.” The industry group RenewableUK said the approval would also secure “significant investment in much-needed new energy infrastructure” to help the UK meet its climate targets. “The government has set the industry a target of nearly quadrupling our current offshore wind capacity to 40 gigawatts by the end of this decade,” said RenewableUK’s chief executive, Dan McGrail. “Giving the go-ahead to a major project like Norfolk Vanguard is a big boost to help us to get there. It also demonstrates to the rest of the world that the UK is committed to taking significant practical action against climate change,” he said.Men who have been convicted for homosexual acts on the Isle of Man will be automatically pardoned later this year in what campaigners said was a long overdue and necessary change in law. Homosexuality was decriminalised on the Isle of Man in 1992 and its first Gay Pride event took place last summer. Jane Poole-Wilson, the home affairs minister, said new legislation would come into force in June at the latest. The new act will pardon those convicted for a historical sexual offence if the act in question is no longer a crime. While the pardons will be automatic, people will have to apply to have historical convictions struck from their records in a “disregard process”. Two years ago the island’s then chief minister apologised for the way gay men had been treated, having had their homes raided and been put on trial for consensual sexual activity. “Our previous laws discriminated against and criminalised men solely for who they were and who they loved,” said Howard Quayle. “The previous law reflected a different time, a different place. An island of the past. Those who were convicted of these crimes, and their loved ones, should no longer have to shoulder the burden of guilt. They should be seen as innocent. “All those people affected – the men themselves, their partners, wider family and friends – they deserve an unqualified apology from us.” The forthcoming pardons were welcomed by Alan Shea, a hero of the Manx battle for gay rights. On 5 July 1991, the Manx bank holiday of Tynwald Day, he wore a concentration camp uniform fashioned from Marks &amp; Spencer pyjamas to petition parliament to legalise homosexuality, making parallels with the Nazi persecution of gay people. Soldiers hissed at Shea as he walked to Tynwald Hill to argue that he should not face life in jail just for having sex with his partner, Stephen Moore, now his husband. On camera, a furious man denounced Shea and his friends as local children looked on with interest. “It’s good that people are finally being pardoned, but we are still waiting for an apology from the chief constable of the Isle of Man police to apologise for the way the force persecuted gay people,” said Shea. He was unable to get a job for 10 years after The Tynwald Day protest and claims his house was put under constant surveillance by police, questioning everybody who came in and out. Shea was never arrested but has friends who were, some of whom left the island, never to return. “Many of them are still haunted with memories of what happened,” he said. Peter Tatchell, the gay rights campaigner, said: “This decision is long overdue and necessary given the intense persecution LGBT+ people faced on the Isle of Man in the decades after homosexuality was significantly decriminalised in the rest of the UK.” He echoed Shea’s call for a police apology, saying: “The Isle of Man police went out of their way to target and persecuted gay and bisexual men and conducted a witch-hunt that was unprecedented in the UK.” In 2017 the UK issued thousands of pardons for gay men, after the 2013 royal pardon granted by the Queen to Alan Turing, the mathematician who broke the German Enigma codes during the second world war. He killed himself in 1954, at the age of 41, after his conviction for gross indecency. The Isle of Man is not part of the UK but is a self-governing British Crown Dependency with its own parliament, government and laws. The UK government, on behalf of the crown, is ultimately responsible for its international relations and defence, and provides consular services for its 84,000 citizens.UK exports of goods to the EU have fallen by £20bn compared with the last period of stable trade with Europe, according to official figures marking the first full year since Brexit. Numbers released on Friday by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) showed that the combined impact of the pandemic and Britain’s exit from the single market caused a 12% fall in exports between January and December last year compared with 2018. Highlighting the disproportionate impact of leaving the EU, exports to the rest of the world excluding the 27-nation bloc dropped by a much smaller £10bn, or about 6% compared with 2018 levels. The ONS compared trade performance against figures from three years ago because that was the last year before distortions caused by firms stockpiling ahead of Brexit deadlines and the spread of Covid-19. Despite the disruption, the EU remains the UK’s largest trading partner. However, for the first time since comparable records began in 1997, the UK now spends more importing goods from the rest of the world than it does from the EU. UK goods imported from the EU were down almost 17%, or about £45bn, compared with 2018. In comparison, imports from the rest of the world increased by almost 13%, or about £28bn. With the EU accounting for just over half of UK exports worldwide, economists said Brexit was serving as an extra headwind for Britain, compounding the disruption from Covid being felt across advanced economies. “UK exporters are continuing to lose market share,” said Gabriella Dickens, an economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics. Although trade levels have picked up in recent months, data from the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis show that real goods exports from advanced economies were 3.8% above their 2018 average in November, outpacing the UK. The hardest-hit commodities recorded dramatic falls. Outbound shipments of clothing and footwear to the EU were both down by almost 60% compared with 2018. Food and live animal exports – for which more stringent border checks are required – were down almost 18%, while vegetable exports dropped by almost 40%. Shipments of cars to the EU, heavily disrupted by global supply chain issues and Covid, were down by a quarter. Guillermo Larbalestier, a trade economist at the University of Sussex, said the drop in vegetable exports was probably linked to a fall in the number of seasonal workers available to pick and process crops, more burdensome paperwork and the difficulty in exporting perishable goods in the face of extended delays at the border. Clothing exports have been affected because a high proportion of garments sold by UK retailers are made in Asia or the US, making them ineligible for the tariffs negotiated in the post-Brexit trade deal. However, the latest figures do suggest a recovery from the worst of the Brexit damage seen in January 2021, just after Britain’s departure, when exports to the EU plunged by 40%. According to the latest figures, UK exports to the EU were about £200m higher in December 2021 than the same month in 2018, but much of this was driven by an increase in wholesale gas prices on international energy markets. Business leaders have warned that border restrictions and reams of red tape have pushed up costs and added to delivery times, permanently undermining the competitiveness of UK goods on the continent. Sixty-seven percent of firms experienced a challenge when exporting and 72% when importing in the last month, according to ONS surveys. “There is a lot more friction on trade, which you would expect to have a more medium-to long-term impact,” said Grant Fitzner, chief economist at the ONS. Gareth Thomas, the shadow international trade minister, said the government had exaggerated the benefits of trade deals with countries outside the EU that have yet to be negotiated. “Ministers are not doing enough to support our exporters in markets outside Europe, while the deal they negotiated with the EU has led to long lorry queues into Dover, a big increase in red tape and a significant decline in trade,” he said. A UK government spokesperson said: “UK goods exports to EU nations were 4% higher last year compared with 2020. However, as the ONS itself recognises, the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, global recession and supply chain disruption, have caused higher levels of volatility in recent statistics. It is therefore still too early to draw any firm conclusions on the long-term impacts of our new trading relationship with the EU. “We are continuing to ensure that businesses get the support they need to trade effectively with Europe.”Jacob Rees-Mogg reminds me of a kipper. A very specific kipper, resting on a plastic pillow of ice, which intruded into the public consciousness back in 2019, when Boris Johnson held it aloft, proclaiming it as an example of the absurd, pettifogging rules imposed by Brussels on the yeoman traders of Britain. Naturally, Johnson’s claims fell apart on inspection. There was no European directive mandating a cushion of ice for the sleeping fish. On the contrary, the ice pillow was demanded by a British rule, drawn up by British officials. Nothing to do with the EU. The episode came back to me when Rees-Mogg, newly appointed minister for Brexit opportunities and government efficiency, appealed to readers of the Sun to write in and tell him “of ANY petty old EU regulation that should be abolished”. That’s because Johnson’s kipper illustrated not only his serial dishonesty on matters European – already well-documented – but also a gap in the Brexiters’ arsenal. That gap was fairly well concealed in the 2016 referendum campaign, but Rees-Mogg’s plea in the Sun, like Johnson’s kipper, has exposed it. Here’s how it can be identified. Take the Brexiters at their word – that leaving was about more than ending European immigration – and ask them to name some other reform that Britain badly needed but which proved unachievable so long as we remained in the EU: a specific change that only Brexit could unlock. The committed leaver will struggle and sputter, before either mentioning blue passports or else retreating into abstract nouns: “freedom” or “sovereignty”. Press them for a concrete, real-world benefit of Brexit, one that survives scrutiny, and they wilt. They either end up making something up, as Johnson did, or else phoning a friend – like Rees-Mogg’s call-out to Sun readers. Perhaps we’re being unfair. After all, Johnson is always telling us that Britain’s swift authorisation of Covid vaccines was possible only because we were outside the EU. Except that, too, is false. The vaccine decisions were taken during the transition period, when the UK was still bound by EU rules. There was no need to leave to make that happen. Surely there must be something. Or is “Brexit opportunities” an oxymoron, on a par with “Ebola upsides”? The trade expert Sam Lowe gamely offers that, “Consumers could benefit from the UK embracing a position as a regulatory freeloader in the medical devices space: but this is not without its risks.” Wonder why they never put that on the side of a bus. If the worst we could say of Brexit was that it hasn’t delivered any of its promised gains, maybe we could let it pass. But Brexit is inflicting grave losses, starting with deep economic pain, even if that pain has been well camouflaged by Covid and by the omertà imposed by a Labour leadership that would rather talk about almost anything else. The evidence of the hurt is in abundant supply. On Wednesday, the public accounts committee reported on the “clear increase in costs, paperwork and border delays” that Brexit has imposed on UK businesses. The next day it was the turn of the Office for National Statistics, whose business survey found that more than half of the UK’s importers and exporters now cite additional paperwork and higher transportation costs as problems, with those two issues their biggest headaches by a wide margin. The phone-in programmes hum with British entrepreneurs, plenty of them leave voters, now driven to despair, forced to spend precious, exhausting hours filling in forms they never used to have to fill in and paying costs they never used to have to pay. Ignore the talk of the greatest growth since the second world war: that’s just a function of the economy having collapsed so badly in 2020. Note instead the Bank of England’s forecast of 1.25% growth in 2023, falling to just 1% in 2024. David Smith, economics editor of the Sunday Times and no remoaner fanatic, puts that down partly to Covid but partly to the “adverse fiscal consequences of leaving the EU”, which left the country “with a budget hole that has had to be filled with higher taxes. We now have a high-tax economy strangled by red tape and hampered by trade restrictions.” The people who led us off this cliff continue to pretend that none of this is happening. In a facepalm moment in the Commons this week, the pro-Brexit MP for Dover, Natalie Elphicke, complained about the “miles of traffic jams” besetting her constituency. Those are because of the laborious checks and delays that now confront lorries coming into the port, but Elphicke insisted the jams were “not because of Brexit but because of Brussels bureaucracy”. Like many Brexiters, she is outraged that when you leave the EU, the EU treats you as if you’ve left the EU. Wherever you look, it’s the same picture. For all the fur-hat photo-ops in Moscow, Britain is no more than a bit player in the current crisis over Ukraine. Before Brexit, the UK was one of the three decisive members in an economic bloc that stood between the US and China as the most powerful in the world. Outside the EU, and having broken our commitment on overseas aid and forsaken the soft power that came with it, the UK is struggling to stay relevant. Meanwhile, the delicate constitutional machinery that kept Northern Ireland at peace has been smashed. At the same time, those other parts of the UK that once relied on EU cash now face a government that has broken its manifesto promise to plug the gap previously filled by Brussels funds. That deprives Wales, which voted to leave the EU, of close to £1bn over the next three years. This is what Rees-Mogg should be reading in his mailbag. That Brexit has inflicted great losses on this country; that the supposed offsets for those losses don’t offset them at all; and that there are next to no “opportunities” worthy of the name. Brexit is a rank failure. I understand why our politics cannot yet say as much, that a decent interval has to pass between 2016 and that moment. But that moment will come eventually – and when it does, it threatens to arrive with a mighty fury. • Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistMason Mount does not like to forget. The midfielder knows how painful it is to lose a final and he will not throw his medal away if Palmeiras stop Chelsea from winning the Club World Cup for the first time on Saturday night. “Obviously the winners’ ones take top place on the mantelpiece,” Mount says after being asked where he keeps his most prized possessions. “You look at the second-place ones for memories. You think how distraught you were. I know a lot of players throw it to the side but I like having them. Then you see the winners’ medals, that feeling of winning, and you remember that. I keep everything.” The midday sun is beating down in Abu Dhabi and Mount, who is about to play the sixth final of his short career, is in a thoughtful mood. The 23-year-old reached the top when Chelsea beat Manchester City in the Champions League final last season, but he soon came crashing back down to earth when Italy beat England in the Euro 2020 final. “The highs and lows of football,” Mount sighs. “I’ve played quite a few finals and understand what it feels like.” What would he say to someone playing in their first one? “Enjoy it as much as you can. When you enjoy something you remember a lot about it. I remember quite a lot of the Champions League final. One thing I don’t is when we scored. It happened so quickly.” Nine months on, Mount struggles to picture what unfolded after his pass sent Kai Havertz through to score Chelsea’s winner against City. “It’s kind of a blur,” he says. “I remember screaming so long I gave myself a headache and I lost my voice.” It was an emotional occasion for Mount and he struggled in the buildup. “I don’t think I slept well and, for the day of the game, it was the only one I have been very anxious about,” he says. “Butterflies in my belly. I did not eat well but as soon as we got to the stadium I was buzzing.” Free to express himself, Mount was excellent that night against City. It helped that Thomas Tuchel lightened the mood with a jokey comment over breakfast, and there are plenty of experienced characters in Chelsea’s dressing room. Thiago Silva, the 37-year-old Brazilian centre-back, is influential. “His English is not the best, but he still has that presence to come over and say: ‘Just do your stuff,’” Mount says. “He’s one of the best in training every day. “He’s starting to learn a bit more English. When we eat he sits next to me. Jorgi’s [Jorginho’s] across from him, then we’ve got me, Marcus Bettinelli and a few of the English boys. He’s down the English end, so maybe he’s done that to learn more of the slang.” Mount is relaxed as he holds court at Chelsea’s hotel, smiling when he spots a Palmeiras fan sitting by the pool. The significance of the Club World Cup is not lost on him. Chelsea have never been world champions and they know that the Copa Libertadores champions will be up for it. “It’s a massive game,” Mount says. “We all know how big the competition is in Brazil. We saw when they were on the coach to the airport, the amount of fans that turned up to send them off.” Chelsea did not convince against Al-Hilal on Wednesday and Mount, who was fit enough only to come off the bench, accepts that he has not had an easy campaign. Minor injuries have stalled his momentum and he was out for a few weeks after having all of his wisdom teeth out in November. “You don’t think your teeth are going to stop you from playing football,” Mount says. “It did actually really mess me up. It was Newcastle away and I woke up on the day in agony. I was in the car back to London and it was the worst journey I’ve ever been on. I wanted to just rip them out myself but it wouldn’t have been the best idea.” It was not easy for Mount to be on the sidelines. He made 69 appearances for club and country last season, although he accepts there are benefits to having a short break. “Sometimes you have to admit to yourself and go to the manager and say: ‘Look, I am feeling it a bit’ – through gritted teeth.” But would he ever actually do that? “No! I just leave it to the physios.” It is not a surprise. Frank Lampard said that Mount’s eyes would burn whenever he left him out and Tuchel experienced something similar when he dropped the England midfielder against City last month. “Missing out on a big game hurts,” he says. “But I’m not someone to go straight away to a manager and say: ‘Why are you not starting me?’ I’m someone who likes to show in training that I’m ready.” There is a relentlessness to Mount. He is quick to jump in with a correction when he is asked about his childhood friend Declan Rice becoming a goalscoring midfielder for West Ham this season. “Is he?” he says. “How many has he got?” Mount is happier once the question is about Rice trying to become a goalscoring midfielder. His competitiveness has kicked in. Is he in a race with Rice? “If I finish up under him this season I’ll be very disappointed,” Mount says. “It will be back to the drawing board. He’s on two goals. I’m on seven. “But obviously he’s been brilliant. I don’t want to say too much about him. I don’t want to gas him up too much but he’s done very well this season. You see how dominant he is for West Ham. Hopefully that continues.” Mount does not remember Rice surging forward quite so much before the West Ham midfielder was released by Chelsea at the age of 14. “He was a centre-back then so if he ever came close to me I’d say: ‘Get yourself back there, mate! You’re not coming past me!’ But you can see how he’s progressed over the last couple of years. The way he strikes the ball, the way he finishes, I’ve always said to him he can score way more goals.” Mount and Rice could be teammates again if Chelsea have their way this summer. For now, though, the focus is on beating Palmeiras. History is there to be made and Mount wants a Club World Cup medal on his mantelpiece. “The Champions League is definitely number one,” he says. “Hopefully on Saturday this one will be up there.”Here’s a roundup of the key developments in UK politics today: Dame Cressida Dick’s resignation as Met police chief has been welcomed by critics who said they were “delighted” by her decision to go. Alastair Morgan, who has spent decades campaigning for justice for his brother Daniel, who was killed with an axe in a pub car park in Sydenham, south-east London, in the 1980s, said Dame Cressida has “disappointed” his family on every level. The new Met chief must be prepared to tackle the “policing culture” which has left the country’s biggest force reeling from a series of scandals, the home secretary, Priti Patel, has warned. Patel, who is beginning the search for a successor to Cressida Dick, said it would require “strong and decisive leadership” to rebuild public confidence in the force’s “integrity and professionalism”. It is understood those connected with the inquiry to partygate do not believe the loss of Cressida Dick will damage or hinder the inquiry, or make it any more prone to any attempt to sway its course. A Met source told The Guardian: “The investigation is continuing.” Speculation has begun regarding who will replace Cressida Dick as the Metropolitan police commissioner. Contenders include Neil Basu, an assistant commissioner who previously worked as the head of counter-terrorism, Matt Jukes, another assistant commissioner, and Lucy D’Orsi, who is currently the chief constable of the British Transport Police. Pressure is mounting on No 10 to make clear it will have no direct involvement in the choice of the next Met police commissioner, given the current investigation into Downing Street lockdown parties, and that it should refrain from trying to influence the inquiry. However, an “ally” of the prime minister told the Times in a veiled warning that the police ought to think very carefully before issuing any penalty to the prime minister. The chancellor appeared to suggest that he does not expect to be asked to fill out a police questionnaire about his involvement in a No 10 event that possibly broke Covid rules. Scotland Yard has said it will be sending formal legal questionnaires to more than 50 individuals, from whom officers involved with Operation Hillman – the probe into so-called “partygate” – wish to hear. The Metropolitan police decided initially to not investigate allegations of lockdown-breaching parties in and around Downing Street in part because no one had admitted taken part and there was no social media footage, a legal document has shown. In a response by legal campaign group the Good Law Project for a judicial review about the Met’s decision in early December to not launch an inquiry, the police force’s lawyers pointed to guidelines saying it did not investigate Covid breaches retrospectively. The Labour MP Neil Coyle has had the whip suspended after allegations he made racist comments to a journalist in a House of Commons bar, a party spokesperson said. It comes after a complaint by Henry Dyer, a political reporter for the Insider website, about the alleged behaviour of Coyle, who has since apologised for his “insensitive” comments. Several protests are due to take place on Saturday in response to the impact of the cost of living crisis on workers and their families. The People’s Assembly has coordinated hundreds of local and regional demonstrations, supported by trade unions, with people planning to take to the streets across the country. The UK’s equalities watchdog is facing calls for it to lose its status as an internationally recognised human rights body amid claims of politicisation and taking a “determinedly anti-trans stance”. A coalition of 19 LGBT+ organisations led by Stonewall and supported by the Good Law Project says the Equality and Human Rights Commission has taken a “recent and significant” shift on trans rights. Defence secretary Ben Wallace said he is not as optimistic as he used to be about quelling the crisis on the Ukrainian border. He told a press conference in Moscow: “I think the direction of travel has been against the direction of the diplomatic travel over the last few weeks.” We’re closing this liveblog now. Thanks so much for joining me today and for all your tweets, emails and comments below the line. Sorry I couldn’t reply to everyone. Our global coronavirus blog is still live and you can follow here: Defence secretary Ben Wallace said he is not as optimistic as he used to be about quelling the crisis on the Ukrainian border. He told a press conference in Moscow: I think the direction of travel has been against the direction of the diplomatic travel over the last few weeks. We’ve seen continued build-up of forces as we’ve seen a build up of diplomacy, and you would hope that, actually... one goes up, one goes down - and I think that is why my optimism is not as (optimistic) as I used to be, or can be. And I’m hoping that the beginning today is an effort to try and see if there is a way forward to make sure we do de-escalate. We’ll keep trying. I think the international community is trying very hard – obviously President Macron’s visit, Prime Minister Johnson spoke to President Putin... recently as well. And indeed, I think the new Chancellor of Germany is coming to visit next week. I think it is very important that we give the Russian government, give them all a chance to provide the reassurance they are seeking about the intentions of Nato, but also to give us the airtime to hear from them their assurances that they have no intention of invading Ukraine as well. The UK’s equalities watchdog is facing calls for it to lose its status as an internationally recognised human rights body amid claims of politicisation and taking a “determinedly anti-trans stance”. A coalition of 19 LGBT+ organisations led by Stonewall and supported by the Good Law Project says the Equality and Human Rights Commission has taken a “recent and significant” shift on trans rights that has prompted them to make a submission to the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions calling for the body to lose its “A-rating”. The chief executive of the commission, Marcial Boo, said Stonewall and others were “aiming at the wrong target” and urged them to “work with us to identify discrimination against LGBT people so we can take action together to stop it”. The call follows two interventions by the commission at the end of January, in which it recommended that the UK government’s proposed ban on conversion practices not extend to trans people, and it wrote to the Scottish government asking it to pause plans to simplify the legal requirements for gender recognition, reversing its previous position. At the time this was met with fury by some Scottish campaigners who railed against “UK government appointees telling us in Scotland how to legislate in devolved areas”. The commission insisted impartiality was “a core value” and that all decisions “are made independently of any government”. Read the full story here: The Metropolitan police decided initially to not investigate allegations of lockdown-breaching parties in and around Downing Street in part because no one had admitted taken part and there was no social media footage, a legal document has shown. In a response by legal campaign group the Good Law Project for a judicial review about the Met’s decision in early December to not launch an inquiry, the police force’s lawyers pointed to guidelines saying it did not investigate Covid breaches retrospectively, given their relatively minor nature and limited resources. At the time the first decision was made, any details about the gatherings were were “fairly vague”, the document said, detailing the reasons given by a senior officer, whose named has been redacted. The officer, it said: .... observed that the press reports did not identify who had been at the gatherings, no one had come forward to admit presence at any of the gatherings, and there was no evidence from social media showing these gatherings taking place, and from which those present could be identified. It followed that if these events had taken place, the organisers could not be identified from the material available to the police at that time and nor could [the officer] draw any conclusions as to whether the gatherings breached the Covid regulations, and if so, whether those present at the gatherings had no reasonable excuse for their presence at the gatherings. The force changed its mind last month, and is investigating the claims. But Jo Maugham, director of the Good Law Project, said the reasons were “profoundly troubling”. He said: It points to a Met that does not want to investigate potential criminality in government or is excessively deferential to those in power. Hundreds of thousands of coronavirus cases are continuing to be missed from the official figures each week, despite the recent decision to start including reinfections, new analysis shows. An average of 101,000 cases of coronavirus per day were recorded from January 16 to 22, according to the Government’s Covid-19 dashboard. But the true number was likely to be nearer 280,500 a day, according to estimates by the Office for National Statistics (ONS). PA reports: It means more than 1.2 million cases will not have been included in the official count during the week to 22 January. The sharp difference in totals reflects the increasing limitations of the Government figures, which count only those people who have reported themselves as having tested positive for the virus. The numbers are affected by how many people are coming forward for tests, have chosen to report their test results, or who are taking a test because they know they have coronavirus symptoms. By contrast, the ONS figures are based on analysis of nose and throat swabs taken from a representative sample of more than 150,000 people in private households. The same people are sampled every week, regardless of whether they know they have Covid-19 or have reported a positive result. The ONS then produces estimates of the likely number of cases of coronavirus across the country. The ONS figures, which are published as part of the weekly infection survey, are the most reliable snapshot of both the prevalence and volume of coronavirus across the country. The Guardian’s political correspondent Peter Walker has created an interesting Twitter thread giving insight on the Metropolitan police’s explanation on why they did not initially investigate No 10 party claims. Claire Waxman, the London’s Victims’ Commissioner, has said that it is “critical that the next chapter of the Metropolitan police truly puts victims at the heart of its mission”. Waxman said: Public trust and confidence in the Metropolitanpolice have been severely damaged in recent years. While this is due in part to high-profile cases and reports detailing the Met’s failings, along with public awareness of unacceptable prosecution rates for sexual offences, it is also informed by the direct personal experiences of victims. Unfortunately, as London Victims’ Commissioner, I regularly meet with victims who feel they have been disbelieved, dismissed or failed by the police. The knock-on impact is that victims are pushed out of the justice system or are unwilling to come forward to report at all, leaving too many perpetrators free to continue offending with impunity. In my role I have the privilege of working with many brave survivors who are invested in improving the system for others and are willing to work with the police to make this happen. I also know many police officers who are working tirelessly to keep London safe and to improve the service they provide victims. It is critical that the next chapter of the Metropolitan police truly puts victims at the heart of its mission. This will mean engaging directly and compassionately with victims and being willing to hear some tough truths about the realities on the ground. It will mean seeing victim testimony as a valuable resource for improvement, rather than unfair criticism. And it will require robust, tangible and transparent plans about how the systemic, cultural issues will be urgently addressed. The journalist Henry Dyer, who was allegedly subject to racist and offensive comments made by Neil Coyle, has said the MP has contacted him to apologise. Dyer added that he had “reiterated that he will be complying with the Labour party’s investigation”. Furthermore, the campaign group Hope Not Hate said it stood “in solidarity with Henry Dyer”. The organisation’s CEO, Nick Lowles, said: “We welcome the decision made by the Labour party to suspend Neil Coyle from the whip, pending investigation. “The reports of Coyle’s behaviour towards a journalist of east Asian heritage reflect views which are deeply racist and unacceptable.” The House of Commons declined to comment. Wales could see all coronavirus restrictions lifted at the end of March, the country’s economy minister has said. During a Welsh government press conference held today, Vaughan Gething said that regulations could be set aside in March if public health conditions continue to improve. Addressing a question about why the Welsh and UK governments were not working closer together to introduce changes to Covid restrictions, such as the self-isolation rules, in unison, Gething said: We have always wanted to work alongside all of the other governments. When we’ve had alignment on our rules and timing and content I know it’s easier for the public to understand and do the right thing. But we can hardly align and work more closely together when we are ambushed by surprise changes. The prime minister didn’t speak to the first minister before going into the preamble for prime minister’s questions and announcing a move that took many people by surprise.” Several protests are due to take place on Saturday in response to the impact of the cost of living crisis on workers and their families. The PA reports: The People’s Assembly has coordinated hundreds of local and regional demonstrations, supported by trade unions, with people planning to take to the streets across the country. Laura Pidcock, national secretary of the People’s Assembly, said: “There is real anger at this growing crisis. Working people could not be working harder and yet life is getting so much more difficult. “People can see clearer than ever the inequality in our society, that while there are companies making massive profits and the richest individuals are getting so much richer, everybody else is having to suffer, making very difficult decisions to try and get by. “Older people will be cold in their homes, people will be struggling to feed their children, when none of this is a crisis of their making. Meanwhile, the Government sits by and does nothing to help the people. So, we will be out on the streets saying enough is enough.” Members of Unite who have been involved in industrial action will speak at the protest in Manchester. Speculation has begun regarding who will replace Cressida Dick as the Metropolitan police commissioner. Contenders include Neil Basu, an assistant commissioner who previously worked as the head of counter-terrorism, Matt Jukes, another assistant commissioner, and Lucy D’Orsi, who is currently the chief constable of the British Transport Police. You can read more of the Guardian’s analysis here: Alastair Morgan, who has spent decades campaigning for justice after his brother Daniel was killed with an axe in a pub car park in Sydenham, south-east London, in the 1980s, said he did not have confidence that a new commissioner could reform the Metropolitan police. He told BBC Radio 4’s World At One programme: This is an organisation that for years – decades – has been out of control. And the main reason for that is the absolutely rotten oversight by the Home Office and other organisations – the complaints system, the political oversight. The whole show has been a mess for decades and this has led to the situation which we have now and, my God, it is going to be a job to tidy it up. It is not going to be something the new commissioner can snap his fingers and sort this out, because there are deep rooted cultural problems in that organisation. Asked whether he had faith that change could be brought about, Morgan replied: “No, if you want an honest answer. No.” Cressida Dick was “the most defensive and dismissive” leader of a British police force, with problems worsening under her tenure as Scotland Yard’s commissioner, the leader of the National Black Police Association (NBPA) has said. Dick announced her departure on Thursday after a falling out with London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, who lacked confidence that she could improve an allegedly misogynistic, racist and closed culture blighting Britain’s biggest force. Insp Andy George, the president of the NBPA, praised Dick’s decades of public service but said it was right she should stand down. George, a former firearms officer based in Northern Ireland, said Dick had been brought down by her “achilles heel” of wanting to protect the Met’s reputation. He said the next commissioner needed to end a “culture of fear” and a “toxic culture” in the Met. The ousting of Dick triggered criticism of Khan, praise for the outgoing commissioner, as well as relief that Dick’s tumultuous commissionership was coming to an end. George said: The news that Dame Cressida Dick has resigned from leading the Metropolitan police service has come with great sadness across policing. Her devotion to officers and staff was clear for all to see but this was ultimately her achilles heel and her desire to protect the reputation of the force has prevented the wholesale cultural reforms that are much needed. The vast majority of police officers put on their uniform and do their best to protect the public but time and again we have seen a culture of fear within the [Met]. A fear of challenging inappropriate behaviour and even when that behaviour is challenged, it is rarely dealt with robustly. The officer reporting discrimination can often find themselves being targeted for speaking out. Defending the indefensible and failing to tackle the widespread issues of racism, misogyny and bullying allows bullies and poor behaviour to thrive and does a disservice to the many hardworking police officers across London and the UK. I have the privilege of speaking to many leaders in policing and I found Dame Cressida Dick to be the most defensive and dismissive leader I met. Read more from my colleagues Vikram Dodd and Ben Quinn here: The new Met chief must be prepared to tackle the “policing culture” which has left the country’s biggest force reeling from a series of scandals, the home secretary, Priti Patel, has warned. Patel, who is beginning the search for a successor to Cressida Dick, said it would require “strong and decisive leadership” to rebuild public confidence in the force’s “integrity and professionalism”. Writing in London’s Evening Standard, Patel, who must now oversee the appointment of a successor, said she would be looking for someone who could deliver results for the public. She said: Following a series of appalling incidents and too many historical cases involving serving Met police officers, it is clear that strong and decisive new leadership will be required to restore public confidence in our largest police force. The public in London and across the entire country must once again have confidence in the integrity and professionalism of the police officers who serve them. Policing culture and conduct have rightly come under scrutiny. Be in no doubt that a new leader must tackle these institutional issues. The former Met police commissioner Paul Stephenson has praised the work Cressida Dick did as commissioner, but admitted her position had become “untenable”. He also suggested the successor didn’t necessarily need a police background and warned that the successor “will face challenges on a daily basis that feel like there’s a bullet with their name on it”. He said: I think her position was completely untenable ... once [Khan] has publicly made it clear that within a matter of days or weeks, his confidence is ebbing and is likely to go, then frankly, I don’t think she had anywhere else to go really. Stephenson said the force should be “casting the net as wide as possible” in the search for a new commissioner. Dick is not due to leave until a replacement has been found. Stephenson, who led the force from 2009 to 2011, told LBC: We should be casting the net as wide as possible to find the best possible person and I would not constrict that, not in any way shape or form. He added that included anyone who was eligible to apply, even from outside policing. Ben Wallace, Britain’s defence secretary, heads to Moscow on Friday riding high: ranked by Conservative members as the best performer in cabinet, his name is being whispered as a possible future secretary general of Nato. It marks a peak for the 51-year-old, who once observed he had “never had an accelerated path through the Tory party” but who has, unlike most members of Boris Johnson’s cabinet, come through crises with his reputation enhanced. Allies put this down in part to sheer diligence – Wallace admitted last week on a ministerial visit to Croatia that he had only had four days off in the past 18 months – and he gets by on little sleep, frequently at his desk, one said, at 7am or earlier. This time, Wallace has attempted to prepare thoroughly for his meeting with Sergei Shoigu, the first bilateral between UK and Russian defence ministers since 2013, even reaching out across party lines. Read more here: Commenting on Cressida Dick’s resignation, director of the End Violence Against Women Coalition (EVAW) Andrea Simon said: It is imperative that the incoming commissioner shows strong leadership and accountability in addressing the Met’s abysmal record in responding to violence against women and girls. An overwhelming number of police failings relate to sexual violence and domestic abuse. What’s more, police abuse of power for sexual purposes is now the single biggest form of corruption dealt with by the police complaints body. The Met has a serious problem with institutional racism and misogyny and we must now see commitment to the difficult but meaningful internal work to transform its culture. Labour MP Neil Coyle has apologised for allegedly racist comments he made to a journalist on the parliamentary estate describing them as “insensitive”, adding that he has “apologised to everyone involved”. In a statement following the withdrawal of the Labour whip, Coyle promised to co-operate “fully” with an investigation into his conduct. It comes after the Bermondsey and Old Southwark MP was accused of using offensive language during a conversation with a reporter at Strangers’ Bar on the parliamentary estate. Coyle said: I’m very sorry for my insensitive comments, have apologised to everyone involved and will be co-operating fully with the investigation. The Labour MP Neil Coyle has had the whip suspended after allegations he made racist comments to a journalist in a House of Commons bar, a party spokesperson said. It comes after a complaint by Henry Dyer, a political reporter for the Insider website, about the alleged behaviour of Coyle, the MP for the south London seat of Bermondsey and Old Southwark since 2015. In a statement published by Insider, Dyer, who is from a British Chinese background, said Coyle referred to China as “Fu Manchu”, and told Dyer he looked like he was involved in giving money to the Labour MP Barry Gardiner, who received large sums from a woman who later was accused of being a Chinese agent. Dyer said he had subsequently encountered Coyle around parliament and felt a “sense of discomfort”, and decided to inform the Commons Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle. A Labour spokesperson said: “The Labour party expects the highest standards of behaviour from all our MPs and we take allegations of this sort very seriously. Accordingly, the chief whip has now suspended the Labour whip from Neil Coyle pending an investigation.” Read the full story here: Dame Cressida Dick’s resignation as Met police chief has been welcomed by critics who said they were “delighted” by her decision to go. Alastair Morgan, who has spent decades campaigning for justice for his brother Daniel, who was killed with an axe in a pub car park in Sydenham, south-east London, in the 1980s, said Dame Cressida has “disappointed” his family on every level. Speaking to the PA news agency, he said: The first time I dealt with Cressida Dick was in 2012 and since then all she has done in relation to my family is just delay, obstruct and disappoint on a huge level. Although I think it is a shame that we are seeing another commissioner disappear under a cloud of smoke, it is necessary. My only anxiety now is who is going to replace her and face the massive job in front of them of rebuilding confidence in the Met. Former Conservative MP Harvey Proctor, whose house was raided by officers from the Met’s failed Operation Midland launched in reaction to false allegations by jailed fantasist Carl Beech about a murderous VIP paedophile ring, said he was delighted by the news. He said: It is now time to clean the Augean stables so that a full inquiry can be conducted on all her personal mistakes. Campaign group Reclaim These Streets, which is bringing a legal challenge against the force over its handling of a Sarah Everard vigil, tweeted a simple message after the news broke last night. Co-founder of the group, Anna Birley, told the BBC she hoped Dick’s replacement was a feminist. She said: I hope that they’re a feminist, I hope that they are somebody who acknowledges that there is a problem because that was something that we found really frustrating over the past months, the lack of willingness to even acknowledge that a problem exists, because without acknowledging that it’s very hard to fix it. Patsy Stevenson, who was arrested at the vigil, was pleased that Dick had gone. She said: We need to focus as well on this not being a token gesture. This does not fix anything, and I just hope that whoever is in charge next understands that radical change needs to be implemented to fix the systemic issues within the Met. Pressure is mounting on No 10 to make clear it will have no direct involvement in the choice of the next Met police commissioner, given the current investigation into Downing Street lockdown parties, and that it should refrain from trying to influence the inquiry. However, an “ally” of the prime minister told the Times in a veiled warning that the police ought to think very carefully before issuing any penalty to the prime minister. Sir Bob Neill, a senior Tory MP and chair of the Commons justice committee, said it was “completely inappropriate to suggest that there should be any special treatment for anyone involved in these inquiries and any suggestion of political pressure on the police is completely reprehensible”, adding that No 10 “would do well to disown it”. Former police watchdog Zoe Billingham said a series of scandals “sadly” led to Metropolitan Police Commissioner’s resignation but “taking the scalp of woman” will not necessarily solve cultural problems in the force. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Women’s Hour, Billingham, who was Her Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue for 12 years, said: Charing Cross was the straw that broke the camel’s back. The comments of those officers was an abomination but the way the Met then handled that, with nine officers still serving and two having been promoted, I think was probably the last breach of trust the mayor could take and that led to, sadly in my view, a change. She added: “I don’t believe that taking the scalp of woman is necessarily going to be the way to address the cultural issues in the Met.” Responding to reports that a senior ally of Boris Johnson has said the Met Police will need to be “very certain” that he has breached lockdown rules before issuing him with a fine, Liberal Democrat leader Ed Davey said: This veiled threat by Number 10 allies is amongst very heavy competition perhaps the darkest moment of this whole sorry saga. It shows a fundamental belief in the heart of government that Boris Johnson should be above the law and that Number 10 will bring any institution into disrepute to save Johnson’s skin. This is a sobering reminder of why we need a cast-iron guarantee that Boris Johnson and his team will have nothing to do with the appointment of Cressida Dick’s successor. There was a time that the Conservatives called themselves the party of law and order; the public will laugh at that very idea for generations. The chancellor appeared to suggest that he does not expect to be asked to fill out a police questionnaire about his involvement in a No 10 event that possibly broke Covid rules, PA news reports. Scotland Yard has said it will be sending formal legal questionnaires by the end of the week to more than 50 individuals, from whom officers involved with Operation Hillman – the probe into so-called “partygate” – wish to hear, regarding the 12 events they are investigating. Rishi Sunak has previously confirmed that he was at one of the events subject to Metropolitan Police inquiries, which was the birthday do held by Downing Street staff and Carrie Johnson for the prime minister on June 19 2020. However, the chancellor has insisted that he had been present at the cabinet room on the day in question for a routine meeting to discuss the pandemic situation. On Friday, Sunak told Sky News he had not received a questionnaire from the Met and, asked whether he expected to receive a form to complete, he replied: “No... well, I don’t know.” The Treasury chief also said he did not think he had broken Covid rules. When asked last week about the birthday celebration, at which one minister described the Prime Minister as being “ambushed by cake”, Sunak said he went to the Cabinet Room as he had for “100, 200, God knows how many other Covid meetings”. Pressed on Friday about whether he still has confidence in Johnson, the Chancellor added: “The prime minister has my total support.” Jonathan Lis, deputy director of the thinktank British Influence, has highlighted the fact that Guto Harri, No 10’s new director of communications, is having some problems with – err – communication after his account shared a problematic tweet. Cressida Dick’s departure came as the Met conducted one of its most high profile and sensitive investigations into partygate. It is understood those connected with the inquiry do not believe the loss of the commissioner will damage or hinder the inquiry, or make it any more prone to any attempt to sway its course. The commissioner was not in control of the investigation and was due only to be periodically updated on its progress. A Met source told The Guardian: “The investigation is continuing.” Detectives from the Met special enquiry team will start sending letters to those they believe attended parties and events under investigation, believed to include the prime minister. Once the replies are received, police will write to the criminal records office who formally issue the fixed penalty notices. Matthew Ryder QC said Dame Cressida Dick’s interview on BBC Radio London, in which she said she believed she had been leading a real transformation in the Met over the last five years, may have prompted the London mayor’s actions. Ryder, who represented the Stephen Lawrence family in their claim against the Met, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I think that statement yesterday probably illustrated very vividly why Sadiq Khan had no choice but to take the position that he did. If anybody listening to what she said yesterday, she thinks that what she’s been doing in denying that culture existing within the Met was an effective way of creating change. She wasn’t understanding the problem and she wasn’t the right person to lead that change. You can be a good police officer in terms of being operationally successful and be a poor commissioner in terms of creating the right culture in the police. And she didn’t get it right on the culture of public confidence. He later clarified that he did not know for sure if it was her comments in the interview specifically that prompted Khan’s actions, but rather it was “illustrative of a deeper misconception about her role”. Susan Hall said “policing work will continue” – including the investigation of allegations of lockdown parties at Downing Street – despite the shake-up at the Met. The Conservative chairwoman of the London Assembly police and crime committee told the Today programme on BBC Radio 4 Dick wouldn’t have been dealing with it anyway, adding that all the work that is in progress will continue. She said: What needs to happen now is Sadiq Khan needs to really make sure that we get another commissioner in place as soon as possible. When questioned if the search for a successor is complicated due the prime minister being under investigation, Hall said: It (the investigation) will continue. She personally doesn’t deal with these things as you know, (it’s) other detectives. Everything that’s going on in the police service will continue. Asked if bringing in a different body rather than the Met to deal with terrorist crimes was on her agenda, Hall said: No, it isn’t and actually, one has to commend the work that’s done in our national counter-terrorism capacity. We’re doing wonderful work there, which obviously nobody gets to know about for obvious reasons. Priti Patel, I believe, is very happy with that part of the work. A government minister has said it was “regrettable” that the relationship between Sadiq Khan and Dame Cressida Dick had broken down so much that she had to leave her post as Met Police chief. Transport minister Robert Courts told Sky News: I think it is a little bit of a shame things have happened the way they have. It appears clearly that the relationship was broken down between the mayor and of course Dame Cressida. That is a shame, but I think what we’ve got to do now is focus on the future and to start to address all of the issues that will cause the people of London concern. Asked to expand on why it was a “bit of a shame” that the relationship became unworkable, Courts replied: Clearly it is a key relationship, isn’t it, between the mayor and his chief police officer? It would have been better if that had been handled in a way that meant the relationship hadn’t broken down, but it clearly has – both parties have said that – so I’m just acknowledging the fact that that relationship has broken down, which is regrettable, but as I say, we are where we are, and we need to look to the future. Sadiq Khan is facing criticism from some quarters for the way he handled the departure of Cressida Dick, who announced her resignation from her role as metropolitan police commissioner on Thursday. Susan Hall, Conservative chairwoman of the London Assembly’s police and crime committee, said the mayor handled the situation “extremely badly”. Hall, who has long been a vocal critic of Khan’s, told the Today programme on BBC Radio 4: Confidence in the police at the moment is at an all-time low and this won’t help either. I think the way he said to the media he put her on notice, he should have been talking behind closed doors. He also renewed her contract only a couple of months ago. If he was that unhappy, then I would wonder why he did that? Hall said there had been a “big question mark” over what “on notice” meant following comments made by Khan about Dick’s future at the Met before she left her post. Hall said: We did a motion at the Assembly yesterday and that was unanimous, cross-party, (on) what exactly ‘on notice’ meant. She also said she agreed Dick’s departure makes Londoners less safe due to all of the “turmoil” that follows. She said: 99% of officers are very good, brave officers, and they’ve been absolutely rocked by the latest IOPC reports into misogyny. They need confidence, they need support, and to have done this in this way, I think Sadiq Khan is completely wrong. It will leave a void at the top as opposed to a properly managed handover, which is no way to run a service like this, no way to the Metropolitan Police. Welcome to today’s Politics Liveblog. I’m Nicola Slawson and I’ll be taking the lead today. You can contact me on Twitter (@Nicola_Slawson) or via email (nicola.slawson@nicolaslawson.co.uk) if you have any questions or think I’m missing something. You can also check out our global coronavirus blog here:As dust settles along the empty corridors of Westminster with parliament in recess, most Tory MPs are looking forward to a break from the never-ending swirl of speculation about Boris Johnson’s political future. But while the open chatter about leadership challenges dies down, possible candidates and their allies are continuing to tap up donors, sketch out policy details and organise teams and office space. “They’re all still working away in the background,” one MP said. “Boris will leave one day – whenever that is – and they want to be ready to hit the ground running.” Johnson’s possible successors are locked in a silent dance, quietly circling him and preparing “oven-ready” leadership bids but wary of moving early or brazenly. “There are a lot of discussions happening in hermetically sealed rooms between two or three advisers,” a minister said. “If the candidate themselves is even seen to lift a finger, it will be over.” The two frontrunners are widely known. Liz Truss, chided as the “secretary of state for Instagram” by some colleagues, headed to Russia this week amid mounting fears about an invasion of Ukraine. Often keen for a photoshoot or inviting comparisons with Margaret Thatcher, the foreign secretary was snapped in a thick black fur coat and matching hat pounding the streets of Moscow and pointing at tanks. Within hours, some newspapers were remarking on the resemblance with a similar, camel-coloured outfit worn by Thatcher on a trip to the Russian capital in 1987. One Tory MP rolled their eyes and remarked that temperatures in Moscow were warmer than usual for the time of year. Another noted that given her recent foreign trips, the meetings nicknamed “fizz with Liz” she held with colleagues “seem to have fizzled out”. The furthest Rishi Sunak has been able to flee from problems in No 10 is Devon, which he visited last month instead of flanking Johnson in the Commons chamber after it was revealed that a “bring your own booze” party invite had been issued to 100 Downing Street staff. Also known for his sharp brand, Sunak appeared this week in black tie at a British Asian Trust event in London. He set hares running by refusing to rule out standing if an election were to be held, dismissing it as a “hypothetical situation”. Sunak’s Treasury team are believed to be ardent supporters, including the economic secretary to the Treasury, John Glen, and the parliamentary private secretary Claire Coutinho. However, the announcement of financial support designed to help with soaring energy bills has angered those who think the chancellor needs to rein in spending. A government source said: “It’s very easy to piss free money out the door; how he handles the economy now is what he should be judged on. That’s why he’s in more of a rush.” They added that a recent press conference where Sunak stood at a podium bearing the words “Downing Street”, as well as reports he was putting the finishing touches to a draft website for his leadership bid, had “pissed a lot of people off”. Allies of Truss have also briefed that Sunak is “much weaker than her” on China – an attack designed to wound his standing among MPs on the China Research Group. In the cabinet, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, is considered impressive by colleagues for his performance as vaccines minister, while another senior minister was said to have raised eyebrows by hiring staff to work on “social media” with contracts lasting three months. Mark Harper, an ex-chief whip, joked at a recent fundraiser about the slogan for his campaign in 2019: “It’s time for a party where everyone’s invited.” As chair of the Covid Recovery Group, he could highlight his longstanding opposition to the last two year’s tough restrictions. Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the foreign affairs committee, is touted as a candidate who could secure the one-nation caucus’s endorsement. He has already declared his ambition to run, but a lack of ministerial experience and too strong a focus on international affairs may see him not survive far into the contest. Also spoken about as a leadership contender is Penny Mordaunt, a Brexiter and former defence secretary who was booted out of the cabinet by Johnson in 2019 for having supported Jeremy Hunt in the leadership contest. Hunt himself is also touted by some of the core team who helped him into the run-off ballot last time, but some believe a fresh candidate is needed for the next race. Michael Gove has in effect ruled himself out of standing. “Been there, knocked back twice, won’t be doing that again,” he has admitted. If he does run because he feels he has nothing to lose, Gove may struggle to convince colleagues he represents a clear enough break with the past, given several of his advisers are close friends with Carrie Johnson. A curtailing of her perceived influence in Downing Street has long been called for by some backbenchers. MPs are even wary of being falsely linked to a leadership challenge. One invited to an innocent dinner by the former cabinet minister Andrea Leadsom was afraid of accepting, for fear word would get out and it would be painted as a plot. There was also twitchiness when Conservative party headquarters carried out a check to make sure membership records were correct. The move led some MPs to interpret it as preliminary work for a membership ballot – a view firmly denied by those working in the building.We are going to close this out in the usual way, with the Fiver, looking ahead to tomorrow’s Club World Cup jamboree between Manchester City and Palmeiras, and also hearing from Mason Mount ahead of that game. Some transfer news, with Arsenal signing USMNT goalie Matt Turner from the MLS, where he plays for New England Revolution. Competition for Aaron Ramsdale and suggests Bernd Leno could on his way this summer. Leno has a year left on his contract from this summer. Big game for Ted Lasso’s lads, this one. Andy Hunter reports on that injury blow to Everton. Norwich won 3-2 the last time Manchester City visited Carrow Road. News from Abu Dhabi. Thomas Tuchel has arrived in Abu Dhabi for Chelsea’s Club World Cup final against Palmeiras after a negative Covid test. The manager had been forced to miss his team’s opening game after contracting coronavirus but will be in the dugout on Saturday subject to the result of a further PCR test that he took after landing. David Beckham’s Inter Miami have signed the Finnish Robert Taylor, as opposed to the Bolton and West Brom legend or the Gillingham and Manchester City legend also called Robert (Bob) Taylor. Red-hot soccer content in this week’s sporting quiz. And here’s our preview of a vital game for Brentford. They have begun to slip of late. The Brentford manager, Thomas Frank, has been talking about Christian Eriksen taking part in training. I think he’s fine, he’s training well and he looks like the quality player we know he is. It’s a joy watching him play football - so natural for him - so that’s fantastic to see, but he will not be available for the team tomorrow. That would always be too early after just one week. We will have a friendly game on Monday where he will play minutes and that’s the right way to do it. I must say he’s bubbling. We are having him seven months after the incident so he missed badly being part of the group, being part of a club and hopefully we can add new chapters to the Brentford story. He loves to be with the boys, being on the grass, playing football. He’s one of those where he needs to touch a ball all the time, so when the drill is done, and I start talking and as soon as we start again, he just needs to touch a ball or something like that. He’s just enjoying it, he’s bubbling and just wants to play football. Our match previews come in, starting with a big game here. Everton can pull Leeds almost down to their level. The league table says Everton have 19 points from 21 matches, and that would be relegation form in other Premier League seasons. More on Manchester United from Jamie Jackson. Ronaldo, the top scorer with 14, has not registered for five games. Rangnick was asked whether he knew how to best use the Portuguese for the benefit of the team. “It’s not only about Cristiano Ronaldo,” he said. “That we should score more goals, it’s obvious. We created enough chances in the last couple of games but we just didn’t score enough goals. This is not only an issue with Cristiano – it’s an issue with other players, especially with the offensive players: we don’t score enough goals.” Things are not good at Manchester United, with an ESPN report suggesting that players are not happy with Ralf Rangnick’s training regime and that assistant Chris Armas, the American, has been nicknamed “Ted Lasso”. Ralf Rangnick replied to those reports in today’s press conference. I haven’t read any newspapers and don’t know about those articles. What I can assure you is that the training is...I mean, the way that the team has developed over the last couple of weeks, it’s obvious tactically and this is due to the work that we do in training, both on the pitch but also if we do the video analysis. The training that we are doing, including all the important training games - and the little games as well as the 11 versus 11 games - and we do a lot of rondos and little games to increase fluidity and get better in possession of the ball, it’s part of the training session. The latest Football Weekly is here. Steve McManaman, 50 today. Imagine Fletch got him a nice card. Bad news for Tottenham, per PA Media. Tottenham defender Eric Dier will again be missing for Sunday’s clash with Wolves. The centre-half has a thigh injury picked up before the international break and is not ready to return at the weekend. Boss Antonio Conte said: “No, unfortunately he’s not fit. For sure, he’s a big loss for us. He needs a bit more time to recover. “I hope to have him available for the next game, away at (Manchester) City. But for this game he’s not available.” Here’s our story on the David Moyes press conference, which doesn’t appear to have closed the Zouma issue in any sense. Bad news for Everton in what looks like a relegation battle. Yerry Mina will be out for what looks like two months after getting injured at Newcastle on Tuesday. Chelsea chase history tomorrow in a game that matters more if you are not in England. Thanks, Dave, for your diligent work. Here’s some further comment from David Moyes, via PA Media’s reporter. Right, that’s it from me. I’ll hand you over to Mr John Brewin for the rest of the afternoon. West Ham boss David Moyes says Kurt Zouma remains available for selection as he plans his line-up for the trip to Leicester on Sunday. Moyes received criticism for playing his defender against Watford on Tuesday after footage appeared on social media of Zouma kicking and slapping his cat. Zouma has been fined £250,000 by West Ham, which will go to animal welfare groups. The player’s two cats have been taken into care by the RSCPA. Moyes said: “Yes he’s available to play against Leicester. There are different views and opinions on should he be available. We as a club took that decision and I stand by that. “I don’t think the club could take more action or any quicker. West Ham have fined him the maximum wages. We all accept the actions are terrible and diabolical. “We are so disappointed it is completely out of character from Kurt. He is a really good lad – we are going to get him some help and trying to give him as much help as we can. “Like drink-driving offences, most people have to go to classes and the RSPCA are going to provide him with classes. We will do everything we can to make sure Kurt is looking into it, and getting better, and understanding it.” Our beady-eyed trio of Nick Ames, Paul Doyle and Will Unwin have spotted 10 things to look out for in the Premier League this weekend. Take a peek here: That Wilf Zaha penalty miss, eh. Despite fluffing his lines spectacularly in the 1-1 draw at Norwich, Zaha remains on penalty duties says Crystal Palace boss Patrick Vieira. “People always remember the last penalty but when you look at his record on penalties it has been really good so there is no reason why he should change,” said Vieira. It’s true, although the sample size is small. Zaha has taken five in his Palace career, scoring four and missing one. To be fair to the Eagles winger, he did score a beauty to equalise at Carrow Road although Vieira wants more goals from him. “I have said he has to score more because he has the ability to do so. He is a player who I believe, with his ability, can create more and score more,” said Vieira. “But that isn’t going to be about him by himself, he needs the team around him to perform to create those chances or put him in a situation where he can express his talent. “When I say he can do more, it is not about him as an individual, it is about him using the quality of the players he has around him as well. “The way we play, the chances that we are creating, to be more decisive. He has the ability to do it but the way we play as a team will allow him to do it more often.” Some Wayne Rooney reaction to the news that an accord has been agreed between former Derby owner Mel Morris and Middlesbrough chairman Steve Gibson. “Obviously, that’s been the main stumbling block in moving forward,” said the Derby boss. “I’ve been pushing and pushing about getting new owners in and this is a big step to allow that to happen. “So now the next step is obviously the administrators engaging with the preferred bidders and getting the right one in.” Some stats ahead of tonight’s WSL showdown between Chelsea and Arsenal. Following their 3-2 win over Chelsea on the opening weekend this season, Arsenal are looking to complete the WSL double over the Blues for the first time since the 2013 campaign under boss Shelley Kerr. Chelsea’s Pernille Harder has scored more WSL goals against Arsenal than she has against any other side (3), with all three strikes coming in her last two such games. The last player in the competition to net in three successive matches against the Gunners was Jane Ross in September 2017. Arsenal’s Beth Mead has assisted 35 goals in the Women’s Super League and needs one more to surpass Karen Carney as the player with the most assists in the competition’s history. Only Toni Duggan (11) has scored more WSL goals against Chelsea than Arsenal’s Beth Mead (8), though each of those strikes have come in home matches, failing to score in seven away appearances against the Blues. Jurgen Klopp certainly liked what he saw from new signing Luis Diaz against Leicester last night. A penny for Antonio Conte’s thoughts after Liverpool moved swiftly for the Colombian, who had been a target for Spurs. Derby have announced they have reached an accord between their former owner Mel Morris and Middlesbrough chairman Steve Gibson in relation to the Teesside club’s legal claim against the Rams. Derby were placed into administration last September and the sale of the club to new ownership has been complicated in part by the claims of Middlesbrough and Wycombe. The club said details of the accord between Morris and Gibson had been shared with administrators Quantuma ahead of the sides’ meeting in the Sky Bet Championship on Saturday. News of the accord follows the release of a lengthy statement by Morris issued last Friday which included an invitation to Boro and Wycombe to take up their claims against him personally at the High Court. Morris said this would allow his old club to “move on for the benefit of the fans, the city of Derby, the sport and the EFL”. Details of the accord were not released, but Derby’s statement said Morris and Gibson had been keen to develop it ahead of Saturday’s game at the Riverside Stadium. “The claim has clearly been the source of much concern to both sets of fans, and especially those of Derby County,” the statement said. “The fact that a resolution has been discussed and agreed should be comforting to both sets of supporters.” “However, it is important for all interested parties, including potential bidders, to be confident that the Middlesbrough claim will not be an impediment to Derby progressing its plans for a sale of the club.” Administrator Carl Jackson added: “We are pleased to see that an acceptable resolution has been identified which allows us to push forward with our plans for the sale of the club.” Kane v Son. Who is more important to Spurs? Well, try this stat from Opta: Since the first game at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium in April 2019, Spurs’ Son Heung-min has both scored (23) and assisted (16) more Premier League goals than any other player at the ground. Indeed, the Korean has scored more goals in 50 Premier League appearances at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium (23) than he netted in 61 home games for Spurs at Wembley and White Hart Lane combined (22). Important piece here about how education and engagement are crucial in the fight against homophobia. From the PA news agency: Education and engagement must continue to play a crucial role in football’s ongoing battle against homophobia, according to the co-founder of LGBTQ+ fans group Proud Canaries. Norwich are dedicating Saturday’s programme for the home game against Premier League leaders Manchester City to both LGBTQ+ History Month and the Football v Homophobia campaign. It will include articles on former Canaries striker Justin Fashanu, who in 1990 became the first male professional to come out as gay while still playing. He took his own life in 1998, aged 37. Di Cunningham helped found the Proud Canaries in 2013, at a time when it felt very much like LGBTQ+ supporters “parked identity at the turnstyle when you come in”. While the outlook is now much more inclusive, she feels football remains “a little bit behind the curve”. Cunningham told the PA news agency: “We have been really, really lucky. Because of the Justin heritage (at Norwich), it hasn’t been that tricky – but that is not to say that there haven’t been hiccups along the way. “When we went on that first pitch parade – which was a pretty ‘outing’ experience because you are just there because you are gay or trans – somebody shouted out from the crowd: ‘don’t clap them, shoot the F-words’. “But that in itself was an opportunity, because it was an opportunity for other fans around this person to say ‘mate, that is not acceptable’, he was reported and he was dealt with (by the club), but it wasn’t a ban. “Some clubs will say: ‘you will have a life-time ban for that kind of thing’, but football is changing, the world is changing. We need to recognise that and give people the opportunity to change and to learn.” Earlier this year, the Crown Prosecution Service announced a decision to define the use of the term ‘rent boy’ in a chant as a homophobic slur. Any fans singing the words during matches will be committing a hate crime and so be liable to face prosecution. Cunningham feels tackling the issues raised head on can also help educate supporters. “The key really is to understand that people get swept up in these things – with the ‘rent boy’ chant, people don’t even know what it means, that it is homophobic,” she said. “Once you point it out to people, there are a lot who will say ‘I’m really sorry, you are a fan of my club and I want you to be welcome, so I’m not going to sing that anymore’. “Other people kind of double-down, and they are the difficult ones, who say ‘well we have always sang it, it’s not homophobic so I am going to carry on singing it.’” Cunningham added: “Our visibility as LGBTQ+ fans, whether it is at our clubs, on a national or international platform, changes the game because people recognise that football has changed and that we should be made to feel as welcome as everyone else. “And a lot of people are saying ‘thank goodness we can see LGBTQ+ fans at football because that makes us feel better and it means that the game that we love is developing and it’s keeping up with society’.” Tonight’s Chelsea v Arsenal WSL clash is being cranked up on social media. Just a note at the healthy number of Twitter followers both teams have: Chelsea 473.6k, Arsenal 409.6k. Brighton seem to draw every game 1-1 but ninth place in the table with 30 points is a far cry from what seemed a perennial battle with relegation. Graham Potter has been talking about the club’s ambitions in his morning press conference. “It’s hard to say that you can think the sky is the limit. We have to be realistic, we have to be pragmatic and also be ambitious, so it’s a tough one,” the Brighton boss said. “What you have got to do is to go step by step and it isn’t always obvious. When we started our journey here in the season before we came, the team finished with 36 points and performance wise was probably a third or fourth bottom team. Now we have taken steps and are a little bit higher than we were, but it hasn’t always been an obvious journey up. “Along the way you get your bottom kicked and you have to get up off the floor, face all this criticism and you have to keep going. Different headlines happen, but you have to maintain progress. If you can do that and things become aligned and you can have an understanding of what you are trying to achieve as a football club, then it is quite amazing what you can achieve. “So I would never say never, but at the same time I do respect the financial game that we are playing in. You have got to maintain the good things you do, keep open-minded in your thinking, keep challenging your position. “For example, Swansea at one point was seen as a model Premier League club and then all of a sudden, relegation happened and it doesn’t look so good. Again it’s about how you position your club – being strong with your ideas, aligned in the resources that you have, being realistic, communicating with the key people, but at the same time having ambition because otherwise what is the point? “We want to dream, we want to come to the football club to believe that we can win. That is really important, I think, for supporters.” Here’s a remarkable story from Will Unwin about Galatasaray defender Omar Elabdellaoui. Here’s a chance to find out more about Arsenal’s Rafaelle Souza in this excellent piece from Julia Belas Trindade. Could the Brazilian play a key role against Chelsea tonight? Back to Marcelo Bielsa and the Leeds boss has taken a swipe at commercial decisions in football overriding player welfare. It’s a well-trodden path with managers and Bielsa isn’t happy with Leeds having a run of three games in six days coming up when they face Manchester United, Liverpool and Tottenham. “There’s no time for preparation because there also isn’t time for adequate recovery. The games are scheduled clearly ignoring that aspect,” he said in Friday’s press conference. “The commercial aspects and the commitments due to the sales of the games make the decisions exclusively dependent on that. All of the aspects that make a competition fair for all those in it are not there in my opinion. Teams are facing each other in different conditions. “The games are planned without the possibility of rest and ignoring the potential injuries, but that’s the same for everybody. There are aspects that increase the difficulty and complexity, and there are also aspects which can be resolved in a better way than the one chosen. “But the compromises that should be made for the spectacle of the game, and for the fairness of the competition, are a second thought.” His solution: “You guys (the media) know better than us what the best solution is – to play less and to admit that to play less means less revenue. The less revenue there is means we’re all going to have to earn less.” God forbid, eh. Viva Marcelo. It’s back-to-back wins for Newcastle after they followed up a 1-0 win at 15th-placed Leeds with a 3-1 home success against 16th-placed Everton. Boss Eddie Howe has been speaking to the press this morning and the chat has focused on French dribbling wizard, Allan Saint-Maximin, who played a key role in the Everton win. Here’s Howe with his wax about Max: “You look at his performance the other day – the cross for Ryan Fraser’s goal from a position in which there was no space to get that ball into the box was incredible, but his overall work-rate and endeavour and attitude were very good and if he can hit that consistently, then what a player he can be. “There’s no doubt he’s got the talent to do anything he wants to do, but finding that on a consistent basis will be the challenge for any player of his type. It’s not easy, but I’ve been very, very pleased with him in recent weeks. “He’s unique as a person and as a player. I’m excited by him. Every time he steps onto the pitch, there’s that feeling that you don’t quite know what he’s going to do and how he can win you this game because he is a match-winner, there’s no doubt about that. “Some of the things he did in his last game, I thought, were exceptional, but I want to see that again and again on a more consistent basis.” The eyes tell us that Manchester United are still struggling to rise above the ordinary and so too do the numbers. Here’s stats boffin Josh Wright of WhoScored with a Guardian Sport Network piece about the lack of a revolution emerging under Ralf Rangnick. Norwich were thrashed 5-0 by Manchester City in August but, as The Monkees sang in their forgettable mid-80s comeback single, that was then (Daniel Farke) and this is now (Dean Smith). Chuck in a couple of FA Cup triumphs over Charlton and Wolves and Smith has guided the Canaries to four wins and a draw from their last six matches. Impressive stuff. Meanwhile, Man City aren’t quite setting the world alight having scored only seven goals in their last five Premier League starts although, to be fair, Pep Guardiola’s leaders have taken 13 points out of 15 across those matches. Here’s Smith: “I am not going to anger Pep again by suggesting they are the best team in the world, but they are certainly up there. They are a very good team, littered with stars all over the place and, whatever team they put out, you know it is going to be a challenge. “But there is an opportunity for players as well – all players want to pit themselves against the best. Hopefully you can then go and get the right performance, then have a bit of fortune go our way as well.” Smith has also given his backing to Jack Grealish. The two were together at Aston Villa but Grealish has only scored two Premier League goal this season following his £100million move in the summer. “Jack is going to be a top, top player – and he has shown moments at City. I still speak to Jack quite regularly. He wants to find more consistency within the team there, but he is playing among a litter of star players there and he is one of them himself. “He is enjoying the experience of it and working with the likes of Pep Guardiola, he is learning more and more. Jack is a top talent and a top lad as well – and anybody who has worked with him will tell you that.” Arsenal are top of the table again although I’m talking here about the one for having players sent off. The Dirty Gunners topped the red card charts in 2019/20 with five, were second (again with five) behind Brighton last season and are now setting the pace alongside Aston Villa with three this term after Gabriel Martinelli’s sending off last night. Here’s how Ben Fisher described it in his match report: “Arsenal had Wolves at arm’s length but Martinelli picked up two yellow cards in a matter of seconds – the first for obstructing a throw-in and the second for a hot-headed trip on Chiquinho – to ensure a nervy crescendo. Mikel Arteta wasn’t best pleased. Teams news from Leeds and boss Marcelo Bielsa has given an update on midfield linchpin (I do like that word) Kalvin Phillips. “He is expected to return in the first few days of March and his recovery has been going as predicted,” said Bielsa matter-of-factly ahead of Saturday’s trip to Everton. The England midfielder suffered a hamstring injury against Brentford in early December and underwent surgery later that month. He’s not the only Leeds player with a gammy hammie. Junior Firpo and Liam Cooper are still out with the same problem while contrarian Patrick Bamford is absent due to a foot injury. After scoring the decisive spot-kick in the Africa Cup of Nations final, it seemed fair to allow Sadio Mane some time to drink in (not literally; he’s tee-total) the celebrations and relax after his exertions in Cameroon. Ahead of last night’s 2-0 win over Leicester, Jurgen Klopp said “Sadio is in bed” but, hot news, Mane will return to training on Friday morning. Perhaps the Senegalese striker noted how well new signing Luis Diaz performed in his position last night and decided he best emerge from his slumbers. Klopp said on Friday: “Sadio will be available. He will come now this morning for training and will be in full training. “We make a decision after that. Emotionally he will still be high flying but we have to see how he is.” Klopp also confirmed captain Jordan Henderson will be back in the squad for the trip to Burnley after being rested against Leicester due to a back problem. Before we crack on with some press conference chat and team news revelations, let’s wind back to what happened in the WSL last weekend. It sets up tonight’s big game nicely. Emma Hayes insists tonight’s Chelsea v Arsenal showdown isn’t a title decider. “A draw or even a loss in either direction isn’t necessarily defining,” says the Blues boss. We’ll have a John Brewin MBM tonight, just to mark your cards. Here’s Suzanne Wrack’s scene setter. Talking of Portugal, it didn’t go so well for Bruno Lage and Wolves last night. A quick look back to last night where Diogo Jota again proved he’s the most prolific Portuguese striker in the Premier League (12 top-flight goals to Ronaldo’s 8). And the other key fixtures this weekend... Friday Women’s Super League Chelsea v Arsenal - 7.45pm Saturday World Club Cup Chelsea v Palmeiras - 4.30pm Those Premier League fixtures in full... Saturday Man Utd v Southampton - 12.30pm Brentford v Crystal Palace - 3pm Everton v Leeds - 3pm Watford v Brighton - 3pm Norwich v Man City - 5.30pm Sunday Burnley v Liverpool - 2pm Newcastle v Aston Villa - 2pm Spurs v Wolves - 2pm Leicester v West Ham - 4.30pm Opinions on who’ll win the Premier League fall into two camps. Liverpool fans still believe it could be them: a game in hand and the chance to win at the Etihad in April could cut the current nine-point gap to three. Everyone else says Man City. It’s doubtful that argument will have moved on after this weekend with the top two facing trips to sides in the bottom three (Norwich v Man City and Burnley v Liverpool). With Newcastle starting to build up a head of steam, the battle for relegation is expanding. Everton (home to Leeds) and Brentford (home to Crystal Palace) are certainly getting twitchy, their main hope being that crafty old-timer Roy Hodgson doesn’t pull some stunts at Watford. As for the battle to be least-worst of the rest, Manchester United, West Ham, Arsenal and Tottenham seem to take it in turns to trip over their own feet. Who do you trust? At the moment, it’s no-one. That, of course, leaves Chelsea who occupy a no-man’s land currently called third spot. Tommy T’s men don’t have a Premier League game this weekend because they’re taking on Palmeiras in the Club World Cup final on Saturday - a huge, huge deal in Brazil; a bit of an afterthought over here. What’s not in doubt is the importance of Chelsea’s home game in the Women’s Super League tonight. Emma Hayes’ side are at home to leaders Arsenal and this could go a long way to deciding the title. The Gunners, who rather got away with a 1-1 draw against Manchester United last weekend, have the chance to pull five clear. But if Chelsea win, they’d go top by a point with a game in hand. Your weekend starts here. Let’s get this thing going...Time to wrap up for the week... here’s today’s main stories: Goodnight, and have a good weekend. GW UK exports of goods to the EU have fallen by £20bn compared with the last period of stable trade with Europe, according to official figures marking the first full year since Brexit. Numbers released on Friday by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show the combined impact of the pandemic and Britain’s exit from the single market caused a 12% fall in exports between January and December last year compared with 2018. Highlighting the disproportionate impact from leaving the EU, exports to the rest of the world – excluding the 27-nation bloc – dropped by a much smaller £10bn, or about 6% compared with 2018 levels. The ONS compares trade performance against figures from three years ago because this was the last year before distortions caused by firms stockpiling ahead of Brexit deadlines and the spread of Covid-19. Despite the disruption, the EU remains the UK’s largest trading partner. However, for the first time since comparable records began in 1997, the UK now spends more importing goods from the rest of the world than it does from the EU (see earlier post). For shipments sent the other way UK goods imported from the EU were down almost 17%, or about £45bn, compared with 2018. In comparison imports from the rest of the world increased by almost 13%, or about £28bn. With the EU accounting for just over half of UK exports worldwide, economists said Brexit was serving as an extra headwind for Britain, compounding the disruption from Covid being felt across advanced economies. “UK exporters are continuing to lose market share,” said Gabriella Dickens, an economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics. More here: European stock market have closed for the week, with the FTSE 100 index finishing 11 points lower at 7661. That 0.15% dip is a recovery from its earlier weakness. Consumer goods giant Unilever led the risers, up 3.5%, a day after it pledged not to make any major acquisitions for the foreseeable future following the backlash over its tilt at GSK’s consumer healthcare arm. British American Tobacco rose 3%, after reporting rising revenues from its vapes and heated tobacco division and announcing a £2bn share buyback. European markets had a weaker day, with Germany’s DAX down around 0.5% at the close and France’s CAC off 1.3%. But it’s been a good week for European travel and leisure stocks - the sector gained around 7% this week, on optimism for a recovery this summer as Covid-19 cases fall. Here’s some reaction to the drop in US consumer sentiment to a decade low: It is the kind of news that calls for a stiff drink: the cost of a home-poured G&amp;T is bubbling up due to a jump in tonic prices at UK supermarkets. Shop price data from the research firm Assosia suggests that the price of mixers made by major tonic brands such as Schweppes and Fever-Tree has risen sharply this month. In Morrisons, the UK’s fourth largest supermarket chain, a number of Schweppes mixers, including bestsellers such as Indian tonic water, have increased by 10p to £1.75 for a litre. The cost of some Schweppes drinks sold in Sainsbury’s and Tesco has also increased. The data also reveals widespread price increases for Fever-Tree’s upmarket tonics. Since the start of 2022 Assosia has tracked 15 price increases for the brand in Morrisons, 16 in Tesco and Asda, and 21 in Sainsbury’s. A 500ml bottle of its Indian tonic water now costs £1.95 in Morrisons, a 15p increase. It costs the same higher price in Tesco and Sainsbury’s. With inflation running at a near 30-year high, tonic is just one of many products going up in price on supermarket shelves as supply chain bottlenecks and soaring energy costs put upward pressure on prices. More here... US consumer confidence has hit its lowest level in a decade, as the jump in inflation causes rising anxiety among Americans. The University of Michigan’s gauge of consumer sentiment hit its lowest level since late 2011, as people grow gloomier about their financial prospects, the economic outlook, and the government’s economic policies. The measures of consumer expectations and current economic conditions both worsened this month, to 10-year lows. Surveys of Consumers chief economist, Richard Curtin, says. Sentiment continued its downward descent, reaching its worst level in a decade, falling a stunning 8.2% from last month and 19.7% from last February. The recent declines have been driven by weakening personal financial prospects, largely due to rising inflation, less confidence in the government’s economic policies, and the least favorable long term economic outlook in a decade. Importantly, the entire February decline was among households with incomes of $100,000 or more; their Sentiment Index fell by 16.1% from last month, and 27.5% from last year. The impact of higher inflation on personal finances was spontaneously cited by one-third of all consumers, with nearly half of all consumers expecting declines in their inflation adjusted incomes during the year ahead. In addition, fewer households cited rising net household wealth since the pandemic low in May 2020, largely due to the falling likelihood of stock price increases in 2022. After yesterday’s wobble, Wall Street has opened cautiously. The Dow Jones industrial average is up 58 points or 0.2% at 35,307, while the broader S&amp;P 500 is down 0.1%. Tech stocks are weaker, with the Nasdaq Composite down 0.4% on expectations of sharp interest rate rises this year to bring US inflation down. Energy stocks are higher, with Chevron (+1.2%) and pharmaceuticals group Merck (+1.3%) in the Dow risers, followed by healthcare group Walgreen Boots (+1%). Nike (-1.3%) are leading the Dow fallers, followed by Salesforce.com (-1%), Microsoft (-1%) and Apple (-0.5%). On the trade data.....LSE associate professor Thomas Sampson says Brexit hit home last year, but surprisingly EU imports were more affected than exports: [even though the UK delayed checks on goods coming into the country, while the EU introduced those checks at the start of 2021] UK imports from non-EU countries outpaced imports from the EU every month last year. December’s trade report shows that imports from non-EU countries remained higher than from EU countries for the 12th month in a row. The ONS says this divergence is linked to increasing imports of fuels, such as gas from Norway, where prices rose sharply through the year. Analysts say the Brexit free trade deal, and the pandemic, have also disrupted trade patterns. Global financial services firm Ebury reported that annual UK goods imports from outside the EU surpassed the value of those from within it for the first time since ONS records began in 1997. Cornelius Clark of Ebury explained: “Evidently the end of the Brexit transition period has impacted trading relationships that many UK businesses have with their EU counterparts. Other factors at play were the restrictions faced by lorry drivers in response to the Alpha variant at the start of 2021 alongside global supply chain bottlenecks. “Further terms of the Brexit trade agreement are still to be implemented which could provide greater headwinds to EU imports and it may be several years before the full impact is evident. “However, imports from China reached an all-time high in 2021 despite the rise in shipping costs indicating that UK businesses are already diversifying their supply chains. The ongoing free-trade negotiations with India could also present a significant opportunity for UK importers too in lowering costs and barriers to trade with a rapidly growing global economic superpower. Sophie Hale, principal trade economist at Resolution Foundation, has analysed the data too, and says it shows Brexit has contributed to a weaker recovery from the pandemic trade shock: Britain’s competition watchdog has provisionally cleared Sony Music’s $430m (£312m) deal to buy AWAL, the artist service company that has worked with musicians including Little Simz, Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds and Billie Eilish’s brother and collaborator Finneas, after initially raising concerns the takeover could potentially lead to worse deals for artists or an increase in prices. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) said that an in-depth investigation into the deal, which was prompted by concerns it could be bad for the music business, has concluded that it will not substantially lessen competition in the UK now or in the future. The CMA had been concerned that the takeover would mean the loss of another independent player in the sector, which is dominated by the big three – Sony Music, Warner Music and Universal Music. However, it has provisionally concluded that there are plenty of other independent “artist and label” service providers, companies that provide a cheaper “DIY platform” for artists offering promotion, marketing and distribution that offer better royalties and copyright ownership than working with traditional record labels. The major record labels have also developed their own A&amp;L services, and artists can also turn to independent record labels that offer better terms than the music industry giants. “We have carefully assessed whether this merger will lead to negative outcomes for the market, artists and, ultimately, music fans, now and in the future,” said Margot Daly, chair of the CMA’s inquiry group.” “Our provisional finding is that the deal is not likely to affect competition in a way that will reduce the choice or quality of recorded music available, or increase prices. We think that a combination of other major labels and independent providers will continue to closely rival Sony, so our provisional decision is to clear the merger.” The CMA will publish its final report on the deal by 17 March. “Our investment in AWAL will deliver real benefits for artists and consumers, amidst intense competition at every level of the music industry,” said a spokesman for Sony Music Entertainment. “We look forward to continuing to work with the CMA throughout the final stages of their review.” SoftBank is facing a battle to float British chip designer Arm, as it remains mired in a legal fight with the head of its Chinese joint venture, while London Stock Exchange chiefs try to persuade the company to reconsider its snub of the UK for the public listing. The Cambridge-based company has been in dispute with Allen Wu, the head of joint venture Arm China, since 2020 when its board voted to remove him. Wu, who refused to stand down and retains control of the venture due to legal rights, has escalated the battle by launching a third legal action against Arm China, adding additional red tape that SoftBank will need to overcome before floating Arm. SoftBank, which bought Arm for £24bn in 2016, has been forced to turn to its backup plan of floating the company after its sale to US-based Nvidia collapsed earlier this week on regulatory hurdles. Widespread political and industry opposition in the UK, Europe, US and China scuppered the deal. More here: Rosneft, Russia’s leading oil producer, has posted record profits for last year as it benefitted from surging energy prices and the global economic recovery. Rosneft followed fellow oil majors BP, Shell, and Total in reporting bumper earnings for 2021, as it benefitted from the rise in wholesale gas and oil prices. Rosneft’s net income jumped to 883 billion rubles (£8.6bn) last year, the highest on record, up more than six times compared to 2020. Chief executive officer Igor Sechin said: “Against the background of the recovery of the global economy, the company achieved new financial records in 2021.” Rosneft will also pay out record dividends for 2021, Sechin added. BP owns a near 20-% stake in Rosneft. BP’s results this week showed that Rosneft contributed $2.7bn in underlying profit to BP’s bottom line last year, or just over 21% of its bumper $12.8bn profit for the year. Oil prices have risen today after the International Energy Agency warned that energy markets were tight, and pointed out that Opec and its allies are failing to meet their production targets. The IEA said that “chronic underperformance” by OPEC+ in meeting its output targets and rising geopolitical tensions have pushed oil prices to their highest in seven years. In its latest monthly report, it said: In January, producers outside the OPEC+ alliance were the ones driving world oil supply higher. Further increases are expected in the coming months as new projects start up and US shale continues to respond to higher prices. That has led us to raise our forecast for US oil supply growth for 2022 to 1.2 mb/d [million barrels per day]. Canada, Brazil and Guyana could add an additional 460 kb/d between them. By contrast, the gap between OPEC+ output and its target levels swelled to 900 kb/d in January. The bloc’s prolonged underperformance has effectively taken 300 mb, or 800 kb/d, off the market since the start of 2021. That shortfall is expected to deepen as some OPEC+ members struggle with production constraints, exacerbating market tightness. Brent crude, the international benchmark, is up 1.3% at $92.58 per barrel. It had hit $94/barrel on Monday, for the first time since 2014, on rising Ukraine tensions. However, the possibility of progress in US-Iran nuclear deal talks did push oil down during the week. NIESR, the economic research institute, have predicted the UK economy will grow by 1% in the current quarter. That would match the expansion in both July-September and October-December, but much slower than the rebound in activity last spring when the winter lockdowns were lifted. NIESR say the economic impact of Omicron was far smaller than that of either of the two previous major waves of Covid-19, keeping December’s contraction to just 0.2% Rory Macqueen, Principal Economist at NIESR, says the economy could have returned to growth in January (we’ll find out next month). The economic impact of Omicron was far smaller than that of either of the two previous major waves of Covid-19: a mere 0.2% fall in December was even stronger than consensus forecasts, but in line with NIESR’s January GDP tracker, suggesting the possibility of a positive reading in January. Unsurprisingly, retail and hospitality contributed the most to December’s fall, with the healthcare sector providing the largest positive contribution.” Britain’s economy grew by 7.5% last year in the fastest annual growth rate since the second world war, despite falling back in December as the Omicron variant dented consumer spending. It comes after the UK suffered one of the largest annual economic contractions of any major economy when GDP fell by 9.4% in 2020 amid the fallout from the first wave of the pandemic. The Office for National Statistics said output fell by 0.2% in December – a stronger performance than expected – as shortages of goods in the shops in the run-up to Christmas and a record number of job vacancies also slowed the economy after a 0.7% increase in November. City economists expected a deeper fall of 0.6% in GDP but an increase in government spending on the vaccine booster programme and the test-and-trace system prevented an even larger slump. There was better news for the government from figures showing GDP growth in the final quarter of the year remained positive at 1% – the same as the previous quarter after the ONS revised down growth in the three months to September to 1%. Rishi Sunak credited the Treasury’s £400bn package of support and “making the right calls at the right time” for the economy’s resilience. “I’m proud of the resolve the whole country has demonstrated, and proud of our incredible vaccine programme, which has allowed the economy to stay open.”. However, Labour and trade union leaders said there was little to celebrate as living standards come under the most sustained pressure for three decades amid Britain’s cost of living crisis amid a faltering economic recovery. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said real wages were plummeting as household energy prices and the cost of the weekly shop soared. “This toxic combination is hitting economic demand and weakening our recovery from the pandemic.” More here: European stock markets lost ground this morning as investors ponder how aggressively America’s central bank will react to soaring inflation. In the City, the FTSE 100 index is down 60 points today at 7612, a drop of 0.75%. France’s CAC has lost 1.2%, while Germany’s DAX is 0.45% lower. Wall Street economists have been revising their interest rate forecasts higher, after US inflation soared to a 40-year high of 7.5% in January. Core inflation was also higher than forecast, dashing hopes that US inflation could have peaked in December. Goldman Sachs now expects seven 25-basis point interest rate rises from the U.S. Federal Reserve this year, up from its previous forecast of five. The markets are betting on ‘shock and awe’ from the Federal Reserve, says Raffi Boyadjian of XM: The big question now is whether there will be some kind of a knee-jerk reaction from the Fed itself amid the ever-worrying rise in inflation. The formerly dovish, now hawkish president of the St. Louis Federal Reserve, James Bullard, has made his views known on what the Fed should do next. Commenting soon after yesterday’s data, Bullard, who is a voting member this year, called for a 100-basis-point increase in rates over the next three meetings. This would mean at least one double hike of 50-basis points, but Bullard didn’t stop there as he raised the prospect of the Fed holding an unscheduled meeting before March to get an early start on liftoff. However, it’s doubtful whether enough voting FOMC members would support such an aggressive move, with Barkin and Daly not in favour of raising rates more quickly. Over in Moscow, Russia’s central bank has raised its key interest rate sharply to 9.5% as it tries to tackle inflation. The Bank of Russia lifted rates from 8.5%, and said inflation was rising appreciably above its forecasts last October. Annual inflation in Russia climbed to 8.7% in January, more than double the Bank’s 4% target. It warned that the balance of risks had tipped towards higher inflation, citing higher energy prices and ‘geopolitical events’: Due to the active growth of demand in the global economy, proinflationary risks associated with price trends in global commodity markets increased. This primarily concerns energy commodities and food markets. Short-term proinflationary risks associated with volatility in global financial markets caused by, among other factors, various geopolitical events, intensified, which may affect exchange rate and inflation expectations. [The Ukraine crisis has caused volatility in energy markets, and pushed the ruble to a 14-month low in January, which lifts import costs] The central bank had already raised interest rates seven times in 2021, up from a record low of 4.25%. Today, it warns that further increases are possible: If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia holds open the prospect of further key rate increase at its upcoming meetings. Policy makers also revised their year-end inflation forecast higher, to 5%-6%, compared with the bank’s earlier forecast for 4%-4.5%. Despite the dip in GDP in December, the Bank of England is likely to continue raising interest rates this year, predicts Ed Monk, associate director at Fidelity International. Monk also warns that wages may lag inflation for some time [inflation is likely to exceed 7% by April, creating the worst squeeze on disposable incomes in at least 30 years]. “While today’s growth data suggest the UK has broadly recovered the ground lost to the pandemic, it’s also clear some momentum has been lost in the past few months. A dip in growth in December was forecast and is understandable given the emergence of Omicron, which led many to restrict their activity in the run-up to Christmas. The question now is whether a fully open UK economy can step up a gear. Consumer sentiment will be tested by the rising cost of living and with tax rises on the way that will squeeze monthly budgets further. Wages are rising but may lag inflation for some time. The Bank of England is worried enough about inflation that it is now raising interest rates and is likely to continue tightening this year. Very weak growth could alter that plan but for now the fact the economy is growing means rate-setters will remain hawkish.” Heathrow airport has said more than 1.3 million passengers cancelled their travel plans over the Christmas and new year period because of Omicron, with hopes for a summer recovery after a weak start to the year. The airport said travel was down 56% in January compared with 2019 levels, a worse start to the year than it had forecast, as the hangover from the Omicron variant affected traveller confidence. “After a tough Christmas, Omicron has continued to bite, and this has been a weak start to the year,” said John Holland-Kaye, the chief executive of Heathrow airport. “As short-lived as the additional travel restrictions were, they ruined the travel plans of more than 1.3 million passengers in the last two months.” Benjamin Disraeli famously warned against putting too much store in statistics, and the latest growth figures are a perfect example of why the former prime minister was right, our economics editor Larry Elliott writes. On the face of it, 2021 was an absolutely corking year for the economy. Britain has had some boom years in the postwar period – 1973 and 1988, for example – but the 7.5% growth last year was the fastest of the lot. Yet 2021 can’t be seen in isolation. Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak are correct when they say the UK had the fastest growth in the G7 last year, yet what they normally omit to add is that it came after the UK had the biggest contraction of any G7 nation a year earlier. The real story is that the economy collapsed by almost 10% in 2020 and then recovered most of the lost ground last year. Activity in the final three months of 2021 was 0.4% lower than in the final three months of 2019 – the period immediately before the pandemic struck. By way of comparison, the eurozone is back to where it was pre-Covid while the US is operating more than 3% above its level in late 2019. Here’s Larry’s full analysis: Charles Hepworth, investment director, GAM Investments also puts 2021’s recovery into context: “The UK economy grew at its fastest pace in 81 years over the course of 2021, growing 7.5% over the full year. But before we get out the bunting, let’s not forget that 2020 saw a record contraction of 9.4% [the worst since 1921], so the economy is still below pre-pandemic levels unlike some other G7 members. The Omicron variant impacted output in December, as was to be expected, with consumers reigning in activity and this will no doubt effect January’s numbers too. As the cost of living crisis builds, it hardly heralds as rosy an outlook– this year the UK economy’s growth will inevitably slow to its post Brexit sub-optimal level.” Barret Kupelian, senior economist at PwC UK, agrees. He says the UK’s position is “less flattering” when you compare its level of output since the pandemic began to its G7 peers, with the US and France having grown more over the same period. (PwC’s chart uses OECD forecasts for Canada and Japan, as they haven’t published Q4 GDP yet) Kitty Ussher, Chief Economist at the Institute of Directors, is hopeful the UK economy returned to growth in January, after Omicron led to a 0.2% drop in GDP in December. “The story of December was one of cancellations and caution, as consumers jettisoned their plans to avoid bringing Covid home for Christmas. Today’s data shows the impact of this screeching halt to festive cheer, with consumer-facing services down 3% in December compared to the previous month. Possibly ironically, one of the most buoyant contributions to economic activity was the vaccination and Test and Trace programmes. “We know from our own data, however, that caution over Omicron among business leaders eased in January, so we are hopeful that next month’s data will see growth rising again.” Sebastian Mackay, Invesco multi-asset fund manager, warns that the UK economy faces many challenges this year. Energy bills are set to soar in April, taxes on workers are going up, and the Bank of England is expected to keep raising interest rates (on top of last week’s rise to 0.5%). Mackay says: “A decent final quarter confirmed a strong growth rebound of 7.5% in 2021 from the 9.4% decline in 2020, albeit real GDP remains below its pre-pandemic level. Looking ahead, UK households face a triple whammy of higher energy prices, an increase in the rate on National Insurance contributions and higher interest rates. Accumulated savings will provide a cushion for wealthier households but little comfort for lower income families. These domestic headwinds, combined with a backdrop of decelerating global growth indicate a more challenging outlook for the UK economy.” The UK experienced ‘a taste of stagflation’ in December, says Capital Economics’ Paul Dales, with Omicron pushing GDP down by 0.2% and inflation hitting a 30-year high. When combined with the CPI inflation rate of 5.4%, the 0.2% m/m fall in GDP in December meant that the economy experienced a taste of stagflation at the end of last year. As it was driven by the Omicron COVID-19 wave which has now faded, the fall in GDP will soon be reversed. But high inflation will be with us for longer and, together with the rise in taxes in April, will restrain GDP growth this year. Much of the UK’s growth in 2021 came in the spring, after the winter lockdown hit the economy hard. GDP shrank by 1.2% in Q1 2021, as England entered its toughest lockdown since the start of the pandemic. Activity fell sharply in January, but then recovered in March as schools reopened, and manufacturing and construction picked up. GDP then jumped by 5.6% in April-June as restrictions were relaxed and people flocked back to shops, offices and hospitality venues. But after that bounceback faded, growth slipped back to 1% in both Q3 and Q4 (as we learned this morning). Economist Simon French of Panmure Gordon points out that UK growth was “mid-range” in the second half of last year. Resolution’s James Smith also highlights that the economy was bouncing back from a weak 2020: Pat McFadden MP, Labour’s Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury, has warned that the UK recovery is expected to slow this year: “The reality is the way the Government runs our economy is trapping us in a high tax, low growth cycle. “Despite government bluster, with their current plans our position is not expected to improve. The latest Bank of England forecast suggests that growth will slow to a crawl next year. That would be the slowest growth of any G7 economy. “Rising taxes, rising prices, and a squeeze on wages and living standards sit squarely on the shoulders of the Conservatives. “Labour has a plan to build a stronger economy, based on an understanding that Britain’s prosperity is found in the effort and talent of tens of millions of ordinary people, as well as backing the sectors that will help drive the industries of the future.” Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak says the UK economy has been ‘remarkably resilient’: “Thanks to our £400bn package of support and making the right calls at the right time, the economy has been remarkably resilient; with the UK seeing the fastest growth in the G7 last year and GDP remaining at pre-pandemic levels in December. “I’m proud of the resolve the whole country has demonstrated, and proud of our incredible vaccine programme which has allowed the economy to stay open. “We’re continuing to help the economy rebuild through our Plan for Jobs, boost for business investment and support for households with the cost of living.” The UK recorded the fastest growth in the G7 last year, as the economy rebounded from the 2020 slump. The 7.5% increase in GDP during 2021 is the fastest growth seen among the G7 countries. It beats the US (5.7% growth), France (+7%), Germany (+2.7%), and Italy (+6.5%) as well as the EU (+5.2%), and likely to beat Canada and Japan who have yet to release 2021 GDP data. But, the UK is recovering from a lower base, having contracted 9.4% in 2020. That was a steeper downturn than other G7 members (although Spain, not in the G7, shrank over 10%). As this chart shows: Overall, the UK is in the ‘middle of the pack’ in the race to recover from the pandemic, says Darren Morgan, ONS director of economic statistics. Morgan told Radio 4’s Today Programme that: If you look at how the UK economy grew in 2021, compared with 2020, then yes, the 7.5% we published this morning means the UK is the fastest growing economy in the G7. But it’s important to put that into a little bit of context, Morgan added: The growth in 2021 comes from a low base in 2020 when the UK economy fell sharply. If you look at where the UK economy is now, compared to its pre-pandemic level, which I know a lot of people do for a broader picture of the economy, the UK is middle of the pack compared with the G7. With the US, Canadian and French economies above the UK’s, but the UK is above Italy, Germany and Japan. The United States, France and Canada are all above their pre-coronavirus level of GDP on a quarterly basis, while the UK was still 0.4% below its level of Q4 2019 in Q4 2021 (but level with February’s GDP level in December). The UK economy grew by 7.5% during 2021 as it recovered from the 2020 slump caused by the pandemic. That’s the fastest growth since the second world war, led by a strong rebound last spring when lockdown restrictions were lifted, despite the disruption caused by Omicron in December. But, it follows a 9.4% fall in GDP in 2020, when Covid-19 drove the economy into a steep slump. Paul Dales of Capital Economics says: In 2021 as a whole, GDP rose by an impressive 7.5%, but that needs to be put in context against the 9.4% fall in 2020. It’s possible that GDP fell in January as that’s when Omicron caused the most people to stay off work and self-isolate. But equally, the timely indicators suggest that activity began to recover from the middle of the month. Either way, a 2% fall in real household disposable incomes this year (due to higher inflation and taxes) will restrain GDP growth from April. With inflation soaring, we doubt this will prevent the Bank of England from raising interest rates from 0.50% to 1.25% this year and perhaps to 2.00% next year. Darren Morgan, director of Economic Statistics at the ONS, says GDP fell back slightly in December as the Omicron wave hit. Despite December’s setback, GDP grew robustly across the fourth quarter as a whole with the NHS (National Health Service), couriers and employment agencies all helping to support the economy. Despite the disruption caused by Omicron in December, the UK economy kept growing in the final quarter of 2021. UK gross domestic product rose by 1.0% in October-December, the Office for National Statistics reports, following a downwardly revised 1.0% increase in Q3. The ONS says: The largest contributors to this quarterly increase were from human health and social work activities driven by increased GP visits at the start of the quarter, and a large increase in coronavirus (COVID-19) testing and tracing activities and the extension of the vaccination programme. On a quarterly basis, that leaves UK GDP 0.4% below its level in Q4 2019 before the pandemic (although it is level on a monthly basis). This chart shows how UK GDP dipped by 0.2% in December, after 0.7% growth in November (revised down from 0.9% growth first reported). The UK’s service sector bore the brunt of the Omicron hit, with output falling by 0.5% in December. Output in consumer-facing services fell by 3.0% in the month, mainly driven by a 3.7% fall in retail trade as consumers avoided the shops. Production rose by 0.3% during the month, and construction increased by 2.0%. That leaves services and construction both above their pre-coronavirus levels, by 0.5% and 0.3% respectively, while production has yet to recover (still 2.6% below) Newsflash: The UK economy shrank by 0.2% in December as the Omicron variant weighed on the recovery. That leaves the economy back at its level in February 2020, before the pandemic, after it had exceeded its pre-Covid levels in November. It’s a smaller contraction than economists had feared, though. Q4 had been shaping up to be a reasonably decent quarter until the Omicron wave broke over the UK economy in December, says Michael Hewson of CMC Markets. The big question is how much of the November rebound in manufacturing and construction carried over into December, and whether it was enough to offset the collapse in retail sales which fell by -3.6%, more than wiping out the collective 2.7% gain seen in October and November. Expectations for the UK economy come in slightly below the 1.1% gain seen in Q3, with a rebound in exports and imports also likely to be seen, as consumers here in the UK and across Europe shop early for Christmas. Industrial and manufacturing production is expected to slow from the strong performance seen in November, with forecasts of about 0.1%. We’ll find out at 7am.... Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Today we learn how the UK economy fared in December, as Omicron put the brakes on the recovery. Economists predict that UK GDP could have fallen during the month, perhaps by 0.6%, after ministers introduced restrictions to slow the highly infectious variant. Hospitality firms were hit by cancellations, and retail sales fell as people avoided the shops. Millions of employees worked from home, and many were off work due to sickness, or self-isolating, causing staff shortages. Before Omicron hit, the UK economy had just recovered to its pre-pandemic levels in November. For the full quarter of October-December, gross domestic product for the fourth quarter is expected to grow a little over 1%, similar to the 1.1% growth in July-September. We’ll also find out how fast the UK economy grew during the full year, as it recovered from its 2020 slump which saw GDP shrink almost 10%. Elsewhere today, financial markets are heading for losses, after US inflation surged to a 40-year high of 7.5%. Wall Street fell after one Federal Reserve policymaker, St. Louis Federal Reserve President James Bullard, said he has become “dramatically” more hawkish. He wants a full percentage point of interest rate hikes over the next three policy meetings to tame inflation - which has fuelled expectations that the Fed could hike rates by 50 basis points in March. The FTSE 100 is seen dropping around 1%, after hitting a two-year high last night. The agenda 7am GMT: UK GDP report for December 7am GMT: UK GDP report for Q4 2021 7am GMT: UK trade report for December 9am GMT: IEA monthly oil report 10.30am GMT: Bank of Russia’s interest rate decision 3pm GMT: University of Michigan survey of US consumer sentimentA hitman has been found guilty of murdering a reality television star’s brother in “a tit-for-tat rivalry” between two major crime gangs. Flamur Beqiri, 36, was shot dead on the doorstep of his £1.7m home in Battersea, south-west London, in front of his wife as she shielded their two-year-old son on Christmas Eve 2019. Beqiri, the brother of The Real Housewives of Cheshire star Misse Beqiri, was a kingpin in an international drugs gang, Southwark crown court was told. Anis Hemissi, 24, was found guilty of murdering Beqiri as well as possession of a firearm after a two-month trial at the south London court. Hemissi, a professional kickboxer, disguised himself in a latex mask for the killing and opened fire 10 times with a pistol, hitting Beqiri with eight bullets from behind. The senior Crown Prosecution Service prosecutor Louise Attrill said the murder was part of a “a tit-for-tat rivalry between two very significant organised crime groups”. “It is an international assassination which required meticulous planning and involved a group of organised criminals recruiting a team to carry out this shocking and brutal murder,” she said. Beqiri, who had joint Swedish and Albanian nationality, claimed to be in the music business but had been involved in the international drugs trade since 2007 as part of a gang led by Daniel Petrovski, 38, the court was told. He had been a target since the summer of 2019, and by November the rival gang’s planning had stepped up as an associate, Estevan Pino-Munizaga, travelled to London for about 14 hours. Pino-Munizaga rented a flat in Oyster Wharf, visited Beqiri’s house nearby and bought a distinctive ladies’ bicycle with a basket. Another associate bought a litter picker on a later trip to the capital. The bike was used by Hemissi to carry out reconnaissance three days before the murder, once dressed as a street cleaner, wearing a latex mask, sunglasses and hi-vis work clothes, while holding the litter picker and a black bin bag. The outfit and bike were abandoned when a local resident, Jeremy Lyons, became suspicious after seeing Hemissi working on public and private streets, telling the hitman: “Get away from this estate please.” Hemissi acquired a replacement bike, which he parked on the Thames path and used to make his getaway after carrying out the shooting. Hemissi, who flew into London on 20 December, left the country to go to Copenhagen, Denmark, in the early hours of Christmas Day. He was arrested on his return after a holiday in Thailand. DS Brett Skowron said: “This murder was meticulously planned by the suspects and involved a number of different men travelling to the UK in the months leading up to Mr Beqiri being fatally shot.” Estevan Pino-Munizaga, 35, was acquitted of murder found guilty of an alternative charge of manslaughter. Tobias Andersson, 32, and Bawer Karaer, 23, also from Sweden, were acquitted of both charges. Clifford Rollox, 31, from Islington, north London, and Claude Isaac Castor, 31, a Dutch national from Sint Maarten in the Caribbean, were found guilty of perverting the course of justice after being hired locally to clean up the flat where the killers had stayed. Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb said she would sentence those found guilty next Friday.The Honduran supreme court has ordered the release of six anti-mining protesters, ruling that they should never have been put on trial. The environmentalists, who have been held on remand for two and half years for trying to protect a river in a national park, faced up to 14 years in prison after being convicted on Wednesday of criminal damage and illegal detention. Two others were absolved of the same charges. Wednesday’s verdict, which cemented Honduras’ ranking as the most dangerous country in the world for environmentalists and land rights defenders, was condemned as “appalling” by the UN special rapporteur for human rights defenders. Amnesty International described the verdict as “outrageous” and said the Guapinol activists were prisoners of conscience. But in a dramatic move, the supreme court accepted an appeal filed months earlier that challenged the constitutionality of the charges and the refusal to grant bail. The court found that the case should never have gone to trial because the judge who sanctioned the indictment against the defenders – and later ordered pre-trial detention – was not authorised to do so. The charges must be annulled and the men freed, as the judge violated due process by presiding on cases outside her jurisdiction. The eight men, from a poor, semi-rural community called Guapinol, have been held in an overcrowded prison throughout the pandemic as a result of bail being denied – yet the conditions requiring pre-trial detention were never met, according to Thursday’s supreme court decision. “The rulings confirm that the case should never have proceeded and that the pre-trial detention was illegal,” said defence lawyer Edy Tabora. “The Guapinol defenders were arbitrarily detained.” The case stems from a huge open-pit mine in Tocoa, owned by one of the country’s most powerful couples, which was sanctioned inside a protected national park without community consultation in a process mired by irregularities, according to international experts. The Guapinol community set up a peaceful protest camp after the mine polluted rivers relied upon by thousands of people. Security forces violently evicted the encampment and dozens of arrest warrants were issued against the protesters. International legal and human rights experts widely condemned the criminalization of the activists and the subsequent militarization of the community, which has forced several people to flee and seek asylum in the US. After a trial mired my delays, irregularities and accusations of judicial bias and falsified evidence, the criminal court ruled on Wednesday that José Márquez, Kelvin Romero Martínez, José Abelino Cedillo, Porfirio Sorto Cedillo, Orbín Nahúm Hernández, and Ewer Alexander Cedillo Cruz were guilty of criminal damage of the mining company’s property and illegal detention of its private security chief. Arnold Alemán and Jeremías Martínez were absolved of the same charges and allowed to return home. As a result of the supreme court rulings, defence lawyers will today petition the court to immediately release the six imprisoned men. Juana Zuniga, partner of José Albino Cedillo, who was among the six found guilty, said: “We the families are in shock, but full of joy. We hope that our companions will be freed as soon as possible and allowed to return home as the defenders that they are and have always been. “Our struggle will continue until the national park is free from mining and environmental destruction.”When the singer Betty Davis marched on to the stage at Ronnie Scott’s jazz club in London in 1975, she was in her underwear – the sort that might have come from an S&amp;M boutique elsewhere in Soho. At that time and in that place, she was enough to scare the living daylights out of her audience. And that was before the tall, slender woman with the giant afro started contorting her body as she delivered songs whose lyrics headed straight through the parental-guidance zone and out the other side, backed by stripped-down funk from her adept band. She was certainly ahead of her time. Later in the decade, the ripped fishnets of London’s punkettes and the gender-fluid styling of Prince would bring such gestures into the mainstream of pop. The uncompromising stance would take more time to filter through, resonating at deeper levels in the work of black female artists such as Erykah Badu, Macy Gray, Missy Elliott and Janelle Monáe, to whom she represented a pioneer and exemplar. Davis, who has died aged 77, exerted an impact on popular culture out of all proportion to her short-lived celebrity, which rested chiefly on her brief marriage in 1968 to the trumpeter Miles Davis. Her cutting-edge tastes and freewheeling way of life changed the way Miles – already a star in the jazz world – thought, looked and sounded. That achievement would have been enough for most people, but half a century later her own music emerged from obscurity to intrigue new audiences. She was born in Durham, North Carolina, where her grandmother introduced her to the sound of the blues before the family moved to Homestead, a town outside Pittsburgh, where her father, Henry Mabry, found work in a steel mill. Betty (named after her mother) left home and high school for New York in 1960, aged 16, after winning a place at the Fashion Institute of Technology in Manhattan. “She knew she was going to be something, and we all knew it,” her brother Chuck told an interviewer. “We just didn’t know what.” Gravitating to Greenwich Village, she became immersed in a culture where styles and races mixed. Her looks brought her work as a model for fashion shoots in Ebony, Seventeen and Glamour magazines and for designers including Halston and Norma Kamali, but music was equally important to her. She DJed at a Village club and made a couple of singles without success before writing a song, Uptown (to Harlem), which appeared on a hit album by the Chambers Brothers in 1967. When she met Davis, introduced by Devon Wilson, Jimi Hendrix’s girlfriend, Mabry had just ended a relationship with the South African trumpeter Hugh Masekela. Davis had recently divorced his first wife, the dancer Frances Taylor. At the time he was trying to find a way out of the confines of a world where his adoring audiences expected him to wear narrow-cut Italian suits in fine fabrics while exploring the pensive cadences of My Funny Valentine in the way that had brought him fame and wealth. Under his new wife’s influence, Davis listened to Hendrix and Sly Stone. “Whatever I got into, he got into,” she said. He put her picture on the cover of an album, Filles de Kilimanjaro, which included a long track titled Mademoiselle Mabry, based on a lick from a Hendrix song, The Wind Cries Mary. His former wardrobe was replaced by buckskin-fringed jackets, silk scarves and freaky sunglasses. Over a band blending rock textures with bottom-heavy funk beats, he played trumpet through a wah-wah pedal. The marriage lasted barely a year, during which he tried and failed to get her a recording contract. It ended, in Betty’s account, when he turned violent after becoming convinced (wrongly, she maintained) that she was having an affair with Hendrix. In 1971 Betty Davis – as she would continue to be known – spent several months in London, where she was befriended by Marc Bolan and continued to write songs. Returning to the US, she made three albums – Betty Davis, They Say I’m Different and Nasty Gal – between 1973 and 1975, raising many eyebrows but little consumer interest, not least because much of the content was too sexually explicit for radio play. “I used to beat him with a turquoise chain,” she sang, provoking speculation over which of her partners she was depicting. Depressed by the death of her father towards the end of the 1970s, she returned to Homestead, where she lived quietly for the next four decades. In recent years, with her approval, her music has been reissued by the Seattle label Light in the Attic. A documentary, They Say I’m Different, was released in 2017, reawakening interest in the work of a woman so determinedly in control of her sound, her sexuality and her life choices. • Betty Davis, singer, songwriter and model, born 26 July 1945; died 9 February 2022Britain’s competition watchdog has provisionally cleared Sony Music’s $430m (£312m) deal to buy Awal – the artist service company that has worked with musicians including Little Simz, Nick Cave and Finneas – after initially raising concerns the takeover could lead to worse deals for artists or increase prices. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) said that an in-depth investigation into the deal, prompted by concerns it could be bad for the music business, has concluded that it will not substantially lessen competition in the UK now or in the future. The CMA had been concerned that the takeover would mean the loss of another independent player in the sector, which is dominated by the big three – Sony Music, Warner Music and Universal Music. However, it has provisionally concluded that there are plenty of other independent “artist and label” service providers, companies that provide a cheaper “DIY platform” for artists offering promotion, marketing and distribution, and that these offer better royalties and copyright ownership than working with traditional record labels. The major record labels have developed their own artist and label services, and artists can also turn to independent record labels that offer better terms than the music industry giants. “We have carefully assessed whether this merger will lead to negative outcomes for the market, artists and, ultimately, music fans, now and in the future,” said Margot Daly, chair of the CMA’s inquiry group. “Our provisional finding is that the deal is not likely to affect competition in a way that will reduce the choice or quality of recorded music available, or increase prices. We think that a combination of other major labels and independent providers will continue to closely rival Sony, so our provisional decision is to clear the merger.” The CMA will publish its final report on the deal by 17 March. A spokesperson for Sony Music Entertainment said: “Our investment in Awal will deliver real benefits for artists and consumers, amidst intense competition at every level of the music industry. We look forward to continuing to work with the CMA throughout the final stages of their review.”Those who have seen Quentin Dupieux’s strange comedy Deerskin, with Jean Dujardin as a murderous would-be cinéaste obsessed with the sartorial superiority of his fringed deerskin jacket, or any of the film-maker’s other wacky adventures, will have an idea what to expect of this latest romp. They may also be justifiably unsure whether to find his movies irresistible or insufferable. I am still undecided in some ways. Incredible But True has a wacky premise that Dupieux very possibly had no idea how to develop. And yet I found myself laughing quite a lot of the time. The sheer silliness and zen pointlessness is entertaining. It’s a film with something of Charlie Kaufman or Spike Jonze or early Woody Allen, mixed with a French version of the Carry Ons. Alain Chabat and Léa Drucker play Alain and Marie, a couple of middle-aged house-hunters being shown a shabby place in the suburbs. The estate agent perplexes the pair by excitedly showing them the house’s special feature: a hole in the basement that, through an interesting Escher-style quirk, leads down into the upstairs bedroom. You wind up higher than you were before. And not only that: the hole in the basement has a second, sensational magic power that astonishes them. The house is a metaphysical wonder at an affordable price. They buy it and Marie becomes obsessed with their house’s “duct”. Meanwhile, the couple’s near-neighbour, who is also Alain’s boss, has a problem: Gégé (Benoît Magimel) has had an electronic penis installed using untested Japanese technology and it is far from trouble-free. The funny-but-exasperating quality of the film is typified by the way that Dupieux leaves so many of the implications untested and unexplored. What happens if you go the wrong way through the tunnel? A Hollywood director might be concerned to hammer out these ideas. Not Dupieux. He just blithely swings on to the next daft gag. New things happen and ridiculous developments briskly unfold in cheerfully preposterous montages. Is this an absurdist meditation on the cruelties of ageing? A Buñuelian satire on the world of bourgeois property ownership? Or just a shaggy dog story? (A dog features actually, and also a cat.) Somehow this film contrives to be more watchable than many of the grander offerings at Berlin, from bigger names. • Incredible But True screened at the Berlin film festival.Representatives from more than 100 countries have committed to measures aimed at preserving the ocean from human harm, including stepping up the fight against illegal fishing, cutting plastic pollution and better protecting international waters. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, hosting the high-level session of the One Ocean summit on Friday, said 2022 was “a decisive year, and we should take here, in Brest, clear and firm commitments.” The US climate envoy, John Kerry, said it was “the ocean that makes life on Earth possible, produces more than half of the oxygen we breathe – and even that is at risk. The ocean and climate are inextricably linked. They’re one and the same.” The 27 EU states and 16 others agreed to pursue a global agreement by the end of the year to regulate the sustainable use of the high seas – waters lying outside any one country’s jurisdiction – and preserve their biodiversity. “We are so close, but we need to push [to get the treaty signed in 2022],” the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, told the summit. The hope is for a fourth and final round of UN negotiations to reach agreement in New York in March. Peggy Kalas, of the High Seas Alliance, said the announcement was “a timely and important commitment to protect our global commons”. But François Chartier, of Greenpeace France, said activists “expect concrete measures on conservation mechanisms and governance”. While 30 more countries also signed up to the so-called 30x30 coalition, which launched in January 2021 and aims to protect 30% of the world’s land and sea by 2030, “clarifications are lacking on the level of protection for marine areas covered”, Chartier said. France said it had exceeded the goal of classifying 30% of the land and marine spaces under its jurisdiction as protected areas after the creation of the world’s second largest marine protected area, around its southern and Antarctic lands. The US said it would support opening talks at the UN for an international deal on plastic pollution, throwing its weight behind the EU27 and about 10 other countries. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) joined the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the French, German, Italian and Spanish development banks in a “clean oceans initiative” to reduce the 9m tonnes of plastic that end up in the ocean each year, pledging €4bn of finance by 2025. Half a dozen more countries joined a “plastics economy global commitment” backed by the UN environment programme to help governments and businesses transition to a circular economy aimed at recycling or reusing 100% of all plastics. In an effort to further curb illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, which accounts for almost a fifth of global catches, six more countries committed to ratifying the International Maritime Organization’s Cape Town agreement setting safety standards for fishing boats. Two more said they would ratify an agreement controlling fishing activities at ports where catches were landed, and several EU member states agreed to deploy their navies in overseas operations to step up surveillance of illegal fishing. Meanwhile, 22 European shipowners committed to new targets to cut underwater noise, emissions, residues and oil discharge, 18 ports around the world undertook to reduce dockside emissions, and Mediterranean countries together with the EU said they aimed to turn the Mediterranean into a low sulphur emission zone by 2025. France and Columbia announced a global “blue carbon” coalition to help finance the restoration of coastal ecosystems such as salt marshes, seagrass beds and mangroves that are capable of absorbing and storing large quantities of carbon. French officials said the summit, attended in person or virtually by heads of state and government from 41 countries, marked the starting point of a series of key international meetings focused on the oceans, including the UN Ocean Conference in Lisbon in June and Cop27 in Egypt in the autumn.For Olivier Bancoult, of the Chagos Refugee Group, it was the sight of two skuas gliding over the waves that heralded long-promised landfall on his native islands. During the first three days of the voyage from Seychelles there had been remarkably few seabirds, until the Mauritian-chartered Bleu De Nîmes, a cruise ship converted from its former use as a British minesweeper, neared the Chagos Islands. Excitement began to build among the exiled Chagossians returning to their homeland. They played music on the quarterdeck. “I will be free,” said Rosemonde Bertin, throwing up her arms in anticipation of stepping ashore on Salomon Island, where she was born 67 years ago. The captain sounded the ship’s horn as the vessel crossed into waters that the UK claims as British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT), despite the United Nations having confirmed three years ago that the area legally belongs to Mauritius. On the top deck, the Chagossians danced and sang in gentle, warm rain, raising glasses of champagne beside two open-air hot tubs. After repeated recalculations of tides and headwinds, the ship was expecting to anchor on Saturday afternoon (local time) off Peros Banhos. The Chagossians will be among the first to set foot on the island. They intend to plant a Mauritian flag and their own orange, black and blue Chagos banner – symbolising the sunset glowing when they were deported by British-chartered boats 50 years ago, the dark years of their exile and the blue ocean. Flowers will be laid in the overgrown cemetery on the island where their ancestors lie. One photograph that has infuriated the exiles is of the studiously well-kept military animal graveyard on the UK/US base on nearby Diego Garcia. The decay of their families’ cemetery on Peros Banhos seems cruel by comparison. The voyage’s main scientific purpose is to place underwater tide gauges on the sea floor on the outlying Blenheim Reef. That is likely to be done early on Sunday. The devices will measure sea levels and enable Swedish experts on the ship to calculate whether any of the reef remains above water at what is known as “highest astronomical tide”. Ola Oskarsson, a marine surveyor retained by Mauritius, is leading the project. If he finds that any part of Blenheim Reef – even a small rock or shingle beach – stays dry all the time, then that can be used as a new outer base point for extending a 200-mile exclusive economic zone (EEZ) in legal argument under the UN convention on the law of the sea. The work, to resolve maritime boundaries with neighbouring Maldives, is being undertaken by Mauritius in the expectation that it will at some point regain control of the Chagos Islands from the UK. The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office has promised “it would not interrupt the survey”. Whether Mauritian activity and landings within what is claimed as BIOT will be monitored by British officials is unclear. In Mauritius itself there has been media criticism of the cost of the expedition and complaints that not enough Mauritian journalists were invited on to the ship. The strangest fact to emerge during the voyage, however, is that the seas around the Chagos archipelago are almost 100-metres below average sea levels elsewhere around the globe. That extraordinary marine feature is due to the Earth not being a perfect sphere but more like a lumpy potato. Different densities inside our planet cause fluctuations in gravity, which affect the behaviour of the oceans. “Mean sea level is not constant,” explained Oskarsson. “It’s undulating because of gravity. Water shifts to even out irregularities.” The Chagos Islands are on a slope that bottoms out at the Maldives. Pravind Jugnauth, prime minister of Mauritius, told the Guardian in a telephone call that organising his country’s first expedition to the Chagos Islands was “not in any way a hostile act”. “It is not in any way meant to embarrass the UK. It is merely an exercise of our sovereignty over part of our territory and that is in accordance with international law.” “We totally condemn the way that the Chagossians have been treated by the UK. Uprooting people from their place of birth and where they were living without any warning and putting them on a ship and just leaving them at the quay in Mauritius and preventing them from going back – that clearly a crime against humanity and it’s extraordinarily serious.” A UK Foreign Office spokesperson said: “The UK has no doubt as to our sovereignty over the British Indian Ocean Territory. Mauritius notified the UK about its plans to conduct a scientific survey close to the Chagos islands. The UK shares this interest in research and environmental protection and gave assurances to Mauritius that it would not interrupt the survey.”Ridley Scott is set to team with Amazon to create a new live-action sequel series to Blade Runner. Blade Runner 2099 will follow on from Denis Villeneuve’s 2017 sequel Blade Runner 2049 to further expand the world originally created by Philip K Dick in his 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? Scott directed the much-loved 1982 adaptation Blade Runner and is set to executive-produce the new series with the potential for him to also direct. In November, Scott confirmed that the show was in development and a pilot had been written. The series was reportedly brought to market last fall with Amazon pouncing and developing it further as a priority. It will mark the second Blade Runner television show after last year’s anime series Blade Runner: Black Lotus which is set in 2032. Reviews have been mixed, with the AV Club’s Sam Barsanti writing that “there isn’t really a compelling hook here aside from the Blade Runner bit in the title”. Blade Runner 2049 received strong reviews but was a box office disappointment making $259m globally from a budget that was estimated to be between $150-185m. The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw called it “visually staggering” in a five-star review. Scott is coming off the back of a busy year with the release of both The Last Duel and House of Gucci. The director is also helping to develop FX’s Alien series with the Fargo showrunner Noah Hawley. It has been described as “the first Alien on Earth”. He is also starting production on Kitbag, a historical drama for Apple TV+ starring Joaquin Phoenix as Napoleon. Blade Runner 2099 is the latest big bet for Amazon, with the streamer set to release The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power in September. The season has cost a reported $465m.Motorists face the return of record high prices at the pumps as global oil markets continue to climb towards $100 a barrel after a slowdown in output from the Opec oil cartel. British drivers will now pay 151.21p a litre of diesel after pump prices on Thursday climbed above the previous all-time high of 151.10p a litre in November last year, compounding the national cost of living crisis. Meanwhile, petrol prices have moved to within 0.05p of their November record to 147.67p a litre across the country, according to the AA, and are already above the 147.72p a litre UK record in London, the south-east and East Anglia. Households and businesses face rocketing costs this year due to the steadily rising market price of gas and oil which is causing economy-wide inflation across the UK. The cost of oil has increased by more than 60% in the last 12 months, from about $60 (£44) a barrel last February to highs of $98 (£72) in the last week. After a brief slump the global oil price has resumed its march towards $100 a barrel, reaching $92.42 (£68) a barrel at midday on Friday. The rise has been driven by growing demand for crude following the easing of Covid-19 travel restrictions, as oil production among the world’s biggest suppliers has struggled to keep pace. Tensions between Ukraine and Russia, which is the world’s third-biggest oil producer, have also fuelled higher oil prices. The International Energy Agency (IEA), which is considered the world’s energy watchdog, on Friday blamed Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) for failing to produce enough oil to meet the quotas set out by the Opec oil cartel and its allies. The pair could help to calm volatile oil markets if they pumped more crude, according to the IEA, after Opec missed its oil production targets by 900,000 barrels a day in January, which helped bring about the global oil market surge. Saudi Arabia and the UAE have the most spare production capacity and could help to relieve dwindling global oil inventories that have been among the factors driving prices towards $100 a barrel and boosting inflation worldwide, the IEA said. “These risks, which have broad economic implications, could be reduced if producers in the Middle East with spare capacity were to compensate for those running out,” the Paris-based agency said in its monthly oil report. In the UK record pump prices are expected to pile on the cost of consumer goods which will cause more pain for struggling households as they brace for a 54% hike in gas and electricity bills from April this year. “Businesses warned this week that they have no option but to pass on higher costs to consumers. The latest jump in the price of diesel, the workhorse fuel of business and haulage, ramps up that inflationary pressure even more,” said Luke Bosdet, the AA’s fuel price spokesperson. Motoring group RAC warned petrol and diesel retailers to keep a lid on pump prices, after charging higher than necessary profit margins through December. “At the moment, we can’t see any justification for a big leap in forecourt prices so we’re urging retailers to continue taking normal margins on each litre they sell. This will ensure drivers, many of whom depend on their vehicles, aren’t forced to pay even higher prices,” said RAC fuel spokesperson Simon Williams.The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has been secretly collecting Americans’ private information in bulk, according to newly declassified documents that prompted condemnation from civil liberties watchdogs. The surveillance program was exposed on Thursday by two Democrats on the Senate intelligence committee. Ron Wyden of Oregon and Martin Heinrich of New Mexico alleged that the CIA has long concealed it from the public and Congress. The pair sent a letter to top intelligence officials arguing that the program operates “outside the statutory framework that Congress and the public believe govern this collection”. Wyden and Heinrich added: “It is critical that Congress not legislate without awareness of a … CIA program, and that the American public not be misled into believe that the reforms in any reauthorization legislation fully cover the IC’s collection of their records.” The two senators, frequent critics of the CIA, said they are not allowed to reveal specifics about what type of data has been subject to bulk collection and called for more details about the program to be declassified. Large parts of the letter, which was sent in April 2021 and declassified on Thursday, and documents released by the CIA were blacked out. The CIA and National Security Agency (NSA) have a foreign mission and are generally barred from investigating Americans or US businesses. But the spy agencies’ sprawling collection of foreign communications often snares Americans’ messages and data incidentally. The senators’ disclosure triggered fresh concerns about privacy protections. Patrick Toomey, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, said: “These reports raise serious questions about the kinds of information the CIA is vacuuming up in bulk and how the agency exploits that information to spy on Americans. “The CIA conducts these sweeping surveillance activities without any court approval, and with few, if any, safeguards imposed by Congress.” Edward Snowden, a former NSA contractor who blew the whistle on the mass surveillance of Americans’ telephone records, wrote on Twitter: “You are about to witness an enormous political debate in which the spy agencies and their apologists on TV tell you this is normal and OK and the CIA doesn’t know how many Americans are in the database or even how they got there anyway. But it is not ok.” And Justin Amash, a former Republican congressman, tweeted: “Rogue agencies like the NSA, FBI, and CIA are a more serious threat to liberty in America than the enemies they claim to protect us from.” There have long been concerns about what information the intelligence community collects domestically, driven in part by previous violations of Americans’ civil liberties. The FBI secretly recorded the conversations of Martin Luther King; the CIA investigated whether the anti-Vietnam war movement had links to foreign countries. On Thursday the CIA released a series of redacted recommendations about the program issued by an oversight panel known as the privacy and civil liberties oversight board. According to the document, a pop-up box warns CIA analysts using the program that seeking any information about US citizens or others covered by privacy laws requires a foreign intelligence purpose. Additional documents released by the CIA revealed limited details about a program to collect financial data against the Islamic State terrorist group. That program also has incidentally snared some records held by Americans. Kristi Scott, the agency’s privacy and civil liberties officer, said in a statement: “CIA recognizes and takes very seriously our obligation to respect the privacy and civil liberties of US persons in the conduct of our vital national security mission. CIA is committed to transparency consistent with our obligation to protect intelligence sources and methods.” Intelligence agencies are required to take steps to protect US information, including redacting the names of any Americans from reports unless they are deemed relevant to an investigation. The process of removing redactions is known as “unmasking.” Wyden and Heinrich have previously pushed for more transparency. Nearly a decade ago, a question Wyden posed to America’s spy chief presaged Snowden’s revelations about the NSA’s mass surveillance programs. In 2013 Wyden asked then-national intelligence director James Clapper if the NSA collected “any type of data at all on millions or hundreds of millions of Americans.” Clapper initially responded, “No.” He later said, “Not wittingly.” Later that year Snowden revealed the NSA’s access to bulk data through US internet companies and hundreds of millions of call records from telecommunications providers. Reports in the Guardian and Washington Post generated worldwide controversy and new legislation in Congress. Clapper would later apologise in a letter to the Senate intelligence committee, admitting that his response to Wyden was “clearly erroneous”.More than half the £1.7bn paid by the government to politically connected “VIP” companies to supply PPE in the pandemic was spent on equipment that has not been used, according to new figures. The total value of unused PPE was £2.8bn for 1.9bn items, according to newly released figures from the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC). The DHSC did not explain why the PPE was unused but it was not all defective. Last week the department revealed that PPE worth £750m was never deployed because it had passed its safe use-by date. Huge quantities were stockpiled after the government over-ordered in the pandemic. The proportion of unused PPE is significantly higher for contracts processed through the a so-called VIP lane – 59% of the £1.7bn ordered from them – than for other firms awarded contracts through the standard procurement route. Of the £10.4bn committed to non-VIP companies for PPE, 17% or £1.8bn has not been used. DHSC released the figures and the names of companies whose PPE has gone unused in response to a freedom of information request pursued by Spotlight on Corruption. In June last year, 1.9bn PPE items were described by a minister as having been put in the “‘do not supply’ [to the NHS] category” but it is possible that some has since been cleared for use. The department’s list includes 552,100 unused items, costing £8.5m, supplied by Meller Designs. The firm, which was awarded a total of £164m in PPE contracts, was co-owned at the time by David Meller, who has donated nearly £60,000 to the Conservative party since 2009 including £3,250 to support Michael Gove’s party leadership bid in 2016, a campaign on which Meller worked as chair of finance. In November the DHSC revealed that Gove’s office had referred Meller’s company as a potential PPE supplier, and it was then processed through the VIP “high priority lane” for companies referred by Tory MPs, ministers, peers or health officials. On Friday the company declined to comment. Another firm on the unused PPE supplier list is PPE Medpro. It was awarded two contracts worth a total £203m after the Tory peer Michelle Mone initially referred the company in May 2020 to her fellow Tory peer Theodore Agnew, then a Cabinet Office minister responsible for procurement. The DHSC’s newly released list says that 25.5m items ordered from PPE Medpro, worth £124.7m, have not been supplied to the NHS, which appears to include the 25m sterile surgical gowns ordered in June 2020 for £122m. PPE Medpro have insisted that they supplied the gowns to the technical specification required. The DHSC has said it is in dispute with the company that it is seeking to resolve via mediation. SG Recruitment, referred by the Conservative peer Peter Gummer who is a director of its parent company Sumner Group Holdings, told the Guardian that its PPE, 2.4m items costing £26m, was on the list because it had been awaiting checks but had now been cleared for use in the NHS. PPE costing £1bn in total stated not to have been passed to the NHS – 476m items such as face masks, gowns and other vital equipment – was supplied by 25 companies whose contracts were processed via the VIP lane, Spotlight on Corruption’s analysis of the DHSC’s list has revealed. The high priority given to these companies, some newly formed or with no track record in medical products, meant they were given a more attentive personal service at the start of the procurement process, previous reporting has found. The DHSC publication follows a statement in parliament by the then health minister, James Bethell, in September that as of 10 June last year, “1.9bn items of [PPE] stock were in the ‘do not supply’ category”. Bethell was replying to a parliamentary question from crossbench peer David Alton, who has pressed in the Lords for details of the waste associated with PPE procurement. The VIP process was ruled unlawful in the high court last month following a challenge by the Good Law Project; Mrs Justice O’Farrell ruled that the government had failed to give equal treatment to all companies offering to supply PPE.I found the thorough comparison of high-street meal deals informative (Meal deals: which UK shops are the best value for lunch?, 7 February), but as you are the leading publication covering climate change, I would have appreciated some insight on their ecological impact. Particularly appreciated would be strategies to avoid the obscene amounts of predominantly plastic packaging most of the options include. Stuart Young Middlesbrough • Last weekend my newsagent received no copies of the Guardian Saturday magazine, or the Feast supplement. Instead, the wholesaler sent extra copies of the Daily Mail Weekend magazine, which were delivered to customers as a substitute. I have tried to keep my composure through all the corrupt and insidious interferences in our lives by this government, but this is beyond the limit. I have also threatened to sue my newsagent. Bob Horne Lightcliffe, West Yorkshire • In Marian Keyes’ list of acclaimed Irish female writers (Marian Keyes: ‘Rehab was one of the happiest times of my life’, 5 February), there was no mention of Edna O’Brien, the greatest living Irish female writer whose books were banned and burned in Ireland in the 1960s. O’Brien paved the way for a new generation of Irish female writers. Jacqueline Pooler Frodsham, Cheshire • One very simple and delicious way with mushrooms (How to convert a mushroom hater, 8 February) is to put a small knob of butter into the cup of a button mushroom, and eat raw. Dave Crook Birmingham • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Team GB’s skeleton equipment has been panned by slider Matt Weston and the 2014 Winter Olympic bronze medallist John Jackson after another dismal day in the Yanqing National Sliding Centre. Britain have won a skeleton Olympic medal at every Games since 2002, including three in Pyeongchang four years ago – thanks in part to a huge advantage in helmet, skin suit and sled technology. But they are certain to go away empty handed this time after a shocking performance in both the men’s and women’s event. On Friday Weston and Marcus Wyatt finished 15th and 16th in the men’s competition, more than four seconds behind Germany’s gold medal winner, Christopher Grotheer. In the women’s competition Pyeongchang bronze medallist Laura Deas and Brogan Crowley were also well off the pace in their first two runs, ending up 21st and 22nd respectively of the 25 competitors. Deas is already 1.8 seconds behind leader Jaclyn Narracott of Australia. Deas said: “It’s certainly not the outcome I wanted. I came to the start block in a great frame of mind. I can’t tell you now why the speed wasn’t there. We’re going to have to go back and look at all of it and try and come back stronger tomorrow.” Jackson, who won bronze in the four-man bobsleigh in 2014 and is now commentating for the BBC, said it was the equipment – and not the sliders – that was to blame. “This is what we have seen with the British equipment, it’s just absolutely draining speed all the way down. That is the problem Laura had. It’s a problem we have seen with the guys as well. This has been the feature of their season. This experience isn’t going well. It is going to be a tough Games for British skeleton.” Weston concurred, saying: “I think there’s quite a few questions that need to be raised but equipment is definitely going to be one of them. Something’s not right. I couldn’t have done much more today. I’m really happy with how I slid. We’ve got to learn some lessons about what’s happened here. For the moment, it’s not where I want to be.” The third and fourth heats of the women’s skeleton are at 12.20pm and 1.55pm UK time on Saturday. There was a mixed day for Team GB’s men curlers in Beijing, as an 8-3 victory over Norway in Friday’s evening session made up for a 9-7 defeat by the US in the morning. After three days of competition the British curlers lie joint third in the standings. The team’s skip Bruce Mouat said he believed there was better to come from them, saying “this is only our second game in a few months, so [I’m] still getting back to playing with the boys and just need to figure out a few more things.” The women’s curling team have given themselves little room for further error. A 9-7 defeat by South Korea means that they have only won one of their first three matches, with Eve Muirhead saying the loss was “a frustrating one to take. But we’ve got to move on, we’ve only played three games and we’ve been in this position before.” Their next match will be against an unbeaten United States team at 12.05pm (UK time) on Saturday. Briton’s Andrew Musgrave and Andrew Young finished 46th and 51st in the men’s 15km classic cross-country skiing, which was won by Iivo Niskanen of Finland. Musgrave, who lives in Trondheim, Norway, said “It’s a tough sport at the best of times and today was not the best of times.”Faced with a rising tide of acrimony, rage, and online crankiness, New Zealand has launched a nationwide campaign to try to calm its citizenry down. Over the summer, pastel posters began cropping up around the cities, asking New Zealanders to “dial it down a notch,” “read it before you hit enter,” and “comment with dignity”. Cartoon characters entreat keyboard warriors to take a breath, and consider “what would your mother say?” The Human Rights Commission – which is an independent crown entity – launched the campaign late last year. Human rights commissioner Paul Hunt says it was prompted by “a rising tide of division and antisocial behaviour.” “Complaints and inquiries have gone off the richter scale. People are really stressed and angry,” Hunt says. The commission has had more complaints about abuse in the past seven months than its previous record annual high, he says. The monthly rate of complaints had almost doubled, from 525 to an average of 956. The “Dial it Down” campaign hoped to remind New Zealanders, Hunt says, that they “can have vigorous disagreement without losing the plot.” Since mid-2021, there has been a significant rise in the quantity and extremist tone of chatter on social media, says Kate Hannah, a principal investigator at research institute Te Pūnaha Matatini. Researchers were seeing a higher overall volume of violent language and imagery – including increased references to lynchings, sexual violence, misogynistic language and profanity. That tone had become commonplace on mainstream platforms, she says. “[One] thing that seems really shocking to me is the level of vulgarity. I know that sounds prudish – but I’m not a prude, I’m a kiwi, I swear. We’re not Americans,” she says – referring to a generally higher antipodean tolerance for swearing. “The other thing that’s shocking is [seeing this] from people on Facebook who look like – or they appear to be like – my mum or my aunty, … in their 60s or 70s, using the C-word,” she says. “That is not necessarily something that we’re used to.” Hunt believes that much of the uptick can be blamed on pandemic stress, and the long, grim months of lockdown. “Two years of the pandemic is very, very tough. So people are struggling financially, emotionally, mentally, they feel powerless, and they’re struggling to cope. And sometimes people do lash out at something else – or someone else.” A large current of abuse has flowed toward journalists – who are often the communicators of pandemic policy, infuriating both those who see them as government lackeys or as over-critical of the government’s response. “The block button has been hot this year,” says Maiki Sherman, chair of the parliamentary press gallery. “I think everyone in the media would agree that we’ve seen an increase in online abuse.” Some of that abuse was extreme, she says. The protesters gathered outside parliament this week were fond of telling journalists that they would soon be “put on trial” and killed for treason. “Just got told I’m going to be executed by a woman holding a sign saying ‘love is the cure’,” 1 News reporter Kristin Hall remarked on Twitter on Wednesday. “Reporters have thick skins, we’re used to dealing with confrontation, it’s part of the job. But it’s escalating to a point where there is real concern, given the types of threats that are being made,” Sherman says. A complicated picture The increase in abuse, Sherman says, was not exclusively the domain of anti-government or anti-vaccine factions – heated jibes were coming in from across the political spectrum. “A huge part of it is to do with the pandemic and vaccinations. But I think also in general, there has been a slow growth over the last few years and over the last two decades, with social media growing itself, and so people have more and more been given this tool to have a voice.” Researchers have found that Māori women were more likely to be subjected to abusive comments – a dynamic Sherman had observed. “I have noticed it targeted at other Māori woman, certainly.” Accounts of abuse recorded by the commission were not restricted to one side of the vaccination debate. Some complaints, Hunt says, were from people who had mask exemptions due to disability, and were shouted at by members of the public who perceived their lack of a mask as indication of a broader anti-health-regulation stance. Simultaneously, an increasing number of frontline workers tasked with enforcing vaccine passes or masks were subject to abuse from customers who refused to comply. He speculated whether sharpening rhetoric was driven by some deeper fissures that emerged as the country’s policies have shifted to emphasise greater freedoms for the vaccinated. “Before, we were all in the same boat. Now, actually, we’re not in the same boat. We’re not being treated the same. Now, I think [the policy] is warranted, I’m not against it – but there is this new dimension … and we’ve got to deal with it properly.” A publicity campaign would not be sufficient to calm some of the uglier elements of the national conversation, Hunt says, but there was hope it would help. “Of course, it’s a very complicated picture. We’re not suggesting our campaign is going to solve it – these things are complicated and they require multi dimensional responses. But we thought this campaign had a role to play.”As Chagossians return to visit their island home after their eviction more than 50 years ago (‘Life was lovely’: Chagossian women head home 50 years after forced exile, 9 February), readers might like to listen to a magnificent opera put on by the BBC at the time: The Island by William Russo, with words by Adrian Mitchell, featuring Cleo Laine and Denis Quilley, and the Russo orchestra, led by Leon Calvert. It seems to have been lost to posterity, but can be heard via the Sea Green Singers website. This is a jazz opera written and produced for BBC radio in the late 1960s, at around the time that Diego Garcia islanders were forcibly expelled to make way for a US airbase. The opera combines the resources of a chamber orchestra and a big band. It contrasts the superficialities of US popular culture with the simplicity of the islanders. It was recorded from the radio, but the quality is sufficient to convey the beauty and power of the music and the tragedy of the story that it tells. Mike Cox Oxford • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The Queen’s reign was already being marked as extraordinarily enduring 45 years ago (Report, 4 February). Around the time of the silver jubilee, Charles Monteith, the editor at Faber &amp; Faber of many great authors between the 1950s and 1970s, asked Philip Larkin and Ted Hughes to produce short poems to commemorate the occasion. They were to be inscribed in stone and placed in Queen’s Square, London, near the Faber offices. Larkin submitted: In times when nothing stood But worsened, or grew strange, There was one constant good: She did not change. Revealing, perhaps, as much his ambivalent feelings about Hughes as any he had about the monarchy, Larkin included a pastiche of what he imagined Hughes would write: The sky split apart in malice Stars rattled like pans on a shelf Crow shat on Buckingham Palace God pissed himself – Hughes, a committed monarchist and soon to be poet laureate, actually produced something more reverential, if less striking, and both official contributions may be seen on a flower bowl and surrounds in Queen’s Square. David Evans Exeter • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Julian Coman is spot-on (Politicians may have forgotten about ‘community’, but British people haven’t, 7 February). We know that humans develop as individuals within a social environment, initially (at least in the west) within their families but always within a wider community. Communities of one sort or another make us who we are. The “I” develops from the “we” – hence the fundamental human need to belong. We edited a book – The Politics of Attachment, published in 1996 and including contributions from soon-to-be Labour ministers – that explored ways in which public policy could build on the power of attachment and the need to belong that remains as powerful as ever. The Labour party, with its emphasis on solidarity and community ties, has long known this, but it should now apply this thinking to a more individualistic 21st century. Communities in the UK have been enriched by people from many different backgrounds, but the one element that everyone, regardless of background, can share is place – whether defined by street, neighbourhood, town, city or country. Almost all of us live in a place where we can make relationships – glancing acquaintances, neighbours and friends – that bridge divides and root us to where we live. We should harness the power of places and people’s attachment to them to build a “radical politics of place”, as Coman advocates. Jane Roberts and Sebastian Kramer London • Julian Coman’s distinction between “I” and “we” is neatly put in Dante’s Purgatorio: “For by so many more there are who say ‘ours’, so much the more of good doth each possess.” It’s true. Dan Edwards Northampton • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I’m not surprised that Arwa Mahdawi was enraged when a child on her flight was blowing a recorder like a referee’s whistle (A no-fly list for unruly passengers? I have a better – and crueller – idea, 9 February). But her comment that the recorder is an instrument of torture that even talented musicians cannot make sound pleasant suggests that she has never listened to Bach’s Brandenburg Concerto No 2, or heard Michala Petri playing The English Nightingale by Jacob Van Eyck, or watched Charlotte Barbour-Condini play Vivaldi’s Recorder Concerto in C minor in the 2012 final of BBC Young Musician of the Year. Benjamin Britten and John Updike were both recorder enthusiasts, like hundreds of musicians who play regularly. We do it to enjoy the beauty of the music, not as sadists who enjoy being tortured. Judith Abbs London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.