Graduates from poorer backgrounds earn half as much as their more privileged peers in their first job after university because they put themselves forward for fewer roles and lack the family connections and financial support to hunt for top jobs, a survey has shown. The survey of 5,000 graduates suggested that those whose parents held professional roles, including chief executives, doctors and teachers, earned an average of £23,457 in their first job after university, compared with just £11,595 among those whose parents held technical, manual or service jobs. After university, poorer graduates applied for an average of six jobs compared with nine for their wealthier peers, the figures showed. “The stark reality is where you grew up and what your parents did still has an impact on your opportunities and your earning potential,” said Sarah Atkinson, the chief executive of the Social Mobility Foundation, which produced the report with TotalJobs. She said wealthier graduates tended to benefit from being able to “hold out for the job and salary” they wanted, as well as having the confidence to aim higher in job applications. They are also better at negotiating over salary, and able to leverage unpaid work experience to start at a higher level, she added. Atkinson urged employers to take steps to ensure they were “open to the biggest pool of talent and applicants with the most potential, not just polish”. This included targeting deprived areas of the country, taking into account socioeconomic circumstances in recruitment, reporting on the backgrounds of their staff and supporting disadvantaged graduates with moving to a new city. She added that universities should work closely with employers to level the playing field by helping disadvantaged students build their CV, find opportunities and transition to work. The report also showed that more privileged graduates were 47% more likely to use family connections to find their first job. This was especially the case for top earners: of those who earned more than £50,000, 61% said family, friends or former colleagues had helped them to secure a job, compared with just 35% of people earning less than £50,000. Privileged graduates were also twice as likely to receive financial support during the job-hunting process, enabling them to undertake more unpaid work experience placements. They were also more confident they would find a job they wanted (71% compared with 50%) and benefited from cultural advantages such as taking inspiration from their parents’ professions in their job search. Willingness to move was also identified as a barrier in the report, with just 64% of poorer graduates open to relocating compared with 76% of their more privileged peers. Those from lower socioeconomic backgrounds tended to look for roles in the areas in which they grew up, where they often found a lack of jobs that matched their skill set. The report suggested this could be due to anxieties about the cost of moving to and living in bigger cities. Atkinson added that there were also cultural reasons. “Young people from working-class backgrounds can find that in leaving their geographical community at home they may feel they’re leaving it behind in a more philosophical sense, which can be hard. They tell us they don’t belong at home any more, but also they don’t feel they belong in a new professional environment because they’re conscious of their background and being different,” she said.Sadio Mané was withdrawn early on for Senegal in a World Cup qualifier against Togo on Thursday, providing Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp with more injury jitters. The forward was substituted in the 28th minute, replaced by Villarreal’s Boulaye Dia, shortly after showing visible signs of discomfort following an aerial challenge. Senegal’s coach, the former Paris Saint-Germain and Birmingham City midfielder Aliou Cissé, said afterwards: “We took him off as a precaution and there is nothing serious,” while conceding that the withdrawal of the 2019 African Footballer of the Year “destabilised us … he is an important player for the team”. Reports have described the issue as a knock and, though the player will be assessed, his participation in Sunday’s match against Congo has not yet been ruled out. Having overcome the substantial injury problems that hit Liverpool’s defensive line last season, the campaign to date has seen Klopp’s options depleted in attacking areas, with Harvey Elliott badly dislocating his ankle in September, and Roberto Firmino out for several weeks with a hamstring problem, sustained against Atlético Madrid last week. Liverpool’s injury list also currently contains James Milner, Naby Keïta, Curtis Jones and Joe Gomez. Diogo Jota took Firmino’s place in last Sunday’s defeat at West Ham, before Divock Origi replaced the Portuguese international and scored late on at the London Stadium. Klopp’s side next play at home to Arsenal on 20 November. Senegal have already made it through to the final qualifying round for the 2022 World Cup, with two-legged play-offs to take place next March. They equalised late on against Togo through Habib Diallo, after Pape Abou Cissé’s own goal on the stroke of half-time. • This article was amended on 12 November 2021. Senegal have an upcoming match against Congo, not its neighbour “DR Congo” as an earlier version said.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s Covid live blog. Thanks for joining us and in the meantime you can follow along with all the latest Covid headlines here. Have a wonderful Friday. EU drug regulator lists rare spinal condition as side-effect of Johnson &amp; Johnson Covid shot. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) said it was also assessing reports of a rare blood condition known as capillary leak syndrome (CLS) following inoculation with Moderna’s vaccine. Germany’s chancellor-in-waiting Olaf Scholz has pushed ahead with a plan to phase out a state of national emergency by the end of the month, despite the country recording the highest coronavirus case numbers since the start of the pandemic. Australia passes the 90% first dose vaccination milestone for those aged 16 and over. Brazil reports 188 Covid deaths in past 24 hours and 15,300 new cases of the coronavirus. Sweden has seen a sharp decline in Covid testing this month after its health agency said vaccinated Swedes no longer need to get tested, even if they have symptoms. The UK reported another 42,408 Covid cases and a further 195 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Morgues are filling up in Romania and Bulgaria as the countries record the EU’s highest daily death rates from Covid-19, after superstition, misinformation and entrenched mistrust in governments and institutions combined to leave them the least vaccinated countries in the bloc. The Netherlands on Thursday recorded more than 16,000 coronavirus infections in 24 hours, the highest number since the start of the pandemic. Dutch health experts have called on the government to impose a partial lockdown to fight the increase in cases. Austria will place millions of people not fully vaccinated against Covid-19 in lockdown in a matter of days, as daily infections are at a record high and intensive-care units are increasingly strained, the chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, said. About 65% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, the lowest rate of any western European country apart from Liechtenstein. The UK government’s vaccine mandate for care home workers came into effect as about 50,000 care home staff have not been fully vaccinated in England and will not be allowed to work from Thursday. The wellness industry may have turned its back on Covid science by promoting vaccine scepticism, conspiracy theories and the myth that ill people have themselves to blame. Europe’s drug regulator on Thursday recommended adding a rare type of spinal inflammation called transverse myelitis as a side-effect of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s single-dose Covid-19 vaccine, Reuters reports. Reports of this serious neurological illness was also at the heart of trial halts in the early stages of development for both AstraZeneca and J&amp;J’s shots, which are based on similar technology. Giving updates on the safety of all coronavirus shots, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) said it was assessing reports of a rare blood condition known as capillary leak syndrome (CLS) following inoculation with Moderna’s vaccine. The EMA said it had recorded six cases of CLS and was assessing all data, but it was not yet clear if there was a causal association between the reports and the vaccine. In CLS, fluids leak from the smallest blood vessels causing swelling and a drop in blood pressure. The condition has also been studied with vaccines from AstraZeneca and J&amp;J. The EMA said there was currently not enough evidence of a possible link between rare cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS) and mRNA-based vaccines from Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine. The regulator is reviewing if approved coronavirus vaccines could cause MIS. The syndrome is a serious but rare condition in which different body parts become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs. Germany’s chancellor-in-waiting Olaf Scholz has pushed ahead with a plan to phase out a state of national emergency by the end of the month, despite the country recording the highest coronavirus case numbers since the start of the pandemic. “The virus is still here and threatening the health of our citizens,” Scholz said in a parliamentary debate on Thursday, as he called on MPs to support a catalogue of new measures to curb the spread of Covid that would replace the state of emergency. “Therefore it is very, very important that we take all measures to ensure we can protect their health.” The Social Democrat, whose SPD party is in the process of forging a governing coalition with the German Greens and the liberal Free Democratic party, specifically mentioned bringing back free rapid tests for the entire population, compulsory testing for care workers and more financial support for vaccination centres administering booster jabs, on top of keeping in place mandatory mask-wearing rules. Read the full story here. It’s Samantha Lock back with you taking over from my colleague Tom Ambrose. First up some great news out of Australia today as the nation passes the 90% first dose vaccination milestone for those aged 16 and over. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, took credit for Australia’s low fatality and high vaccination rates during the Covid-19 pandemic but also promised the Liberal-National government will seek less “control” over citizens’ lives in future. Facing a surge in coronavirus infections that threatens to overwhelm Colorado hospitals, the governor, Jared Polis, defied federal guidance on Covid booster shots on Thursday by issuing an order allowing all state residents 18 and older to get them. The Associated Press reported: US Food and Drug Administration rules allow booster shots for those 18 and over who are at high risk of exposure to the virus. The FDA also permits boosters for people 65 and older, and adults with special medical conditions. Polis’ order declares all of Colorado at high risk of infection, significantly expanding the number of residents eligible. “Because disease spread is so significant across Colorado, all Coloradans who are 18 years of age and older are at high risk and qualify for a booster shot,” the Democratic governor said in his order. Brazil has had 15,300 new cases of the coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours, and 188 deaths from Covid, the health ministry said on Thursday. The South American country has now registered 21,924,598 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 610,224, according to ministry data, in the world’s third worst outbreak outside the US and India and its second-deadliest. Germany reported a record-high number of more than 50,000 daily coronavirus cases on Thursday as lawmakers mulled legislation that would pave the way for new coronavirus measures. The Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s national disease control center, registered 50,196 new cases, up from 33,949 daily cases a week earlier. Infections have multiplied so quickly in recent days that hospitals in the hardest-hit regions cancelled scheduled surgeries to allow medical personnel to focus on Covid patients. The institute also reported 237 daily Covid deaths, bringing Germany’s pandemic death toll to 97,198. One of the country’s top virologists, Christian Drosten, warned on Wednesday that another 100,000 people could die in the coming months if the country’s vaccination rate didn’t accelerate quickly. Unlike some other European countries, Germany has balked at making vaccinations mandatory for certain categories of workers and has struggled to persuade more people to voluntarily get shots. At least 67% of the population of 83 million is fully vaccinated, according to official figures. “In Germany, I must say, unfortunately, that our vaccination rate isn’t high enough to prevent the fast spread of the virus,” Chancellor Angela Merkel said late on Wednesday. Good evening, I’m Tom Ambrose and will be running the live blog for the rest of the evening. We start with news that the contagious Delta variant is driving up Covid hospitalisations in the Mountain West of the United States and fuelling disruptive outbreaks in the north. “We’re going to see a lot of outbreaks in unvaccinated people that will result in serious illness, and it will be tragic,” said Dr. Donald Milton of the University of Maryland School of Public Health. In recent days, a Vermont college suspended social gatherings after a spike in cases tied to Halloween parties, the Associated Press reports. Boston officials shut down an elementary school to control an outbreak. Hospitals in New Mexico and Colorado are overwhelmed. In Michigan, the three-county metro Detroit area is again becoming a hot spot for transmissions, with nearly 400 Covid patients in hospitals. Mask-wearing in Michigan has declined to about 25% of people, according to a combination of surveys tracked by an influential modeling group at the University of Washington. Germany may be registering record coronavirus infections again but in Cologne, revellers shrugged off any virus fears to return in force on Thursday for their first carnival fair since the pandemic, AFP reports. “We are completely protected” by the the rules keeping unvaccinated people away from the event, said Marie-Louise, who had travelled in from the Netherlands for the street party. The Cologne Carnival, which begins at the 11th minute of the 11th hour on the 11th day of the 11th month, kicks off a month-long series of merrymaking and events running through to Ash Wednesday the following year. The street festivities in the western city involving people dressed up in elaborate costumes, partying to big band music and enjoying comedy shows, were cancelled in 2020 due to the pandemic, like elsewhere across Germany. Early in the health crisis last year, a carnival party had become a super-spreader event, leading to Germany’s first major cluster of infections. More than a year on, the Covid crisis still casts a shadow over festivities. Germany registered a record number of new infections in 24 hours, official data showed, and regions are laying on new restrictions, especially targeting the unvaccinated. Related: Scholz pushes new measures to tackle Germany’s rising Covid cases Bavarian state premier Markus Soeder, himself an aficionado of dressing up at carnivals, said he found it “a little difficult to imagine carnival” going ahead. Instead, he warned that restrictions on such events may be needed to halt surging infections. The Cologne event too had to improvise as the designated “prince” who is meant to lead the festivities tested positive on the eve of the carnival and had to be replaced at the 11th hour. But the crowd was undeterred. Gathered without masks in a square in the city’s old town, they turned up in their thousands to the tune of the song “Mir sin widder do” – “we are back”. Uwe Schoernig, who is the treasurer of an association of carnival participants, said: “It feels great to party again. “I’m not going to feel bad about having fun,” Schoernig, dressed in a sailor’s uniform, told AFP. “If the politicians think restrictions are necessary, we’ll keep to the rules. But as long as that’s not the case, we will carry on.” Hanno Puetz, who was the “prince” leading festivities at Bergisch Gladbach city in 2019, agreed. “We’ve been waiting for so long,” he said, pointing to cancelled carnivals through 2020. “We can’t wait any longer to parade through the streets in our costumes.” “We have so little normalcy in our lives these days. Here at least we can bring back a bit of joy,” said Puetz. Martina, 22, who had travelled from Bielefeld with her friend Alina for the party, said: “We feel free again.” She told AFP: “You just need to get vaccinated and then there’s no problem.” But not all are throwing caution to the wind. Reveller Stephanie Walbroehl said she planned to “test herself through the weekend” before returning to work. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today: Europe’s drug regulator has recommended two Covid antibody therapies, one from American-Swiss partners Regeneron-Roche and another from South Korea’s Celltrion, as the region builds up its defence against surging cases. Approval by the European Commission would mark the first for any Covid treatment on the continent since Gilead’s remdesivir last year. Sweden has seen a sharp decline in Covid testing this month, just as much of Europe contends with surging infection rates, after its health agency said vaccinated Swedes no longer need to get tested, even if they have symptoms of the disease. The stance by the health agency has rekindled criticism that the country has once again broken ranks with its neighbours, and has led to some of Sweden’s regions no longer providing free testing for all. The UK reported another 42,408 Covid cases and a further 195 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Morgues are filling up in Romania and Bulgaria as the countries record the EU’s highest daily death rates from Covid-19, after superstition, misinformation and entrenched mistrust in governments and institutions combined to leave them the least vaccinated countries in the bloc. Despite ample vaccine supplies, the two countries have fully vaccinated the lowest proportion of their populations in the EU: 34.3% of Romania’s inhabitants have received two jabs, and 22.8% of Bulgaria’s. Story here. The Netherlands on Thursday recorded more than 16,000 coronavirus infections in 24 hours, as Dutch health experts called on the government to impose a partial lockdown to fight the increase in cases. The caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte’s cabinet is expected to decide on Friday on measures following the recommendation of the Outbreak Management Team, the pandemic advisory panel, for a two-week partial lockdown. It would be western Europe’s first lockdown since vaccines were widely deployed. Austria is days away from placing millions of people not fully vaccinated against Covid-19 in lockdown, as daily infections are at a record high and intensive-care units are increasingly strained, the chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, said. About 65% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, the lowest rate of any western European country apart from Liechtenstein. The German chancellor-in-waiting, Olaf Scholz, pushed ahead with a plan to phase out a state of national emergency by the end of the month, despite the country recording the highest coronavirus case numbers since the start of the pandemic. He mentioned bringing back free rapid tests for the entire population, compulsory testing for care workers and more financial support for vaccination centres administering booster jabs, on top of keeping in place mandatory mask-wearing rules. Story here. Deer can catch the coronavirus from people and give it to other deer in overwhelming numbers, a US study has found - the first evidence of animals transmitting the virus in the wild. On third of Iowa deer sampled over nine months had active infections, with a peak of 80% testing positive between November and January, according to a preprint study that has not yet been peer-reviewed or published. Story here. Death rates from Covid infections are much higher in patients with diabetes in Africa, where the number of people with diabetes is growing rapidly, the World Health Organization said. A WHO analysis of data from 13 African countries found a 10.2% case fatality rate in patients with Covid and with diabetes, compared with 2.5% for patients with Covid overall. Matshidiso Moeti, the WHO regional director for Africa, said: “Covid-19 is delivering a clear message: fighting the diabetes epidemic in Africa is in many ways as critical as the battle against the current pandemic.” Ukraine’s health ministry proposed expanding the list of occupations for which Covid vaccinations will be compulsory to cover medical personnel and municipal employees. Ukraine, which has a vaccination rate among the lowest in Europe, already obliges teachers and employees of state institutions and local governments to receive vaccinations, without which they face being suspended from work. The new list of roles that will require vaccination will include medical staff, municipal workers and employees of municipal companies. Europe’s drug regulator has recommended two Covid antibody therapies - one from American-Swiss partners Regeneron-Roche and another from South Korea’s Celltrion, as the region builds up its defence against surging cases. Approval by the European Commission would mark a first for any Covid-19 treatment on the continent since Gilead’s remdesivir last year. Reuters reported earlier this week that the European Medicines Agency’s (EMA) endorsement of the two drugs was imminent. Regeneron-Roche’s antibody cocktail, Ronapreve, was backed by the EMA’s human medicines committee for treating adults and children over 12 with Covid who do not require oxygen support and are at high risk of severe disease. Celltrion’s Regkirona was recommended only for adults with similar conditions. Ronapreve can also be used for preventing Covid in people over 12 weighing at least 40kg, the EMA said. The two treatments are based on a class of drugs called monoclonal antibodies that mimic natural antibodies produced by the human body to fight infections. While the potential approval process is ongoing, the two drugs are already available to some patients in the European Union as the EMA assisted member states on early use in some cases. Regeneron’s antibody cocktail was granted emergency authorisation in the US last year, and in August received conditional marketing authorisation in the UK. The EU has secured about 55,000 courses of the therapy, a European Commission spokesperson said in June. The bloc has no supply deal with Celltrion, whose antibody treatment has so far been approved only in South Korea. Thursday’s recommendation comes after Eli Lilly last week withdrew its application for EU approval of its antibody-based treatment, citing a lack of demand from EU member states as the bloc focuses on other suppliers. As the UK government’s vaccine mandate for care home workers comes into effect, about 50,000 care home staff have not been fully vaccinated in England and will not be allowed to work from Thursday. On Wednesday, care leaders asked Sajid Javid for a reprieve, urging the health secretary to allow unvaccinated carers to keep working until at least next April when NHS staff face mandatory vaccines. There is concern that staff shortages could prevent thousands of patients leaving hospital. Three care workers have shared their views with my colleague Jedidajah Otte about how the mandate will affect them: Sweden has seen a sharp decline in Covid testing this month, just as much of Europe contends with surging infection rates, after its health agency said vaccinated Swedes no longer need to get tested, even if they have symptoms of the disease, Reuters reports. The stance by the health agency has rekindled criticism that the country has once again broken ranks with its neighbours, and has led to some of Sweden’s regions no longer providing free testing for all. Covid testing fell by 35% last week compared with a month earlier. That places Sweden in the bottom of the European Union, along with countries like Germany, Spain, Poland and Finland, according to Our World in Data. The health agency argues the resources for testing could be better used elsewhere and that there is no need to test those who are fully vaccinated as they have a low risk of getting sick and are less likely to spread the disease. However, the timing of the decision, just as Europe is heading in to the winter season, has baffled some scientists. One recent newspaper column said “Sweden is once again in the dark” about the spread and ability to break disease chains. “The number of cases is low in Sweden, but considering how the outside world looks like with lots of cases in Europe, I think you should have waited with this decision,” said Anders Sonnerborg, professor in clinical virology and infectious diseases at Karolinska Institutet. “I have a hard time seeing that waiting a few months would be a major intervention in people’s lives,” he said. Health Agency official Sara Byfors on Thursday defended the decision, saying testing would still be at a high enough level to catch trends and that testing had never caught all cases. “If we see that the spread of infection increases and that it becomes a problem then we are prepared to reverse our decision,” she told a news conference. The number of hospitalisations and patients treated at intensive care units have started to creep up in recent weeks but are still the lowest in the European Union per capita, according to Our World in Data. Sweden’s handling of the pandemic has stood out, shunning lockdowns throughout the health crisis and instead relying on voluntary measures based on social distancing and good hygiene. The country’s number of deaths per capita since the start of the pandemic is several times higher than those among Nordic neighbours but also lower than in most European countries that opted for strict lockdowns. Fears of overwhelmed morgues, record Covid cases, anti-lockdown protests – the headlines this week in New Zealand might evoke deja-vu for anyone who lived through the pandemic in Europe, Asia or America. New Zealand has recently generated a series of news stories that could have been a year-old dispatch from the opposite side of the globe. National radio announced that hospitals had been buying portable refrigerators to prepare for the possibility of growing Covid deaths. In the capital, Wellington, a crowd of thousands of “pro-freedom” anti-vaccination protesters gathered in front of parliament – one of the first organised, medium-scale expressions of dissatisfaction from a country that had held on to extraordinarily high levels of social support for its Covid response. Over the weekend, the country cracked 200 new daily Covid infections for the first time in the pandemic. New Zealand is preparing to face for the first time what the US, UK, Europe and much of Asia saw almost a year ago. For a government that has so far protected its population from the worst of Covid, the new era presents new challenges – including pockets of complacency or denial. Read the full story here: The UK has reported another 42,408 Covid cases and a further 195 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s dashboard. That is compared to 214 deaths and 39,329 infections in the 24 hours prior. In England, a mandatory jab policy for care workers kicked in on Thursday, meaning unless staff are medically exempt they must be fully vaccinated or risk losing their job. PA reports tens of thousands of care home staff who have not been fully jabbed will now be unable to legally work in care homes. Figures published by NHS England show that more than 56,000 current staff in care homes for younger and older residents had not been recorded as having received both doses as of 7 November, four days before the deadline. Several thousands of these are understood to have self-certified as medically exempt or to have applied for formal proof. Health officials expect the number of double-vaccinated staff to have risen in the three days between Sunday and Thursday. It is unclear how many staff have already quit due to the requirement. NHS England figures up to the end of October show that the number of staff in care homes in England has fallen by more than 4,000 since just after the first-dose deadline in mid-September. Romania and Bulgaria are recording the EU’s highest daily death rates from Covid-19, after superstition, misinformation and entrenched mistrust in governments and institutions combined to leave them the least vaccinated countries in the bloc. “A village is vanishing every day in Romania,” said Catalin Cirstoiu, the head of the Bucharest university emergency hospital, where the morgue is filled to overflowing with coronavirus victims, this week. “What about in a week or a month? A larger village? Or a city? Where do we stop?” Cirstoiu told Associated Press the system was near breaking point, “all caused by one thing: the population’s inability to comprehend they need to get vaccinated”. While new infections have recently started to edge down, Bulgaria this week reported its highest ever total of daily fatalities. Its seven-day rolling average of deaths per million inhabitants reached 22.8, compared with an EU average of 3.1. In Romania the average daily death rate hit 23.7 per million last week and has since dipped to 21, according to figures from OurWorldInData – still more than 30 times higher than in Portugal, France or Spain. Despite ample vaccine supplies, the two countries have fully vaccinated the lowest proportion of their populations in the EU: 34.3% of Romania’s inhabitants have received two jabs, and 22.8% of Bulgaria’s. That compares with an average of 65.2% across the EU, with countries such as France, Finland, Italy, Ireland, Belgium, Denmark and Spain all nearing or exceeding 70% and Malta and Portugal surpassing 80%. Low vaccine take-up has exposed a deep east-west faultline defined by poverty, underdevelopment and low levels of health education – and compounded, in many ex-communist eastern EU states, by very low confidence in government. Read the full story here: The Netherlands on Thursday recorded more than 16,000 coronavirus infections in 24 hours, the highest number since the start of the pandemic, data showed. The rising number of cases is once again putting pressure on hospitals. Health experts on Thursday called on the government to impose a partial lockdown to fight the increase in Covid cases [see 1.11pm.]. The wellness industry’s gurus increasingly promote vaccine scepticism, conspiracy theories and the myth that ill people have themselves to blame. How did self-care turn so nasty? Sirin Kale investigates: Austria is days away from placing millions of people not fully vaccinated against Covid-19 on lockdown, as daily infections are at a record high and intensive-care units are increasingly strained, the chancellor Alexander Schallenberg said on Thursday. About 65% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, the lowest rate of any western European country apart from tiny Liechtenstein, according to European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control data. Many Austrians are sceptical about vaccinations, a view encouraged by the far-right Freedom party, the third-biggest in parliament. Under an incremental government plan agreed in September, once 30% of intensive-care beds are occupied by patients with Covid, people not vaccinated against the coronavirus will be placed under lockdown, with restrictions on their daily movements. The current level is 20% and rising fast. “According to the incremental plan we actually have just days until we have to introduce the lockdown for unvaccinated people,” Schallenberg told a news conference in the westernmost province of Vorarlberg, adding that Austria’s vaccination rate is “shamefully low”. The conservative-led government said on Friday it was banning the unvaccinated from restaurants, theatres, ski lifts and providers of “services close to the body” such as hairdressers. “A lockdown for the unvaccinated means one cannot leave one’s home unless one is going to work, shopping [for essentials], stretching one’s legs – namely exactly what we all had to suffer through in 2020,” Schallenberg said, referring to three national lockdowns last year. Centrist opposition parties have accused the government of doing too little for months to boost vaccination levels and keep infections in check. Some conservatives have argued that a lockdown for the unvaccinated would be unenforceable. Schallenberg said the police would conduct spot checks. The rise in cases in Austria comes at a time when eastern European states, with the continent’s lowest vaccination rates, are experiencing some of the world’s highest daily death tolls per capita. Experts in the Netherlands on Thursday recommended a two-week partial lockdown, which would be western Europe’s first since vaccines were widely deployed, and other countries are requiring vaccination certificates to enter public spaces [see 1.11pm.]. Germany’s chancellor-in-waiting Olaf Scholz has defended his plan to phase out a state of national emergency by the end of the month, despite the country recording the highest coronavirus case numbers since the start of the pandemic. “The virus is still here and threatening the health of our citizens,” Scholz said in a parliamentary debate on Thursday, as he pushed for MPs to support a catalogue of new measures to curb the spread of Covid. “Therefore it is very, very important that we take all measures to ensure we can protect their health.” The Social Democrat, whose SPD party is in the process of forging a governing coalition with the German Greens and the liberal Free Democratic party, specifically mentioned bringing back free rapid tests for the entire population, compulsory testing for care workers and more financial support for vaccination centres administering booster jabs, on top of keeping in place mandatory mask-wearing rules. Scholz said he welcomed some German federal states following Austria’s lead by introducing so-called “2G” requirements, meaning only those who have been vaccinated or recently recovered from Covid can visit bars, clubs or restaurants, but shied away from endorsing a nationwide application of such a rule. Read more on this story here: As America’s pandemic – for now – seems to be moving into a new phase with national rates in decline from the September peak and vaccines being given to children, a new worry has appeared on the horizon: wildlife passing on the virus. A new study shows that deer can catch the coronavirus from people and give it to other deer in overwhelming numbers, the first evidence of animals transmitting the virus in the wild. Similar spillover and transmission could be occurring in certain animal populations around the world, with troubling implications for eradicating the virus and potentially even for the emergence of new variants. One-third of Iowa deer sampled over nine months had active infections, with a peak of 80% testing positive between November and January, according to a preprint study that has not yet been peer-reviewed or published. It builds on previous findings that one-third of deer in other US states were exposed to the virus and developed antibodies, but it differs in showing high rates of active infections, which last for a much narrower window of time. The virus very likely spilled over from humans to deer through several different interactions, and then it probably spread to other deer, according to the analysis. Nearly everything about their study shocked the scientists. They knew deer could be infected with the coronavirus. But they were stunned by the numbers – four out of five deer tested positive at the highest peak – as well as high viral loads that were “truly gobsmacking”, Suresh Kuchipudi, a clinical professor of virology at Penn State and co-author of the study, told the Guardian. They were also surprised by the fairly clear links in the genetic analysis connecting human transmission to the animals and then the rapid transmission to other deer. The full story is here: A pandemic advisory panel in the Netherlands on Thursday recommended imposing western Europe’s first partial lockdown since the summer, putting pressure on the government to take unpopular action to fight a Covid surge. The caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte’s cabinet is expected to decide on Friday on measures following the recommendation of the Outbreak Management Team, broadcaster NOS reported. The government often follows the expert panel’s recommendations. Steps under consideration include cancelling events, closing theatres and cinemas, and earlier closing times for cafes and restaurants, the NOS report said. Schools would remain open. After a partial lockdown of around two weeks, entry to public places should be limited to people who have been fully vaccinated or have recently recovered from a coronavirus infection, according to the advice. Even as infections surge to record levels, many developed countries have taken the view that vaccine programmes mean lockdowns are unnecessary. The UK is relying on booster shots to increase immunity and to try to avoid overwhelming its healthcare system. The Netherlands has so far provided booster shots to a small group of people with weaker immune systems. It will start offering them to people aged 80 years and older in December, while extra jabs will eventually be available for anyone older than 60. Despite an adult vaccination rate nearing 85%, hospitals in parts of the Netherlands have been forced to scale back regular care to treat patients with coronavirus. Last month, roughly 56% of Dutch patients in hospitals with Covid and 70% of those in intensive care were unvaccinated or only partially vaccinated. Unvaccinated patients in Dutch hospitals with Covid had a median age of 59, compared to 77 years for vaccinated patients, data provided by the Netherlands’ Institute for Health (RIVM) showed. Last week, the Netherlands re-introduced masks and expanded the list of venues that require a “corona pass” that demonstrates vaccination or a negative test result, to gain access. New coronavirus infections in the country of 17.5 million have roughly doubled in the last week to more than 400 per 100,000 inhabitants, and are as high as in the worst weeks of December last year. Death rates from Covid infections are much higher in patients with diabetes on the African continent, where the number of people with diabetes is growing rapidly, the World Health Organization said on Thursday. A WHO analysis of data from 13 African countries found a 10.2% case fatality rate in patients with Covid and with diabetes, compared with 2.5% for patients with Covid overall. In a statement, Matshidiso Moeti, the WHO regional director for Africa, said: Covid-19 is delivering a clear message: fighting the diabetes epidemic in Africa is in many ways as critical as the battle against the current pandemic. An estimated 70% of people with diabetes on the continent were unaware they had the disease, according to the WHO. The number of people with diabetes in Africa is expected to surge to 55 million by 2045 from 24 million this year, the International Diabetes Federation forecasts. The data from Africa on the increased vulnerability of people with diabetes to death from Covid-19 reflects a global trend. A Reuters investigation this year reported that the pandemic has revealed that the United States has been losing its public health battle against diabetes for more than a decade. As of Thursday, Africa has recorded over 8.6m confirmed Covid cases and 220,0000 deaths, according to a Reuters tally. Less than 7% of the African population is fully vaccinated against Covid, compared with about 40% globally, WHO says. The Chinese port city of Dalian has ordered all businesses handling imported chilled and frozen foods to suspend operations after a Covid outbreak that began last week. The city on China’s north-east coast has reported more than 80 cases over the past week, with the first in a warehouse worker in the Zhuanghe area of the city on 4 November. Local authorities issued the order on Monday, the state-backed newspaper Global Times reported on Thursday. Unlike other countries, China says frozen foods pose a risk of spreading Covid and authorities reject goods from overseas if the virus is detected on packaging, even though the World Health Organization says neither food nor packaging is a known transmission route. Dalian is a leading port for seafood shipments as well as fruit and some meats. The suspension covers third-party cold storage facilities, bonded warehouses, food production companies and cold storage used by the catering sector, according to a notice posted on local industry websites that could not be verified by Reuters. Dalian’s food sector also faced heavy disruption last year after authorities issued new requirements for cold storage warehouses because of the risk of the coronavirus entering the country on imported foods. Germany’s likely new chancellor Olaf Scholz urged more citizens to get vaccinated against Covid on Thursday as the parliament debated new rules to tackle a fourth wave of infections without imposing lockdowns or making shots mandatory for anyone, Reuters reports. The three parties negotiating to form Germany’s new government have agreed to let a state of emergency in place since the start of the pandemic expire on 25 November, despite record new cases as colder weather and more indoor gatherings turn Europe once more into a coronavirus hotspot. Some German politicians considered the state of emergency, which allows the government to bypass parliament, was no longer necessary given the vaccination drive and the need to create a new normality in Europe’s largest economy. Instead the would-be three-way coalition has proposed legislation allowing existing hygiene measures, such as compulsory face masks in indoor public spaces, to be enforced and tightened - without extending to the lockdowns and curfews deployed in previous waves of infection. The parties also want to re-open vaccination centres and reinstate free Covid tests, Scholz said in a speech opening the debate on the law in the Bundestag lower house of parliament. Free tests had been phased out in a bid to incentivise more citizens to get their Covid jabs, but the vaccination level has flatlined at around 67% in recent weeks and supporters point out that even those who are vaccinated can contract and transmit the virus. “We must prepare our country for winter,” said Scholz, acting finance minister and chancellor candidate of the centre-left Social Democrats that came first in September’s election. The outgoing chancellor Angela Merkel, who did not stand for re-election in September’s vote, watched on from the auditorium. Scholz said workers in care homes should get tested daily to avoid the tragedy of past waves. Vaccines are not mandatory for healthcare and care home workers in Germany, unlike in many other European countries. The federal government and leaders of Germany’s 16 states would meet next week to discuss further measures to tackle the pandemic, said Scholz, who is expected to be voted in as chancellor in early December if coalition talks are successful. He said he favoured measures such as requiring workplaces to check that staff be vaccinated, recovered or have tested negative for coronavirus. Germany’s fourth Covid wave is already stretching capacity in some hospitals, prompting doctors to say they will have to postpone scheduled surgeries and several states to tighten hygiene regulations. In Saxony, for example, restaurant goers must now provide proof of vaccination or past infection - a negative test is no longer enough - and other German states are set to follow. Germany’s public health authority Robert Koch Institute reported a record 50,196 new cases of Covid on Thursday [see 7.23am.], the fourth day in a row it has posted a fresh daily high. Related: German Christmas markets face second year of closures as Covid rates soar Ukraine’s health ministry has proposed expanding the list of occupations for which Covid vaccinations will be compulsory to cover medical personnel and municipal employees, it said on Thursday. The government already obliges teachers and employees of state institutions and local governments to receive vaccinations, without which they face being suspended from work. The new list of roles that will require vaccination will include medical staff, municipal workers and employees of municipal companies, the health minister, Viktor Lyashko, said. Ukraine has registered record coronavirus cases and deaths in recent weeks, and the government has imposed strict lockdowns and promoted vaccination in an attempt to fight back. The ministry has registered 3.16m cases and 74,857 deaths since the start of the pandemic. But it is one of several countries in eastern Europe with vaccination rates among the continent’s lowest. Only about 8.3 million in a population of 41 million are fully vaccinated. The pharmaceutical firm Valneva has asked for an apology and has not ruled out future legal action after the British health secretary told MPs its coronavirus vaccine would not get approval for use in the UK, PA reports. The French company which has a production facility in Livingston in Scotland, had its previous order of about 100m doses torn up by the UK government, with Sajid Javid saying the product would not get the go-ahead from the regulator. But the company, visited by Boris Johnson in January, has since been cleared to supply tens of millions of doses across Europe. David Lawrence, Valneva’s chief financial officer, told BBC Radio Scotland that Javid’s comments in September had caused reputational damage, had financial implications for the company, and “put a question mark next to our vaccine”. A lot of people had lost confidence in our vaccine following the health secretary’s comments in parliament. We had to do a lot of work to restore confidence. Lawrence said Javid was “very clearly wrong” to state the vaccine would not secure approval from the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). We would love to hear an apology from him. The damage he did to our company and our commercial discussions was quite significant and we’re still awaiting an apology for those remarks. Javid originally told MPs the company “would not get approval” by the regulator, but later amended Hansard, the official parliamentary record, to state the vaccine “has not yet gained” clearance. Lawrence said Valneva was still deciding whether or not to sue the government over the comments. “We haven’t ruled out any of our options yet,” he said. Asked for its response to Lawrence’s comments, and whether an apology would be forthcoming, the Department of Health and Social Care said: Clinical trials for the Valneva candidate vaccine have not yet been completed. As such, our independent medicines regulator - the MHRA - has not approved the Valneva candidate vaccine for use in the UK. Canada’s coronavirus epicentres are shifting from dense urban zones to more rural or remote areas that have lower vaccination rates and fewer public health resources, Reuters reports. Some of those areas were spared in earlier waves of the pandemic and are now forced to contend with a widely spreading virulent strain of the coronavirus with fewer options at their disposal to deal with the surge. The country has high overall vaccination rates but pockets of hesitancy allow the virus to spread. In Ontario, Canada’s most-populous province, the Sudbury health region about 250 miles (400km) north of Toronto has tightened restrictions. Officials have brought back capacity limits in public spaces, requiring residents to mask and provide proof of vaccination. Its recent Covid case rate, at 164.7 per 100,000 as of Monday, is by far the highest in the province. It has also seen positivity rates, the percentage of people tested for Covid who test positive, rise to 4.43% as of 24 October. The provincial average that week was 1.56%. “Less dense, less urban areas were relatively spared in this pandemic but ... I think we’re starting to see the non-urban wave of Covid starting,” said Zain Chagla, an infectious diseases physician at St Joseph’s Healthcare in Hamilton, Ontario. Greater Sudbury has more than 160,000 people but less hospital capacity than the Toronto area. “What’s particularly worrisome is the number of cases and the rapid rise of cases combined with the fact that we’re seeing cases kind of all over,” including about a quarter with no identified source, said Penny Sutcliffe, medical officer of health for Public Health Sudbury and Districts. On Wednesday, Ontario paused plans to raise capacity limits at sites such as sex clubs “out of an abundance of caution”. Sutcliffe said the increased transmission in her region could be linked to both an easing of restrictions and widespread Covid fatigue: We’re all tired of the pandemic and tired of having to take precautions. It is a fatigue felt elsewhere. Yukon declared a state of emergency this week after announcing 80 Covid cases in three days, bringing the total active cases to 169 in the territory of 43,000 people. About 22.1% of Yukon’s population is indigenous, compared with the national average of about 5%. In Saskatchewan, the province’s far north-west region, which is home to multiple First Nations communities, had the highest infection rates this week. It also had the lowest vaccination rate as a percentage of the total population, government data showed. In Alberta, the province’s relatively rural northern region that includes the oil sands hub of Fort McMurray had the highest hospitalisation rate and the highest case rate as of early November. This past summer, the Delta variant ran through crowded oil sands housing and a young population that did not see itself at risk of Covid, said a Fort McMurray family doctor Raman Kumar. “There’s more a sense of rugged individualism where people don’t necessarily rely as much on the government.” Now, he said, he and his colleagues are tackling the “three Cs” of vaccine hesitancy: quashing complacency and conspiracies and maximising convenience. “If someone comes in for a prescription refill, it’s always a really good opportunity to mention to someone: ‘Hey, did you get your vaccine?’” Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ The World Health Organization reports that coronavirus deaths rose by 10% in Europe over the past week, making it the only world region where both Covid-19 cases and deaths are steadily increasing. The Robert Koch Institute has recorded another record daily caseload of Covid-19 in Germany, with 50,196 new cases reported on Thursday, the fourth day in a row it has posted a fresh daily high. The country’s likely future chancellor Olaf Scholz said today vaccination centres should be reopened across the country. Slovakia’s number of patients hospitalised with Covid grew to 2,532, the health ministry said, as some hospitals had to limit non-urgent care. Russia has reported 1,237 coronavirus-related deaths in the last 24 hours, that is close to the record one-day toll recorded the previous day. The chief of an intensive care unit in Trieste in northern Italy said hospitals are experiencing a “return to the dark days of the pandemic” amid a rise in coronavirus infections and hospitalisations. Two patients died and a nurse was injured when a fire broke out in a Covid hospital in Ploiesti in central Romania early today. France is at the beginning of a fifth wave of the coronavirus epidemic, the health minister, Olivier Véran, said on Wednesday. “Several neighbouring countries are already in a fifth wave of the Covid epidemic. What we are experiencing in France clearly looks like the beginning of a fifth wave,” Véran said. In the UK, the minister for small business, Paul Scully, said he had hoped unvaccinated care workers would “reconsider” their decision not to take up a Covid-19 jab before today’s deadline. Vic Rayner, chief executive of the National Care Forum, said there was a “human cost” to the UK government’s mandatory jab policy for care home staff. The number of people in England waiting to start routine hospital treatment has risen to a new record high. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said a survey of more than 450 leaders across all parts of the health service found nine out of 10 said the situation they now face is “unsustainable”. Britain’s recovery from its third Covid-19 lockdown slowed sharply over the summer as the economy’s growth was hit by rising infection rates, the pingdemic and global supply shortages. Moderna has applied for approval from Japan’s health ministry to use its Covid-19 vaccines for booster shots. A study in the US has shown a worrying level of Covid transmission among wild deer. Australia is set to surpass the 90% first-dose vaccination coverage rate. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the “extraordinary” achievement is expected to be reached just after midday on Thursday. New Zealand also hit a fresh Covid vaccination milestone, with 90% of Kiwis aged 12 and over having received at least one jab. Meanwhile, the popularity of the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has plummeted in two new polls, as the country struggles to contain a Delta outbreak and transitions to a new era of endemic Covid. That is it from me, Martin Belam. I will be off shortly to host the comments on our Thursday quiz. Andrew Sparrow has UK politics live, Oliver Holmes is covering Cop26 live today, and Lucy Campbell will be along here in a moment to continue bringing you the latest coronavirus news from the UK and around the world. The chief of an intensive care unit in the northern Italian city of Trieste said hospitals are experiencing a “return to the dark days of the pandemic” amid a rise in coronavirus infections and hospitalisations. Umberto Lucangelo said 90% of the Covid-19 patients are unvaccinated while several people in intensive care had joined recent protests against the health pass and vaccinations in the city. He added that hospital units were “at the limit” with staff having to work double-shifts. “And with the bitterness of witnessing the attitude of those who are not getting vaccinated and who believe in science fiction.” Trieste has been at the centre of Italy’s anti-health pass and vaccination protests. The protests intensified after the government made the health pass mandatory for all workers, who have to present proof of immunisation, vaccination or a negative test before entering their workplaces. The rise in infections in recent weeks is partly attributed to the protests but also the low vaccination rate in the city and the strong cross-border commuter flow with neighbouring Slovenia, where the virus has been surging. Lucangelo said some of the no-vaxxers in hospital are repentant. “But others are irreducible deniers who are still convinced that Covid doesn’t exist.” Reuters reports Moderna has applied for approval from Japan’s health ministry to use its Covid-19 vaccines for booster shots Japan plans to start administering booster shots from December this year, and has already approved the use of Pfizer vaccines for a third round of shots. If approved, Moderna’s vaccine would become the second to be approved for booster jabs in Japan. The number of people in England waiting to start routine hospital treatment has risen to a new record high With more than 18 months of Covid disruption to the healthcare service, a total of 5.8 million people were waiting to start treatment at the end of September 2021, according to figures from NHS England. This is the highest number since records began in August 2007. As America’s pandemic – for now – seems to be moving into a new phase with national rates in decline from the September peak and vaccines rolling out to children, a new worry has appeared on the horizon: wildlife passing on the virus. A study shows that deer can catch coronavirus from people and give it to other deer in overwhelming numbers, the first evidence of animals transmitting the virus in the wild. Similar spillover and transmission could be occurring in certain animal populations around the world, with troubling implications for eradicating the virus and potentially even for the emergence of new variants. One-third of Iowa deer sampled over nine months had active infections, with a peak of 80% testing positive between November and January, according to a preprint study that has not yet been peer-reviewed or published. Nearly everything about their study shocked the scientists. They knew deer could be infected with the coronavirus. But they were stunned by the numbers – four out of five deer tested positive at the highest peak – as well as high viral loads that were “truly gobsmacking”, Suresh Kuchipudi, a clinical professor of virology at Penn State and coauthor of the study, told the Guardian. They were also surprised by the fairly clear links in the genetic analysis connecting human transmission to the animals and the rapid transmission to other deer. Read more of Melody Schreiber’s report here: As Covid recedes in US a new worry emerges – wildlife passing on the virus Germany’s likely future chancellor Olaf Scholz said today vaccination centres should be reopened across the country and more citizens be encouraged to get vaccinated against coronavirus given the worrying rise in infections. “The virus is still amongst us and threatening citizens’ health,” said Scholz, the finance minister and chancellor candidate for the centre-left Social Democrats which came first in September’s national election. Reuters reports that German lawmakers are debating a new law providing a bundle of measures to tackle the country’s fourth wave of coronavirus. Germany today reported a daily record of 50,196 cases. A quick snap from Reuters here – Slovakia’s number of patients hospitalised with Covid grew to 2,532, the health ministry said, as some hospitals had to limit non-urgent care. The country of 5.5 million reported 6,546 new Covid cases, not far off its record number from the previous day. Russia has reported 1,237 coronavirus-related deaths in the last 24 hours, that is close to the record one-day toll recorded the previous day. Authorities are waiting to see whether the government-enforced paid holiday for non-essential workers has made a dent in the surge currently affecting the country. This map is a useful reminder of how the Covid situation is worsening across Europe at the moment. In the UK, the minister for small business, Paul Scully, said he had hoped unvaccinated care workers would “reconsider” their decision not to take up a Covid-19 jab before today’s deadline. PA Media quote his LBC radio appearance saying: I’d hope that people would, if they haven’t had their vaccination, go back and reconsider and get that vaccination done if they want to continue working with those vulnerable people. I think there is little point in having people have care off people who may unfortunately help to transmit the disease and send them to hospital. So it is a slightly circular discussion and we want to make sure that people who are receiving care can be as safe as possible. Vic Rayner, chief executive of the National Care Forum, said there was a “human cost” to the UK government’s mandatory jab policy for care home staff, which became effective from today. PA Media quotes Rayner on BBC Breakfast saying that about 8% of staff are leaving their jobs, on top of those who have already quit the sector since the policy was announced. “It’s really challenging for organisations all across the country and I think there’s a very human cost to this policy,” she said, pointing to the cost for the staff leaving, for the people they cared for and the breach of trust between staff and employers asking them to leave. “What it feels like for the care home sector is that we’ve been sort of guinea pigs around the implementation and rollout of this policy.” Asked about the impact of the staff losses, Rayner said: “People who need care who aren’t currently in receipt of it are unable to get it. You are also seeing organisations who are saying, unfortunately, they’re no longer able to provide the care for people they have been [caring for].” Britain’s recovery from its third Covid-19 lockdown slowed sharply over the summer as the economy’s growth was hit by rising infection rates, the pingdemic and global supply shortages. Figures from the Office for National Statistics show that national output expanded by 1.3% in the three months to September, leaving it still more 2.1% below its pre-crisis level in the fourth quarter of 2019. The third-quarter performance followed expansion of 5.5% in the three months to June – a period when restrictions on activity were being lifted. Staff shortages and supply constraints blunted the impact of the ending of remaining lockdown restrictions in July, with a poorer trade performance also acting as a brake on growth. Read more of Larry Elliott’s report here: UK economic recovery slows sharply as GDP grows by 1.3% A couple of responses in the media coming through to Germany’s new record of 50,196 daily Covid cases. [see 7.23am] Reinhard Sager, the president of the association of German local authorities (DLT), called on the catering and event industry to more strictly check that customers are tested, vaccinated or recovered from the virus. “The concern about losing potential customers should be significantly less than the concern about the consequences that threaten if they continue to do too little to fulfil the control obligations,” Sager told the Rheinische Post newspaper. Reuters reports that Dirk Wiese, the deputy parliamentary leader of the Social Democrats, has told ARD television that the parties hoping to form the next coalition government are also considering allowing employers to impose a requirement for their staff to be vaccinated, recovered or tested negative for coronavirus. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said a survey of more than 450 leaders across all parts of the health service found nine out of 10 said the situation they now face is “unsustainable”. PA Media quote Taylor as saying on the BBC Radio 4’s Today Programme: We’ve still got thousands of people in hospital with Covid. Hospitalisation rates have started to fall in the last few days, that’s good, but there are still many patients in hospital. Then we’ve got the normal winter pressures, and then you add the huge amount of pent-up demand that has built up during the pandemic. You put those three things together and you’ve got a situation which almost every leader in the health service now says is unsustainable. Asked what “unsustainable” means, Taylor said it means the quality of care and patient safety is “compromised”, and also means it is very difficult for hospitals to make inroads into the “huge” elective care backlog. Taylor said people are turning up at emergency departments with quite advanced diseases, adding there is “overwhelming demand”. The seven-day average number of patients in hospital with Covid, according to the UK government dashboard, was 9,000 on 6 November. This compares to a peak seven-day average in January at the height of the last wave of the pandemic of 38,434. In the UK, the former health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, the current chair of the health and social care committee in parliament, has been asked on Sky News about the rules on vaccination for care home workers which come into force today. He said that care staff would want to “take the trouble to make sure they’re not spreading the disease asymptomatically”, adding: That is the first responsibility of every doctor, nurse or carer. And every single one that I know has been jabbed. So I think it is the right thing to do to keep patients safer. But I do recognise there are some practical challenges. Asked whether daily testing might not be more effective, since vaccines do not provide 100% protection, he said: Daily testing is not foolproof either. The one thing you can do, that you know will make a big difference, is to get jabbed. And I think that people working in health care do understand that, and they want to put the safety and the protection of the vulnerable people that they are, after all, giving their lives to looking after, they want to put that first. So, look, it’s a really difficult issue. It’s difficult in the care sector. It’s difficult in the NHS. But I do think [the health secretary] Sajid Javid is right to bite the bullet on it. The Robert Koch Institute has recorded another record daily caseload of Covid-19 in Germany, with 50,196 new cases reported on Thursday, the fourth day in a row it has posted a fresh daily high. The total number of confirmed coronavirus cases is 4.89m and total deaths rose 235 to 97,198, according to the Robert Koch Institute. The institute reported a rise in the coronavirus seven-day incidence rate - the number of people per 100,000 to be infected over the last week - to 249 from 232 on Wednesday. Emma Thomasson reports for Reuters that the three German parties in talks to form a coalition government by early December have agreed not to extend a nationwide state of emergency, despite a fourth wave of infections. Instead, they presented a draft law on Monday that would amend existing legislation to allow for measures such as compulsory face masks and social distancing in public spaces to continue to be enforced until next March. The draft law is due to be presented to the Bundestag lower house of parliament today and voted on in a special session a week later. Two patients died and a nurse was injured when a fire broke out in a Covid hospital in the central Romanian city of Ploiesti early today, officials have said. The fire, which was quickly extinguished, broke out at around 2am, and affected one room. Fifteen patients in the wing were moved to another hospital. Luiza Ilie reports for Reuters that there were more than 17,400 Covid-19 patients, including 310 children, being treated in Romanian hospitals on Thursday, including 1,823 in intensive care units. Romania has the second lowest vaccination rate in the European Union and one of the highest Covid-19 mortality rates in the world, with record daily infection numbers throughout October stretching its hospitals. Hello, it is Martin Belam here from London. The morning media round in the UK will be dominated, I expect, by discussion of developments at Cop26. I’ll bring you any Covid lines that emerge. The minister fronting questions for the government today is the minister for small business, Paul Scully. Here’s a reminder of the UK’s latest coronavirus figures. The World Health Organization reports that coronavirus deaths rose by 10% in Europe over the past week, making it the only world region where both Covid-19 cases and deaths are steadily increasing. It was the sixth consecutive week that the virus has risen across the continent as many nations experience their fourth or fifth waves. WHO said there were about 3.1 million new cases globally, about a 1% increase from the previous week. Nearly two-thirds of the coronavirus infections - 1.9 million - were in Europe, where cases rose by 7%, according to a weekly report. The number of weekly Covid-19 deaths fell by about 4% worldwide and declined in every region except Europe. The countries with the highest numbers of new cases worldwide were the United States, Russia, Britain, Turkey and Germany. Out of the 61 countries WHO includes in its European region, which includes Russia and stretches to Central Asia, 42% reported a jump in cases of at least 10% in the last week. A very happy Thursday to all and thanks for joining us we go through all the latest Covid developments. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be brining you the news from over here in Sydney, Australia. Europe has emerged as the only region in the world where both Covid cases and deaths steadily increased over the past week, the World Health Organization reports. Covid deaths rose by 10% and it now the sixth consecutive week that the virus has risen across the continent. Nearly two-thirds of global infections - 1.9 million - were in Europe, where cases rose by 7%, the UN health agency said in its weekly report. A coalition of 10 Republican US states sued the federal government to try to block a Covid-19 vaccine requirement for healthcare workers on Wednesday. The lawsuit contends that the vaccine requirement threatens the jobs of millions of healthcare workers and could “exacerbate an alarming shortage” in healthcare fields, particularly in rural areas where some health workers have been hesitant to get the shots. New Biden administration rules will require federal contractors to ensure their workers are vaccinated and businesses with more than 100 employees require their workers to get vaccinated or wear masks and get tested weekly for the coronavirus. All of the mandates are scheduled to take effect on 4 January. Australia is set to surpass the 90% first-dose vaccination coverage rate. Health minister Greg Hunt said the “extraordinary” achievement is expected to be reached just after midday on Thursday. France is at the beginning of a fifth wave of the coronavirus epidemic, Health Minister Olivier Veran said on Wednesday. “Several neighbouring countries are already in a fifth wave of the Covid epidemic, what we are experiencing in France clearly looks like the beginning of a fifth wave,” Veran said. New Zealand also hit a fresh Covid vaccination milestone, with 90% of Kiwis aged 12 and over having received at least one jab. Meanwhile, prime minister Jacinda Ardern’s popularity has plummeted in two new polls, as the country struggles to contain a Delta outbreak and transitions to a new era of endemic Covid. Moderna Covid-19 vaccine patent dispute headed to court after US National Institutes of Health scientists say they played “a major role” in developing the vaccine and intends to defend its claim as co-owner of patents on the shot, NIH Director Dr. Francis Collins told Reuters. Australia will share a further 7.5 million Covid-19 vaccine doses with Indonesia, bringing its total pledge to 10 million doses. The first case in the UK of a pet dog catching coronavirus, apparently from its owners, has reportedly been detected. A fifth lion at Singapore Zoo has also tested positive for Covid-19, the Animal and Veterinary Service (AVS) said on Wednesday. Israel to hold world’s first drill to test readiness for the possible emergence of a lethal ‘Omega’ variant. The drill, scheduled for Thursday, will take the format of a war games exercise and will test the capabilities of government departments and national agencies to respond to the emergence of the variant. Brazil has had 12,273 new cases of coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours, and 280 deaths, the health ministry said on Wednesday. France is at the beginning of a fifth wave of the coronavirus epidemic, health minister Olivier Veran said on Wednesday. Demand for Covid booster jabs jumped in France after Emmanuel Macron said a top-up dose would be necessary for people to retain their vaccine passes. The US has brokered a deal between Johnson &amp; Johnson and the Covax vaccine-sharing program for the delivery of the company’s Covid vaccine to people living in conflict zones. The UK reported another 39,329 Covid cases and a further 214 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, official data showed. Russia’s coronavirus death toll surpassed 250,000. The country reported a record 1,239 Covid-related fatalities in the previous 24 hours, taking the official death toll to 250,454.A federal appeals court granted Donald Trump’s request to temporarily block the National Archives from releasing White House documents to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The National Archives had previously been expected to start sending the records tomorrow, after a lower court dismissed Trump’s claims of executive privilege over the materials. The appeals court will hear oral arguments in the case on 30 November because the judges granted the request for an expedited schedule to decide the matter. The three judges who will hear the case were all nominated by Democrats, which will likely be reassuring to members of the select committee. Joe Biden marked Veterans Day at Arlington National Cemetery. The president laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and delivered a speech thanking veterans for their service. “Our veterans represent the best of America,” Biden said. “You are the very spine of America, not just the backbone. You’re the spine of this country.” Joe Manchin is reportedly wavering on the timeline for passing Democrats’ reconciliation package, due to concerns about inflation. According to Axios, the senator is considering pushing the bill’s passage to 2022 after a labor department report showed that US inflation hit a 30-year high last month. Manchin has expressed fears that more government spending could supercharge inflation, although the White House has insisted the reconciliation package will help lower prices. Gloria Oladipo and Oliver Laughland report: Kevin Gough, a defense attorney in the trial over the killing of Ahmaud Arbery, has sparked outrage after asking the court to limit the number of Black pastors who can sit with the Arbery family, claiming their presence could influence the almost entirely white jury. On Thursday, while addressing Judge Timothy Walmsley, who is presiding over the trial, Gough claimed that high-profile Black pastors such as the Rev Al Sharpton and the Rev Jesse Jackson could be “intimidating” for jury members. “There’s only so many pastors they [Arbery’s family] can have. If their pastor’s Rev Al Sharpton right now, that’s fine. But that’s it. We don’t want any more Black pastors in here or others,” said Gough. As others in the court discussed Sharpton’s presence in the court room, Gough went on to say, “If a bunch of folks came in here dressed like Colonel Sanders with white masks … ” before being cut off. Walmsley refused Gough’s request, stating: “I’m not going to start blanketly excluding members of the public from this courtroom.” Sharpton said in a statement: “The arrogant insensitivity of attorney Kevin Gough in asking a judge to bar me or any minister of the family’s choice underscores the disregard for the value of the human life lost and the grieving of a family in need spiritual and community support.” Read more: The shouting that unfolded on Wednesday in Kyle Rittenhouse’s homicide trial has thrust the presiding judge, Bruce Schroeder, and his style of unusual lectures and quirky questions in court under the spotlight. Schroeder heavily admonished prosecutors in the trial in Kenosha, Wisconsin, questioned the authenticity of some pinch-to-zoom footage presented in evidence, and apparently forgot to silence his phone in court, which at one point rang with a song used at Donald Trump’s rallies. The trial is in its second week. The defense team rested its case on Thursday afternoon, setting the stage for closing arguments on Monday, and the prosecution said it would seek approval for the jury to consider lesser charges against the teenager on some criminal counts. Kyle Rittenhouse had taken the stand in his own defense on Wednesday and Thursday amid dramatic scenes in the courtroom. Rittenhouse, 18,has pleaded not guilty to six charges, including first-degree intentional homicide, first-degree reckless homicide and first-degree attempted intentional homicide. He killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, 27, when he shot them with a military-style assault rifle during night-time protests in August 2020, after a white police officer shot a local Black man, Jacob Blake, in the back and gravely wounded him. The Kenosha county assistant district attorney, James Kraus, on Thursday said he planned to ask the judge to allow the jury to consider lesser charges on the counts involving Huber and Grosskreutz, a move that would lower the burden of proof for conviction. Meanwhile, proceedings had became highly charged on Wednesday. Rittenhouse sobbed on the stand, the defense requested a mistrial and the judge gestured and shouted angrily at the lead prosecutor, accusing him of asking questions of the defendant that were legally out of bounds. Read more: Pressure mounts for Mark Meadows, the former White House chief of staff, to cooperate with the House select committee investigation into the Capitol riot. The White House counsel has alerted Meadows’ lawyer that Joe Biden will not assert executive privilege over documents and deposition that lawmakers investigating the 6 January insurrection are requesting, the Washington Post reports. Meadows was subpoenaed in September but has dragged his feet in complying indicating that Donald Trump has requested he respect the former president’s “executive privilege” over confidential communications with staff. “The President believes that the constitutional protections of executive privilege should not be used to shield information reflecting an effort to subvert the Constitution itself, and indeed believes that such an assertion in this circumstance would be at odds with the principles that underlie the privilege,” White House deputy counsel Jonathan Su wrote to Meadows’ lawyer. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: A federal appeals court granted Donald Trump’s request to temporarily block the National Archives from releasing White House documents to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The National Archives had previously been expected to start sending the records tomorrow, after a lower court dismissed Trump’s claims of executive privilege over the materials. The appeals court will hear oral arguments in the case on 30 November because the judges granted the request for an expedited schedule to decide the matter. The three judges who will hear the case were all nominated by Democrats, which will likely be reassuring to members of the select committee. Joe Biden marked Veterans Day at Arlington National Cemetery. The president laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and delivered a speech thanking veterans for their service. “Our veterans represent the best of America,” Biden said. “You are the very spine of America, not just the backbone. You’re the spine of this country.” Joe Manchin is reportedly wavering on the timeline for passing Democrats’ reconciliation package, due to concerns about inflation. According to Axios, the senator is considering pushing the bill’s passage to 2022 after a labor department report showed that US inflation hit a 30-year high last month. Manchin has expressed fears that more government spending could supercharge inflation, although the White House has insisted the reconciliation package will help lower prices. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. A panel of three appeals court judges will hear arguments in the case over Donald Trump’s effort to block the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection from obtaining White House documents. Those three judges will be Patricia Millett, Robert Wilkins and Ketanji Brown Jackson. As Politico’s Kyle Cheney notes, all three judges were nominated by Democrats: A federal appeals court has granted Donald Trump’s request to temporarily block the National Archives from releasing documents to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The court has also set a hearing for November 30 to hear oral arguments in the case, granting the request for an expedited schedule. The archives were expected to start sending Trump White House documents to the select committee tomorrow, but this ruling will alter that timeline. A lower court has already ruled against Trump, dismissing the former president’s claims of executive privilege over the materials. Joe Biden will also travel to Detroit, Michigan, next week to tout the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill. “On Wednesday, November 17, the President will travel to Detroit, Michigan to visit General Motors’ Factory ZERO electric vehicle assembly plant,” the White House said in a new statement. “He will discuss how the Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal delivers for the American people by accelerating the expansion of electric vehicle charging infrastructure and supply chains, reducing emissions to fight the climate crisis, improving air quality, and creating good-paying, union jobs across the country.” The White House announced earlier today that Biden will also travel to Woodstock, New Hampshire, on Tuesday to visit a bridge and deliver remarks on the infrastructure bill. The president plans to sign the bill on Monday at the White House, where he will be joined by a bipartisan group of lawmakers who helped craft the legislation. A group of congressional Republicans who helped pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill last Friday are facing calls for political punishment by their own party, including the threat of having their committee assignments stripped for supporting Joe Biden’s agenda, according to reports this week. Several hardline Republicans, including the Colorado congresswoman Lauren Boebert and former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, have publicly urged retaliation against party colleagues who voted for the $1tn bill. Some members who were among the GOP rank and file who helped the bill pass the House say they have received death threats. “That 13 House Republicans provided the votes needed to pass this is absurd,” the Texas representative Chip Roy said, and the Washington Post has reported. Florida’s Matt Gaetz had fumed early on Saturday, tweeting: “I can’t believe Republicans just gave the Democrats their socialism bill.” House speaker Nancy Pelosi has already called for Republican Paul Gosar to be investigated by the House ethics committee and law enforcement over his violent tweet about Joe Biden and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. “Threats of violence against Members of Congress and the President of the United States must not be tolerated,” Pelosi said on Twitter, calling for minority leader Kevin McCarthy to “join in condemning this horrific video”. So far, McCarthy has remained silent about Gosar’s tweet, even as many Democrats demand that the Republican leader take action. The White House has also denounced the violent tweet. Karine Jean-Pierre, the deputy White House press secretary, said on Tuesday, “There is no place for any type of violence or that type of language in the political system. And it should not be happening, and we should be condemning it.” A group of House Democrats is introducing a proposal to censure Republican congressman Paul Gosar over his violent tweet about Joe Biden and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. Gosar’s tweet included an altered video showing him striking Ocasio-Cortez with a sword and appearing to attack Biden, prompting intense criticism from the congressman’s Democratic colleagues. Now several of those lawmakers -- Jackie Speier, Jim Cooper, Brenda Lawrence, Sylvia Garcia, Veronica Escobar, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Rashida Tlaib, Eric Swalwell , Nikema Williams and Ayanna Pressley -- are demanding that Gosar be censured. “For a Member of Congress to post a manipulated video on his social media accounts depicting himself killing Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking President Biden is a clear cut case for censure,” the lawmakers said in a statement. “For that Member to post such a video on his official Instagram account and use his official congressional resources in the House of Representatives to further violence against elected officials goes beyond the pale.” The lawmakers warned that the Capitol insurrection demonstrated how “vicious and vulgar messaging can and does foment actual violence,” and they denounced House minority leader Kevin McCarthy’s silence about Gosar’s tweet. “Violence against women in politics is a global phenomenon meant to silence women and discourage them from seeking positions of authority and participating in public life, with women of color disproportionately impacted,” they said. “Minority Leader McCarthy’s silence is tacit approval and just as dangerous.” Donald Trump, the former US president, has been scrambling this week to make a last-ditch legal bid to block the release on Friday of sensitive White House records related to the deadly 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol. The National Archives, a federal agency that holds presidential files, is poised to give congressional investigators hundreds of pages and other material, such as video clips, that Trump wants to keep secret. The ex-president’s lawyers this week tried and failed to persuade district judge Tanya Chutkan to put on hold her ruling that allows a House of Representatives committee investigating the attack to access phone records, visitor logs and other documents. Now, with time running out, Trump’s hopes are pinned on the influential US court of appeals for the District of Columbia in Washington. His legal team have asked it to overturn Chutkan’s ruling and stop the National Archives handing over the first documents on Friday. As is customary, the DC circuit court will randomly assign three judges to a panel to consider the appeal. If they decline to issue a preliminary injunction, Trump is expected to appeal to the supreme court through its “shadow docket”, which allows justices to quickly decide emergency matters without full briefs and arguments. Joe Biden will visit Woodstock, New Hampshire, on Tuesday to continue pitching the benefits of bipartisan infrastructure bill, which he will sign on Monday. According to the White House, Biden will visit a bridge in Woodstock and “discuss how the Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal delivers for the American people by repairing and rebuilding the nation’s roads and bridges while strengthening resilience to climate change, improving equity and safety for all users, and creating good-paying, union jobs that grow the economy”. Biden visited the Port of Baltimore yesterday to tout the benefits of the bill, saying, “Infrastructure week has finally arrived.” The racial justice litmus-test trial of the white killers of 25-year-old Black Georgian Ahmaud Arbery is currently underway in Brunswick, in the south-east of the state. Earlier today the jury was shown video of Arbery walking around a vacant property on an earlier visit to the mostly white southern Georgia neighborhood where hewas later fatally shot after being chased by three white men who are now on trial for murder. Defendants Gregory McMichael, 65, his son Travis McMichael, 35, and their neighbor William “Roddie” Bryan, 52, have pleaded not guilty to murder, aggravated assault and false imprisonment. They face life in prison if convicted of murder. The trial is in its second week of hearing arguments and evidence in a case closely-watched and widely regarded as a test for the state of racial justice in the US, although it got underway with a jury of 11 white members and only one Black member, vastly out of proportion with the county demographics. Meanwhile, after New York politician and civil rights campaigner Al Sharpton showed up, there has apparently been some protest from the defense... Speaking outside the Glynn county courthouse as the trial opened, Arbery’s mother, Wanda Cooper-Jones, said she found the final jury’s racial makeup “devastating” but was confident the jury would “make the right decision”. The defendants have argued they thought Arbery might have been fleeing a crime, rather than going on one of his regular jogs in the area, and they pursued in an attempt to make a citizen’s arrest when he ran through Satilla Shores, a suburb of the small coastal city of Brunswick, south-eastern Georgia, in February 2020. The man who owned the house under construction where Arbery was seen on surveillance tape wandering around, Larry English, has said he called 911 - but had also called 911 previously when a white couple were caught on tape similarly intruding on the property. English has also said, via a lawyer, that he later concluded that Arbery had been stopping by a faucet on his property for a drink of water. Drilling down a little now on Donald Trump’s request for the federal appeals court to block the release of his White House records from the National Archive in relation to the January 6 insurrection at the US Capitol by his extremist supporters. Those more steeped in court-speak have been examining some of the language in the legal documents. And further, on what the committe and the National Archives are - or more importantly are not - arguing today: And Here’s where the day stands so far: Donald Trump is asking a federal appeals court to temporarily block the release of White House records to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The National Archives was expected to start sending the records tomorrow, after a federal judge dismissed Trump’s claims of executive privilege over the materials. Trump is appealing that ruling, and he has now asked the court to block the transmission of the documents until the appeal is heard. Joe Biden marked Veterans Day at Arlington National Cemetery. The president laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and delivered a speech thanking veterans for their service. “Our veterans represent the best of America,” Biden said. “You are the very spine of America, not just the backbone. You’re the spine of this country.” Joe Manchin is reportedly wavering on the timeline for passing Democrats’ reconciliation package, due to concerns about inflation. According to Axios, the senator is considering pushing the bill’s passage to 2022 after a labor department report showed that US inflation hit a 30-year high last month. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. US district judge Tanya Chutkan issued a ruling this week that Donald Trump could not claim executive privilege over the White House documents subpoenaed by the House select committee investigating the insurrection. Chutkan said in her ruling: “His position that he may override the express will of the executive branch appears to be premised on the notion that his executive power ‘exists in perpetuity’... but presidents are not kings, and plaintiff is not president.” Trump’s lawyers are appealing Chutkan’s decision, and they are now asking a federal appeals court to grant a temporary injunction to prevent the National Archives from sending the documents to the committee tomorrow. Donald Trump’s lawyers argued that a temporary injunction would allow the courts to fairly consider his appeal of the lower court’s decision to allow the National Archives to send the documents to the select committee. “If no administrative injunction issues from this Court, then the records at issue will be produced on November 12, at 6:00 p.m.,” they said in their court filing. “Put simply, this motion seeks only a brief pause in the production; it will not prejudice the other arguments or requests to be made by the parties in this important appeal.” The filing notes that both parties in the lawsuit believe the matter “should be handled expeditiously,” as the select committee looks to gather more information about the Capitol insurrection as quickly as possible. Donald Trump has now formally asked a federal appeals court to temporarily block a lower court’s ruling that cleared the way for the National Archives to send White House documents to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The new filing from Trump’s legal team requests “a brief administrative injunction to maintain the status quo and allow the Court to consider, on an expedited basis, whether to grant an injunction pending appeal”. The National Archives had been expected to start sharing documents with the select committee tomorrow, after a federal judge dismissed Trump’s claims of executive privilege over the materials. The blog will have more details coming up, so stay tuned. Speaking at Arlington National Cemetery to mark Veterans Day, Joe Biden thanked all of those who have served in the US military. “Our veterans represent the best of America,” Biden said. “You are the very spine of America, not just the backbone. You’re the spine of this country.” The president emphasized that Americans owe veterans a debt of gratitude for protecting their freedoms at great personal sacrifice, saying many troops have been “through hell” fighting in the country’s wars. “We’ve asked so much of you for so long, and our nation is grateful,” Biden said. The secretary of veterans affairs, Denis McDonough, delivered remarks at Arlington National Cemetery to mark Veterans Day. The cabinet secretary expressed his gratitude to all Americans who have served in the military and asked the country to “remember the terrible cost” of war. “Millions of veterans have risked their lives to protect the democratic ideals of this great nation,” McDonough said. “We live in peace and prosperity today because of them, because of you.” Joe Biden is also scheduled to speak at Arlington, after the president laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. Stay tuned. Joe Biden participated in a wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery this morning to mark Veterans Day. The president was joined by first lady Jill Biden and veteran affairs secretary Denis McDonough as he laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. This year marks the centennial anniversary of the tomb, as the first unknown soldier was buried there in 1921, after the anonymous man died in World War I. In honor of Veterans Day, a group of Democratic lawmakers is reviving an effort to compensate the relatives of Black service members who were denied certain benefits because of their race. The AP reports: The new legislative effort would benefit surviving spouses and all living descendants of Black WWII veterans whose families were denied the opportunity to build wealth with housing and educational benefits through the GI Bill. Since 1944, those benefits have been offered to millions of veterans transitioning to civilian life. But due to racism and discrimination in how they were granted through local Veterans Affairs offices, many Black WWII veterans received substantially less money toward purchasing a home or continuing their education. The Senate bill was to be introduced Thursday by Sen. Rev. Raphael Warnock of Georgia, the son of a WWII veteran. Warnock shared a photo of his father on Twitter, saying, “My dad served in the Army during World War II. Today on Veterans Day, I’m especially grateful for him and all of our Georgia veterans who have sacrificed so much for our country.” Brad Raffensperger, Georgia’s top election official, was sitting at his kitchen counter with his wife, Tricia, in early January, his cell phone on a metal stand so he could take notes. On the other line was Donald Trump, who had lost Georgia to Joe Biden in November, a result confirmed by multiple recounts. The president had a blunt and unimaginable request for Raffensperger: find enough votes to flip the results of the election in Georgia. Raffensperger, a mild-mannered engineer by training, refused to go along with the president’s request, but saw it as a threat, he writes in his new book Integrity Counts. He and his family have since been subject to a barrage of harassment, including death threats, from Trump and his supporters. In an interview with the Guardian, Raffensperger said he has not spoken to Trump since, and he does not expect to. He added that he still gets occasional threats because of the election results. Read the full interview: House speaker Nancy Pelosi and her congressional delegation have now concluded their trip to Glasgow for the Cop26 climate change conference. “Throughout this monumental conference, our delegation shared with the world our progress in advancing our legislation to Build Back Better, which, with the Bipartisan Infrastructure Framework, represents an historic $1 trillion investment in realigning our economy to be greener and cleaner,” Pelosi said as she left Glasgow. “When our delegation returns to Washington, we bring a re-energized spirit of ambition, boldness and urgency to the climate fight.” The Democratic speaker has said she intends to pass the reconciliation package next week, but it remains unclear whether the Congressional Budget Office will be able to finish its analysis of the bill on time. A handful of centrists in the House Democratic caucus have said they will not support the reconciliation package until they see the CBO report, and that demand has already delayed the bill’s passage once. Meanwhile, House Democrats are still waiting for the Congressional Budget Office’s analysis of the reconciliation package because a handful of their centrist colleagues say they will not support the bill until they see the report. The CBO released its cost estimates for four parts of the bill yesterday, but the agency has said it will take longer to score the entire proposal. “The analysis of the bill’s many provisions is complicated, and CBO will provide a cost estimate for the entire bill as soon as practicable,” Phillip L Swagel, the CBO’s director, said in a statement on Tuesday. “When we determine a release date for the cost estimate for the entire bill, we will provide advance notice.” So the House is waiting on the CBO score, and the Senate is expected to make changes to the House-passed bill anyway. That means Democrats still have many hurdles to overcome before passing the bill. The odds of them passing the bill before the end of the year are seeming slimmer and slimmer. The Guardian’s Dominic Rushe and Larry Elliott report: Pressure on America’s central bank to raise interest rates has intensified after rising energy costs, supply shortages and increased consumption sent US inflation surging to a level not seen for more than 30 years. Although the Federal Reserve has repeatedly insisted price pressures will prove “transitory”, financial markets were taken aback by a 6.2% increase in the cost of living in the world’s biggest economy over the past year. A labor department report released on Wednesday showed prices rose by 0.9% in October alone – more than double the 0.4% jump in September – to push the annual rate of inflation to its highest level since December 1990, a time when global oil prices had risen sharply due to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. The news came after the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve tried to downplay rising costs, arguing they are a temporary phenomena driven by Covid-19’s unprecedented impact on the global supply chain. Joe Biden has acknowledged that prices are too high in the US right now, and he has pledged to address the problem. “Everything from a gallon of gas to loaf of bread costs more. And it’s worrisome, even though wages are going up,” Biden said in Baltimore yesterday. “We still face challenges, and we have to tackle them. We have to tackle them head on.” The president argued the bipartisan infrastructure bill would help to address these problems by easing supply-chain issues, which will lower prices. “We’re already in the midst of a historic economic recovery. And thanks to those steps we’re taking, very soon we’re going to see the supply chain start catching up with demand,” Biden said. “So not only will we see more record-breaking job growth, we’ll see lower prices and faster deliveries as well.” The White House announced yesterday that Biden will sign the infrastructure bill on Monday, a week and a half after the House passed the legislation and sent it to the president’s desk. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Senator Joe Manchin, one of the holdouts in Democrats’ negotiations over the reconciliation package, is now wavering on the bill due to concerns about inflation. Axios reports: Red-hot inflation data validates the instinct of [Manchin] to punt President Biden’s Build Back Better agenda until next year – potentially killing a quick deal on the $1.75tn package, people familiar with the matter tell Axios. ... With a limited number of legislative days left in the year, Manchin is content to focus on the issues that need to be addressed, Axios is told. They include funding the government, raising the debt ceiling and passing the National Defense Authorization Act. The news comes after the labor department reported that US inflation hit a 30-year high last month, with prices rising by 6.2% over the past year. In response to the labor department’s report, Manchin said on Twitter: “By all accounts, the threat posed by record inflation to the American people is not ‘transitory’ and is instead getting worse. From the grocery store to the gas pump, Americans know the inflation tax is real and DC can no longer ignore the economic pain Americans feel every day.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Many former residents of a settlement in Papua New Guinea who claim they were forcibly evicted nearly a decade ago say they are living without access to sanitation, electricity and water and some have faced homelessness, violence and community tension as a result of the move, according to a new report. In 2012 the Paga Hill Development Company (PHDC), a PNG registered company with significant ties to Australia, announced its plan to create the Paga Hill Estate, which would include a resort, casino, and an aquarium. In 2012 police, backed by bulldozers, began moving into the settlement of Paga Hill in Port Moresby, to clear the area. Roughly 3,000 residents of Paga Hill were relocated to other settlements around the capital. A new report by Aid Watch and Jubilee Australia contains interviews with 190 former Paga Hill residents, some of whom allege their displacement has led to a range of problems. According to the report, 96% of people interviewed said they had access to appropriate sanitation, water, electricity, healthcare, and education in Paga Hill. Just six per cent say they have access to sanitation where they live today, while 11% say they have access to electricity and only 37% say they have consistent and free access to water. “These are the ultimate necessities we need to live and survive every day that have been taken from them,” said Natalie Lowrey, campaign coordinator at Aid Watch. PHDC told Paga Hill residents they would be relocated to Six Mile settlement, east of Port Moresby, where each household would be given a land title, with access to electricity and water. But nearly a decade later, many people at Six Mile are living in tents that are now breaking after years of use, there is only one water tap that works sporadically and electricity and sanitation are inadequate, according to the report. In 2014, after further evictions, some Paga Hill residents were relocated to Gerehu, a large suburb north of Port Moresby, which has not been connected to the electricity grid. The sole water tap is located in a neighbouring community, and former Paga Hill residents say they have to pay to use it. Some say they’ve sustained back injuries from carrying the water the distance home, others claim they’ve been attacked by residents of the community where the tap is located. In a statement, PHDC said the matters raised in the report have long been resolved by the PNG courts. The company added that its relocation of the community, despite not being legally required to do so, was a landmark case and was conducted legally. “Specifically, the courts confirmed the settlement’s status as informal/illegal, finding there was no impropriety in our acquisition of the land at Paga Hill, nor in the eviction process, and that no compensation was warranted. Despite not being legally required to do so, PHDC provided land with access to services, financial and other assistance as part of a landmark relocation that was praised by the United Nations in PNG,” the company said. Roy Trivedy, who was the UN’s resident coordinator in PNG at the time the resettlement took place, spoke at an official event marking the handover of land to some Paga Hill community members, congratulating PHDC and the Paga Hill residents on the resettlement programme. However, he told the Sydney Morning Herald in 2017 that while he had been impressed with the written plans for resettlement, he had not been involved with Paga Hill since. “I’ve asked the company to stop using my name to endorse something I haven’t seen,” he told the newspaper. PHDC disputes Trivedy’s account of his limited knowledge of the relocation plans, saying he was involved in “multiple meetings to do with evictions and our relocation efforts”. Allan Mogerema, a Paga Hill youth leader, said the forced relocation has led to conflict between communities. “I’ve lost two friends, murdered in the neighbourhoods they were forced to move to,” he said. “A lot of these communities are very cramped and so when new people come in, in this case were forced in because they didn’t have a choice, it created conflict. All of these people are just trying to survive in pretty hard conditions,” he said. The report also alleged that 25% of those interviewed directly blame the death of family members or friends on the demolitions, evictions, and relocation. “Imagine you’re removed from the place you love, your home, you lose all your possessions. It was a very traumatising experience and left many people very depressed,” said Mogerema. “Of course, people died from this.” Lowrey added: “Many of those who died were elderly, those interviewed said they just didn’t have access to the right healthcare where they were relocated to,” she said. “They died earlier than they should have because of that.” PHDC said former Paga Hill residents have already attempted to sue them for compensation, with the matter dismissed on every occasion and that they are not aware of any grounds for compensation. It also disputes the account of Paga Hill as an “idyllic” community before the evictions occurred, saying the settlement was “informal, illegal [and] lacked basic infrastructure”.Darryl McDonald has known Josh Giddey since he was a little tyke. The 57-year-old former NBL star, synonymous with the league’s glory years of the 1990s and 2000s, played against Josh’s dad, Melbourne Tigers champion Warrick. Warrick Giddey would then serve as assistant coach at the Tigers where McDonald played out his career. They coached juniors together at the Tigers and against each other in school basketball. McDonald remembers Josh Giddey buzzing around basketball camps as a youngster having fun and completing all the drills. More recently, he has worked closely over the last 12 months with the young gun who, as a first-round draft pick, is making waves in his rookie NBA season. “There’s this one day I remember watching him play,” McDonald says. “Josh was playing for the Tigers in the Under-18 championships against Bulleen at the State Basketball Centre [in Melbourne’s outer eastern suburbs]. “I watched him come off a pick and roll and throw a left-handed dart to the opposite corner. When I saw that I’m thinking ‘that’s different, I haven’t seen nobody at that age do that’. And mind you, he’s right-handed. I’d heard he was good but it was that game, I thought ‘OK he’s special’.” During lockdown in Melbourne last year, a mutual contact reached out to McDonald. “Josh wants to work with you” was the message. So, the pair got to work at Hoop City, a new bayside state-of-the-art basketball facility. “I remember him as a little tyke,” McDonald says. “When I first started working him out, I walked in and saw him and said to myself, ‘damn this guy is a 6ft 8in point guard, those guys don’t grow on trees. It was obvious he had NBA potential. His game and what he can do is made for the NBA. “I love his poise. You can’t rush him, he plays at his own pace. And he’s a rookie, sixth pick of the draft, people are going to try him but he doesn’t back down and I love that about him. “He’s out there hooping, playing his game, doing what he can do and being effective. Just put the ball in his hands and let him make plays. I look at Luka Doncic and I think Josh has that same ability – that size, being able to look over defence and make plays.” Late in 2020, Giddey headed to Adelaide for his debut NBL season where he would claim Rookie of the Year. At the end of the season, he reconnected with McDonald. “He hit me on Instagram – ‘I’m coming home for six weeks, let’s get in the gym’,” McDonald says. “His agent also hit me and said ‘I need you to work with him and get him ready before America’, so we went Monday to Friday for about five weeks.” In the lead-up to July’s NBA draft, Giddey would lift weights each morning, shoot with Andrew Gaze then meet McDonald at 8pm. “It was a lot of ball handling, a lot of pick and roll stuff. He worked hard. We’d go an hour and a half every night and he hit every drill hard,” McDonald says. “Not one day did I walk in and have to say ‘listen dude, if you don’t want to go, take the day off’.” Watching Giddey play in the NBA is a “joy” for McDonald. “I just love what I’m seeing,” he says. “Josh playing but playing really, really well. I mean he’s just turned 19. Watching his ability to create, give people shots, get himself shots. You see why he’s on this stage.” Jack McVeigh played with Giddey for the Adelaide 36ers last NBL season. He recalls teammate Brendan Teys receiving a call from a private number during a road trip. “It was an NBA scout, might’ve been Golden State,” McVeigh says. “He didn’t ask a single question about basketball. Teysy said afterwards ‘it’s so good I didn’t have to lie’. The call was so easy because Josh is a good kid, a great teammate, he listens, his head’s screwed on. He doesn’t take himself too seriously and has all the traits you want in a human being.” It might be tempting to underestimate the pressure Giddey was under in his first NBL year, but McVeigh says the Australian league is “no joke”.“Guys who have played in the NBA were picking him up,” he says. “My rookie year was tough and I was 21. He was 18, had a lot of pressure and was playing for a life-changing opportunity. And he was cool and calm the entire time.” McVeigh loves the all-in support the Australian basketball community has for its latest breakout star. “From kids buying his jersey to playing with him on [video game NBA] 2K to the guys who play major roles in the NBL getting around him and showing him support and love,” he says. “Everyone wants the kid to succeed.”It was a short, simple question put to Scott Morrison in a radio interview. “Prime minister Scott Morrison, have you ever told a lie in public life?” His answer was equally brief: “I don’t believe I have, no. No.” Morrison made the comments to 3AW radio on Friday, in an interview repeating his false claim that Labor wants to increase the price of petrol. While it’s impossible to disprove what Morrison believes, we can jog his memory. Here are five topics on which Morrison has made false or incorrect statements for readers to judge, including instances where the prime minister’s denials might be construed themselves as lies. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning 1. Electric vehicles During the 2019 election, Morrison claimed that electric vehicles couldn’t tow boats or caravans or reach camping spots and that “Bill Shorten wants to end the weekend when it comes to his electric vehicle policy”. On Tuesday, while releasing his own electric vehicle policy, Morrison was asked about his past comments “campaigning against” them, and replied: But I didn’t. That is just a Labor lie. I was against Bill Shorten’s mandate policy, trying to tell people what to do with their lives, what cars they were supposed to drive and where they could drive. Labor’s policy included a target of 50% of new vehicles to be electric by 2030, but did not include a mandate. On Thursday, when Channel Seven’s Natalie Barr noted there was no mandate in Labor’s policy, Morrison claimed “they were going to put up the price of fuel”. In fact, Labor wanted pollution standards for vehicles and subsidies for electric vehicles – neither of which puts up the price of petrol. 2. Submarines In September when Morrison revealed the new Aukus alliance, purchase of nuclear submarines and cancellation of the $90bn conventional submarine contract with France, he stressed that “poor performance” of Naval Group was not to blame. Asked about “blowouts, delays and complications”, Morrison replied he didn’t believe those criticisms were all founded in fact. But under increasing diplomatic pressure from France, Morrison claimed on 1 November that “our concerns over the early delays and the delivery on, particularly on things like Australian industry content, time and cost … had raised concerns in my mind.” When French president Emmanuel Macron accused Morrison of lying about giving France notice, private text messages were leaked to refute the claims, revealing Macron had asked: “Should I expect good or bad news for our joint submarines ambitions?” The texts show the opposite of what was intended – that 48 hours before Australia canned the Naval Group contract, Macron was still in the dark. Morrison also falsely accused journalists of “taking selfies” with Macron and that he would not “cop sledging at Australia”, when Macron’s criticism was directed at Morrison, not Australia. 3. Vaccination rollout ‘not a race’ As Australia’s vaccination rollout stalled in mid-2021, Morrison tried to rewrite history on his comments that it was “not a race”. Morrison told Channel Seven’s Sunrise on 29 July: When Professor [Brendan] Murphy and I made those remarks, we were talking about the regulation of the vaccines. In fact, on 31 March – after both Pfizer and AstraZeneca’s Covid-19 vaccines had been approved – Morrison said: We are working through the GPs as we move into 1B and the six million Australians that are part of that. And so, it’s not a race, it’s not a competition…” 4. Taiwan On 6 May, Morrison incorrectly characterised Australia’s policy towards Taiwan as “one country, two systems” – the principle that China pledged to apply when Hong Kong was returned to Beijing’s control in 1997. Morrison’s office claims he was talking about Hong Kong, despite the question making no mention of it. Speaking to SBS on 12 May, Morrison was asked about the comments and denied he’d made an error: What we know is that we have a situation with China where we’ve recognised, we’ve recognised, how they see these relationships within the region, particularly in relation to Taiwan, formerly Hong Kong and things of that nature. And so Australia understands that and that’s always been the basis of our policies.” 5. Shanghai Sam In September 2019, the Coalition was running defence for its MP Gladys Liu, arguing that media scrutiny of her alleged links with China was racist. Asked about his own description of Labor’s Sam Dastyari as “Shanghai Sam”, Morrison claimed “I didn’t use either of those phrases”. In fact, Morrison described Dastyari as Shanghai Sam in a tweet: And on 6 September, 2016, Morrison said: “Shanghai Sam must go. It’s that simple.”On Wednesday this week, the New South Wales lower house passed an affirmative consent bill, which could see the Crimes Act changed to specify that consent to sexual activity must be communicated and not assumed. The next day, Sydney’s Griffin Theatre Company opened Wherever She Wanders, a play by award-winning Australian playwright Kendall Feaver, which explores the complex failures of systems, movements and individuals to protect us from sexual harm. Set in a residential college on the grounds of an Australian university, the play’s catalyst is an incident that, it would be argued in courts, operated on inferred or assumed consent. But Wherever She Wanders is not interested in the specifics. Instead, it pulls back to examine the ways that rape culture thrives in closed systems like once-single-sex colleges, where songs about rape and objectification are revered like choral hymns and preserved in lovingly-made songbooks. Nikki Faletau (Emily Havea) attends the college on a full scholarship and has made a habit of calling out these old, troubling behaviours whenever she sees them – much to the consternation of Jo Mulligan (Fiona Press), the first-ever woman in charge of the college. Jo, a second-wave feminist who has “gotten over” her activism, sees many of Nikki’s complaints as over-sensitive and over-dramatic. But when something happens to sweet fresher Paige Hutson (Julia Robertson) on her first night in residence, Nikki can’t let it go – and she won’t let Jo dismiss it, either. Feaver began writing the play nine years ago, but in late 2021 it lands squarely in the zeitgeist, coming just one month after Diana Reid’s debut novel Love and Virtue: a novel which also examines rape culture in Australian residential colleges, through the lens of a girl who has a murky sexual experience on her first night, and whose more progressive friend takes the story viral. Both book and play refuse to moralise; both find the meeting of ego and social justice measures worrying. Both writers are more interested in complicating our thinking around call-out culture, social justice movements and systemic failures than they are in personal, singular experiences. Feaver especially refuses to offer any answers for a better way to handle sexual assault and discrimination, preferring instead to demonstrate how it looks, how it thinks – how it acts. What gets a little lost in the shuffle, however, is how it feels. We spend time with Nikki – understanding her fear and anger and commitment to speaking out – and with Jo’s complex discomfort about the whole situation. Nikki’s entire experience at the college is doubly fraught as a woman of colour in a predominantly white institution, but while Nikki uses Paige’s more palatable experience (Paige is pretty, and white, and innocent) to advance her agenda, the playwright Feaver leaves Paige behind too. We go where Feaver wants to go, and stay grounded in ideas far more than in character, emotion or human experience. How much this will work for individual audience members will vary. But Feaver has director Tessa Leong as her bridge from idea to lived truth, and Leong digs deep into Feaver’s clever and well-researched script, steering her enormous ideas and prowling debates into a deft and stylish production with a natural and satisfying rhythm – always seeking to find the humanity and hold it up to the light. Feaver has a talent for wit, especially to deflect, distract, or muddle with a scene, and Leong ensures that not a single much-needed laugh is missed. Mark Paguio, who plays male student Ghazali – renamed “Gerald” by his white friends – is a real gift to the production, shouldering the majority of the humour and bringing a surprising cache of warmth and vulnerability to his supporting role. The play straddles physical and online worlds: Paige and Nikki are both gamers and at one point argue in-universe of a fantasy video game, with Paguio and Tony Cogin playing as their avatars in full elf and wizard garb. Ella Butler’s set, simple with a few collegiate adornments and video elements by Susie Henderson, is transformative. But it’s the unwavering, constantly-flowing energy of Leong’s production that leaves the biggest impression. She balances sensitivity (a potentially triggering photo of an assault is projected onstage as a blurred-out preview) with humour (those disturbing songs are harmonised and remixed in a note-perfect second act opener). It’s a bold, ambitious play, hungry to debate and argue and complicate. It isn’t comforting or cathartic. But its questions may linger in the back of your mind, prompting you to seek out the answers for yourself. • Wherever She Wanders runs at Griffin Theatre Company in Sydney until 11 DecemberAn Antarctic penguin has traversed 3,000km of icy waters to find himself far from home and on new and puzzling shores: the south-eastern coastline of New Zealand. The Adélie penguin in question, affectionately named “Pingu” by locals, was spotted looking somewhat lost at Birdlings Flat, a small settlement on New Zealand’s South Island. It’s only the third recorded instance of a live Adélie penguin – a species that makes its home on the Antarctic peninsula – making it to New Zealand. Its arrival is a reminder of the threats the birds face from warming waters, increased competition over food supplies, and changed habitats. After observing that the penguin was not getting in the water and could be vulnerable to dogs, locals called Thomas Stracke of Christchurch Penguin Rehabilitation. Stracke said when he arrived with a vet, he was shocked to find an Adélie penguin. “Apart from being a bit starving and severely dehydrated, he was actually not too bad, so we gave him some fluids and some fish smoothie,” Stracke said. The penguin was released into a bay on the banks peninsula, where his helpers hope he may be able to make the journey home. “I would have preferred to get him on the Hercules [air force plane] that drops staff at Scott Base,” Stracke said, but he was told by the Department of Conservation that the idea was not feasible. “They had a meeting with the other big penguin guns and they said no.” Stracke said warming waters meant the birds were struggling to find food supply. “When the waters warm up because the fish usually go into deeper cold waters. And so there’s no fish around,” he said. New Zealand’s populations of yellow-eyed penguins were also struggling as they competed with fishing businesses for food and the rehabilitation centre was seeing increasing numbers of malnourished or starving penguins come in, he said, calling the situation a “nightmare”. Otago University zoology professor Philip Seddon said Pingu’s appearance was “super rare,” and that it could have been a younger bird that strayed too far and got caught in a current that carried him into New Zealand waters. Seddon said that while Adélie penguin populations looked to be stable at the moment – increasing in some areas and decreasing elsewhere – there were plenty of possible threats in their future, and changes in penguin behaviour could be an early warning sign that the marine ecosystem was in crisis. “All species of penguin are like marine sentinels … when they’re doing badly, they’re giving us an early signal – canaries in coalmines – an early signal that things are not good,” he said. Seddon said while one arrival did not make a trend, “I think if we started getting annual arrivals of Adélie penguins, we’d go actually, something’s changed in the ocean that we need to understand.” “More studies will give us more understanding where penguins go, what they do, what the population trends are like – they’re going to tell us something about the health of that marine ecosystem in general.” Global heating is affecting Antarctic penguin habitats in uneven and sometimes unpredictable ways: in some areas, sea ice is expanding, but in other crucial areas it’s decreasing. That can have a mixed effect on penguin populations: some loss of sea ice can actually help Adélies, allowing more viable breeding space. But too much warming can also disrupt those habitats, or the food supplies penguins rely on: according to Nasa, in the areas of Antarctica that are experiencing warming, Adélie populations are either declining or expected to drop off in the next 40 years – and as sea ice decreases it can prompt changes in the migration patterns of the Ross Sea penguins. At times, those changes have led to disaster: in 2017, a colony of 40,000 Adélie penguins suffered a “catastrophic breeding event” – where all but two chicks died of starvation. It was the second mass death in just four years, marking a cluster of breeding disasters not previously seen in more than 50 years of observation.At the NRMA Kennedy awards on Thursday night, held in the grand ballroom at Royal Randwick in Sydney, the Australian Financial Review’s Michael Roddan made a quip about the Kennedys being the “Bogan Walkleys” while he picked up a trophy for financial journalism. It got a big laugh from the crowd but organisers took immediate offence, dimming the lights and ushering him off stage. Minutes later, he was approached by a man who said it was time to leave and he was ejected. “Not sure if my crime was testing a few jokes or the fact that people enjoyed them,” Roddan told Weekly Beast. “Anyway, I obviously didn’t mean to upset anyone but I guess you never know with these things anymore.” The editor-in-chief of the Australian Financial Review, Michael Stutchbury, said what everyone in the room was thinking. It was an inoffensive joke. “Michael Roddan was honoured to receive a Kennedy award last night,” Stutch told Beast. “Michael made what he and many others in the room felt was an affectionate joke about the awards. It’s unfortunate that an organiser at the journalism awards night didn’t share his sense of humour.” The harsh morning light did not change the mind of organisers. Incredibly, Roddan’s name did not appear on the official list of winners although it was reinstated after Weekly Beast contacted the organisers. Roddan’s photo has been deleted from the Kennedy’s Twitter feed after it was initially posted last night. Set up 10 years ago by the friends of the late Daily Telegraph and Fairfax Media crime reporter Les Kennedy, who died aged 53 in 2008, the Kennedys has been marred by controversy before. At the presentation of the awards in 2015, Guardian Australia’s photographic editor-at-large, Mike Bowers, was awarded the Kennedy for outstanding online photographic essay only to have it taken back five days later by organisers, who said it had only been given to him because his name was sent to the award engravers by mistake. “We won’t be commenting on any transgressions at the historic 10th annual Kennedy Awards for Excellence in Journalism last night at Royal Randwick,” a spokesman told Weekly Beast. “The gala night was a great success in difficult times and we want to sincerely thank all our guests and sponsors for their continued support.” Funny, not funny But Roddan being marched out is not even the most shocking thing to happen at the Kennedys. When you think of excellence in journalism, Peta Credlin and John Laws may not be the first names that come to mind, Credlin being a former chief of staff to Tony Abbott whose usual fare is monologues railing against Daniel Andrews and ‘woke ideology’, and Laws a talkback radio legend who insists he is an entertainer and not a journalist. But Credlin and Laws were two of the big winners for excellence in journalism. The Sky After Dark presenter beat entries from ABC multi-award winning investigative journalist Caro Meldrum-Hanna and a joint Four Corners investigation with the Age and Sydney Morning Herald from Adele Ferguson, Lesley Robinson and Lauren Day. Credlin took home the gong for long-form current affairs journalism for her Sky News Australia investigation Deadly Decisions: Victoria’s Hotel Quarantine Catastrophe, given Credlin’s well-known animosity to Victoria’s pandemic response and lock-down measures, many saw the story as an agenda-driven partisan attack on Victorian premier Daniel Andrews. It comes months after Credlin was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia in the Queen’s birthday honours. “Peta explores the terrible human cost of the botched quarantine program, revealing devastating new details of how Victoria’s Covid crisis has impacted grieving families and small business owners who no longer have an income due to the lockdown,” the Sky blurb for Deadly Decisions: Victoria’s Hotel Quarantine Catastrophe said. Laws, 86 and still broadcasting, at least endeared himself to the crowd, with a self-deprecating speech in which he said how hard it was to climb the stairs to the dais and he didn’t know how he was going to get down. Hit parade There is a big presenting job up for grabs at the ABC and competition is fierce. We’re not talking about a replacement for Fran Kelly on RN’s News Breakfast. We are talking about which ABC stars will be chosen to host the The Sydney Gay &amp; Lesbian Mardi Gras Parade which will be broadcast on ABC Radio and ABC Television from next year in a three-year deal announced this week. After eight years with SBS ABC managing director, David Anderson said he was delighted the ABC would once again be host broadcaster. “This is a homecoming for Mardi Gras. The ABC was the first broadcaster to televise Sydney Mardi Gras in 1994. We’ve waited 28 years for it to return and from 2022 onwards, we will provide coverage of Mardi Gras that only the ABC can, without commercial interests.” Weekly Beast understands ABC 7.30 reporter Jason Om has put his hand up for the coveted role, but we reckon there are others who would love the honour. ABC News channel presenters Patricia Karvelas and Joe O’Brien couldn’t hide their excitement the parade had come back to Aunty, both posting photos of them enjoying themselves at previous Mardi Gras parades. The ABC has been given both the television and radio rights to the event until 2024 and Triple J has been named as the host radio broadcaster. RN breakfast contenders Seriously though there is another big job on offer, and it involves stepping into the big shoes of Fran Kelly on RN Breakfast next year, after she announced she was stepping down. Weekly Beast understands there are several high profile contenders all very worthy, including The World Today host and playwright Sally Sara and RN Drive host and TV presenter Patricia Karvelas. Outsiders may be surprised to hear the program is not in the news department so the decision will not be taken by outgoing news boss Gaven Morris. In Aunty’s bureaucratic structure RN Breakfast sits within the “entertainment and specialist” department which is run by Michael Carrington. Tributes to a life on screen Bert Newton’s hometown paper the Herald Sun gave over its front page to celebrate his legendary career on Friday, with an exclusive interview with widow Patti who married Bert in Melbourne in 1974, with Graham Kennedy as best man. Melbourne hosted the state funeral for Newton which was broadcast across no fewer than five networks – Nine, 10, Seven, ABC News, SKY News as well as YouTube – a fitting tribute to an entertainer who dominated our TV screens for decades. On Thursday night the theatres in Melbourne dimmed their lights for the late star, who was also a live stage performer of note. The eyes have it The incredible admission by Robert Nelson of the Age that ‘sometimes the eyes aren’t enough’ and he missed the point of an installation in a review, reminds us of another Murdoch installation which was missed by the newspaper company. After the Age published his review which failed to mention the artwork featured effigies of Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch Nelson said he “didn’t realise that the figures represented Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch”. “It puts a different spin on the work, for sure”. Back in 2007 when the Sydney Morning Herald was moving into its then-new digs in Darling Harbour a design company installed giant stylised portraits of business leaders in the newsroom. The then-Fairfax board toured the building and no-one noticed who was featured staring down at the journos. It wasn’t until staff moved in that they noticed one of the pillars was adorned by the portrait of Rupert Murdoch. Management blamed the designers and dispatched a contractor to tear down the posters. Block shocker The Daily Telegraph has been found in breach of press standards for a story which was headlined “Retired porn star sparks Surry Hills apartment block controversy”. The sub-headline of the article stated: “A noisy retired gay porn star has been told to behave and show respect to his neighbours after police were called four times, causing angst in his apartment building”. The Australian Press Council says has publications “should exercise great care to not place unwarranted emphasis on characteristics of individuals such gender and sexual orientation but the Tele argued that the resident described himself in social media accounts as a ‘gay porn star’. ”The council considers that in prominently referring to the resident’s sexuality in the sub-headline, the publication failed to take reasonable steps to avoid contributing to substantial prejudice and that there was not sufficient public interest justifying doing so,” the APC said. News Corp scandalised by ABC smut The Daily Telegraph tried to shame the ABC this week by claiming it had “come under fire for its ‘tawdry’ coverage of Australians’ sex lives” which they said glorified polyamory and open relationships. “On one recent day the ABC’s lifestyle site ABC Everyday featured at least three articles on the topic on its homepage with titles such as “What Shane has learnt from being in polyamorous relationships” and “Why more women are suggesting open relationships”, political editor James Morrow wrote. South Australian senator Alex Antic was lined up to condemn the public broadcaster: “The ABC’s charter requires it to deliver broadcasting services of a high standard, not tawdry gossip column style articles.” But it took ABC journo Matthew Bevan no time at all to dig up similar articles in the Tele, including “My best and worst experiences of being a swinger” just a few days earlier.When you shop First Nations-owned businesses you support a network of growers, gatherers, producers and makers that extends far beyond the business itself. Not only that, but you help drive demand for authentic Indigenous goods and designs, and support Aboriginal self-determination in the process. These 10 Indigenous-owned retailers have all been suggested by Jarin Baigent, co-founder of Trading Blak and founder of Jarin Street. To discover more First Nations businesses online, search #BuyBlak on Facebook and Instagram. 1. Earrings from Gillawarra Arts, via Trading Blak Photograph: Marley Morgan, Barefoot Wandering Photography It can be tricky knowing whether a business that claims to be Aboriginal-owned actually is, let alone whether it partners with Aboriginal suppliers in an ethical way. But if it’s on Trading Blak, you can be confident you’re shopping with a 100% Indigenous-owned business that supports the community it comes from. Trading Blak offers gift vouchers for any of its stockists and is home to brands across clothing, homewares, wellbeing and jewellery, including these vibrant earrings from Gillawarra Arts. 2. Swimwear from Liandra Swim Liandra Gaykamangu is a Yolngu woman from Milingimbi, the largest of north-east Arnhem Land’s Crocodile Islands. “The ocean has always played a huge part in my connection with the world,” she says. “I remember fishing with my dad and spending all day at the beach swimming with my cousins. Today, I love being out on the mudflats hunting for shellfish and fresh oysters with my sisters and nieces.” In early 2018 Gaykamangu grew her affinity for the ocean into a swimwear business. “It began as a way for me to combine all the things I truly love in a positive way: education, culture and sustainability.” All Liandra Swim pieces are made from regenerated plastic and recycled elastane, and delivered in plant-based packaging. This season’s Community Collection features hand-drawn prints inspired by Milingimbi, and like all the brand’s lines is limited edition. 3. Homewares from Emro Designs Emro Designs’ eye-catching rugs and cushion covers printed with original artworks by Indigenous artists make great gifts for homebodies. The indoor rugs come in bright, bold colours or a more muted palette, while the outdoor rug made from recycled plastic (meaning it’s wipe-clean) is a top present for anyone who isn’t fed up with picnics yet. Parents with young kids will also appreciate being able to throw it down during playtime to keep the carpet safe. 4. A print from Salty One Here Nyul Nyul Saltwater man Lowell Hunter of Salty One Here. Using only his feet and traditional dance movements, Lowell Hunter of Salty One Here creates large-scale sand art on some of Australia’s most beautiful shorelines. He then captures his work from above via drone and turns it into art-quality prints. A proud Nyul Nyul Saltwater man from the Kimberley region of Western Australia, Lowell grew up in Warrnambool, Victoria, and now lives in Geelong. His art features the symbols and stories of his people. What began as a way to feel more connected to country has now grown into a successful business. 5. Dance lessons from Brolga Dance Academy For kids with energy to burn, lessons in contemporary or traditional Aboriginal dance are a gift to them and their parents. At Brolga Dance Academy in Redfern, New South Wales, little ones will discover a world beyond ballet and tap, in which the story is as important as the steps, under the tutelage of founder/artistic director and proud Gamilaroi and Murrawarri woman Jodie Welsh-Choolburra. 6. A dress from Ngarru Miimi Wiradjuri, Gangulu and Yorta Yorta woman Lillardia Briggs-Houston designs and makes some of Australia’s most beautiful ethical fashion, all from a fibro studio in Narrandera, New South Wales, where she grew up. Every Ngarru Miimi piece is dyed, painted or printed by hand on silk or linen, which means orders will take a few weeks, so it’s best to start Christmas shopping early – but this is true slow fashion worth waiting for. 7. A portrait from Barefoot Wandering Photography “Bara-y” print by Marley Morgan, Barefoot Wandering Photography New or expectant parents, or anyone who wants to document a special time in their life, might want to commission a portrait by photographer Marley Morgan, AKA Barefoot Wandering Photography. Based in Coffs Harbour, New South Wales, but available to travel across Australia, Morgan has a talent for capturing raw emotion on film in a way that feels honest and intimate. 8. A scarf from Balgarra Designs Between them, the four women behind Balgarra Designs – sisters Joanne Cassady and Michelle Hamilton, their cousin Leeanne Hunter and friend Leona McGrath – have spent decades expressing their considerable painting talents on everything from jewellery to boomerangs. Wear Cassady’s beautiful artwork with this Waterfall printed chiffon scarf inspired by the cascading waterfalls of Far North Queensland. 9. Breakfast treats from The Unexpected Guest Whether your guests are unexpected or the regulars who descend every Christmas, make them feel welcome by putting out breakfast cereals and bars from The Unexpected Guest. There are lemon myrtle and wattle seed bars, and an award-winning “granüesli” made from all-organic nuts and seeds. If they are well behaved, send them off with a monthly subscription (from $45) when they leave. 10. Native ingredients from Indigiearth Indigiearth stocks more than 200 food and skincare products from across Australia, including loose-leaf teas, native spices and superfood powders made from freeze-dried quandong and Kakadu plum. Both fruits are rich in antioxidants and have long been used in bush medicine, and Kakadu plums contain more vitamin C than any other fruit in the world. All Indigiearth’s ingredients are ethically sourced and sustainably harvested by Aboriginal communities using traditional land management methods, too. Meta is bringing #BuyBlak Friday to Australia, and encouraging Aussies to support First Nations-owned businesses this holiday season and beyond. To discover more First Nations-owned businesses, search #BuyBlak on Facebook or Instagram.Police in New South Wales argued against a proposed public health order that would have allowed vulnerable Aboriginal communities to choose to lockdown in the event of a coronavirus outbreak. The ABC reports that the NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, proposed the health order in March 2020 in response to a request from some remote Aboriginal communities to restrict access and travel to those communities to prevent the spread of Covid. But the proposed order was shelved, reportedly following criticism from the NSW deputy police commissioner and state emergency operations controller, Gary Worboys, regarding issues with enforcement. Covid did not spread to remote Aboriginal communities in NSW until the Delta outbreak which hit Wilcannia via Dubbo in August this year. The virus has since spread to other regional and remote communities including the far north town of Moree. Fifteen Aboriginal people with Covid have died in NSW since August. The Aboriginal community-controlled health service in Wilcannia, Maari Ma Aboriginal health corporation, was one of those that called for better protections for remote communities at the start of the pandemic, saying in a March 2020 letter to the federal minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, that it had “grave fears” for the town if Covid were to take hold. “We cannot wait until the first case turns up in the community, or worse, the first hospital case presents,” the letter said. Remote communities in Western Australia, the Northern Territory and Queensland also lobbied for, and were granted, orders to restrict access and protect communities. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In WA, restrictions on travelling to the regions are expected to be extended until after the state opens up its domestic border in 2022 in order to protect vulnerable communities with lower rates of vaccine uptake. In a statement to the ABC, NSW Health said it agreed not to progress the public health order in early 2020 following consultation with groups which included NSW police and the Centre for Aboriginal Health, citing potential social and economic impacts. “This included potential impacts on the provision of essential goods and services, the impact of restricting movement to and from specific communities, particularly in relation to cultural activities and the potential impacts of enforcement and penalties,” the health department said. “The NSW government was also advised by Aboriginal people and through local emergency management committees that restricting Aboriginal communities from moving across traditional lands would be an unreasonable restriction on cultural activities.” Guardian Australia has sought comment from both NSW Health and NSW police. Worboys told the ABC in a statement he supported the creation of local community action plans to address the risks of Covid which were individually negotiated with various Aboriginal communities in NSW. He said that it was for the minister to create public health orders and his role was to provide “information, opinion and comment that informs their decision making”. “Ultimately it was up to the minister if he was to be satisfied as to whether he would issue a certain [public health order],” Worboys said in the statement. “Had a [public health order] been issued regarding Aboriginal communities, the emergency management arrangements and NSW police force would have dealt with the consequences of that order.”The Singaporean owners of the Basslink cable that links Tasmania’s electricity grid to the mainland have put the business into administration rather than pay at least $40m it owes the state and Hydro Tasmania due to an outage in 2015. In a statement to the Singapore stock exchange, Keppel Infrastructure Trust said there was “no contractual recourse to KIT under the financing arrangements currently in place for the Basslink interconnector”. An arbitrator ordered the companies in the Basslink group to pay Tasmania $40m in December last year after finding in favour of the state and state-owned Hydro Tasmania in a dispute over the cause of the 2015 outage, which lasted six months and forced the government to ship in diesel generators. The total claim against Basslink brought by the state and Hydro Tasmania is at least $70m, although KIT said Basslink disputed “the basis and quantum” of $33.3m of this figure. After the arbitration, the state and Hydro Tasmania agreed to pause pursuing the debt while KIT attempted to refinance Basslink, but the standstill agreement expired on 27 October. On the same day, a deal to sell the cable to infrastructure company APA Group was reported to have fallen over. Tasmania and Hydro Tasmania appear to have little prospect of getting paid much of what they say they are owed because their claims rank behind a syndicate of banks led by NAB that is believed to be owed about $600m. Basslink appointed Adam Nikitins, Stewart McCallum and Colby O’Brien, from accounting firm EY, as administrators on Friday. After this, the banking syndicate appointed Peter Gothard, Peter McCluskey and Brendan Richards from KPMG as receivers and managers. The receivers have “day to day control of Basslink’s operations,” KPMG said in a statement. “I want to reassure our stakeholders and the community that Basslink’s business will continue to operate as usual and there will be no disruption to the operations of the interconnector or communications as a result of this appointment,” Gothard said. “We look forward to working pro-actively with all stakeholders, including the Tasmanian government and Hydro Tasmania, to establish a pathway to restructure the business.” The Basslink chief executive said the group “always worked in good faith to progress the implementation of the arbitration awards and to progress the matters under the standstill agreement, which included engaging the state and Hydro Tasmania with several proposals for a resolution of issues and proposed repayment plans”. “Regrettably, against the backdrop of many issues and having exhausted options, Basslink needed to take proactive action to put Basslink in the best possible position to navigate forward through these challenges,” he said. KIT said the collapse would have no effect on the amount it paid unitholders. “Given that there is no contractual recourse to KIT under the financing arrangements currently in place for the Basslink interconnector and KIT does not rely on Basslink’s cash flows for distributions, the abovementioned update is not expected to have any material financial impact on the distribution per unit of KIT for the financial year ending 31 December 2021,” it said in its statement to the SGX.There’s a tension in the Rocky series between two largely incompatible conceits: Rocky Balboa as the shy, humble, gentleman brawler from working-class Philly or Rocky Balboa as the cartoon avatar of America’s can-do spirit, intrepidly grinding through title matches against stronger, faster, more colorful opponents. The first type won a best picture Oscar for its young writer/star, Sylvester Stallone, who, in classic underdog fashion, was wildly overmatched against All the President’s Men, Bound for Glory, Network, and Taxi Driver. The second type dominated the next decade in ever-more garish and cynical vehicles, none dumber than Rocky IV, which pitted The Italian Stallion against Ivan Drago, a dead-eyed, machine-tooled robot of the Soviet empire. Now that Creed and its sequel have brought the vintage Rocky back — and, in Creed II, the surprisingly affecting return of Dolph Lundgren as Drago — Stallone has retooled Rocky IV to seem more like the original Rocky, at least insofar as such a feat is possible. His new Rocky IV: Rocky Vs. Drago is only a few minutes longer than the original cut, but there’s a significant amount of tinkering in this version, particularly toward the beginning, that’s intended to add depth to Rocky’s relationships to his friend and rival Apollo Creed (Carl Weathers) and his wife Adrian (Talia Shire), and remove some of the sillier touches, most notably the infamous robot given to his brother-in-law, Paulie (Burt Young), as a birthday gift. Erasing Paulie’s robot from history will surely be chilling to fans, who understood the robot as a sassy symbol of the wealth that had softened Rocky’s once-gritty palooka. Stallone also tosses the Balboa-Creed sparring match that opened the original Rocky IV and replaces it, curiously, with seven minutes of material from Rocky III that underscore their bond. Since Creed will not survive his exhibition match against Drago, Stallone seems intent on drawing out their scenes together as much as possible, hitting hard on the theme of aging warriors doing what’s in their nature, even if others have trouble understanding why they want to step back into the arena. But let’s be clear: this is a ridiculous undertaking, a polish on a Cold War relic. For example, Stallone does not cut the sequence where Balboa speeds off into the night in his Lamborghini to Robert Tepper’s No Easy Way Out while flashing back to scenes from the first three Rocky movies. He merely attempts to add gravitas by converting those flashbacks from color to black-and-white. (Fans needn’t worry about the other montage sequences, though: Unlike Paulie’s robot, the two back-to-back training montages for the Drago fight are sacrosanct.) In any form, Rocky IV remains a goofy, threadbare fantasy of Reagan-era bootstrap-ism and political saber-rattling, with every mighty Rocky punch landing like a sledgehammer to the Berlin Wall. The film has always been a less-fun recycling of the entertainingly tacky Rocky III, starting with Creed’s death in the ring against Drago in Las Vegas, which is so immensely unsettling that it throws the story off-balance, rendering Rocky’s redemption efforts hollow. (It was worse at the time, only three years removed from the bout where the South Korean challenger Duk Koo Kim collapsed and later died after getting knocked out by lightweight champion Ray “Boom Boom” Mancini.) Rocky vs Drago succeeds to the tiniest degree in making the film feels like some semblance of a character study, rather than a rushed 90 minutes full of repurposed footage and fighting montages set to workout music by Survivor, John Cafferty, Touch, and composer Vince DiCola. The fighting sequences in the Rocky movies have always been a dream of what boxing might be like if it were more like a choreographed street brawl than a sport where defense is an option. Rocky’s strategy of waddling toward his opponent with his gloves down is like if Muhammad Ali’s rope-a-dope strategy involved exhausting a rival by having him punch you repeatedly in the face. All the Rocky movies are about overcoming odds through grit and determination, and they’re all seductive for that reason, especially when the odds are as great as Rocky fighting a machine-tooled Russian who’s a full foot taller and possessed of a lethal right hand. But even Stallone at the time seemed to realize that he’d exhausted the formula, and he handed over the reins to Rocky V to John G. Avildsen, who directed the original film, in an effort to rediscover the character’s lost soul. It didn’t work then for Rocky V. And it doesn’t work now for the unsalvageable Rocky IV. Rocky IV: Rocky vs Drago is available to rent digitally on 12 November in the US and is released in cinemas on 19 November in the UK. • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to update details about the movie’s availability based on distribution information provided after publication.Australia’s only working carbon capture and storage project in Western Australia has failed to meet its target to lock away greenhouse gases from a major gas processing plant. Chevron, an America-based multinational oil and gas company, was given a target by the WA government to capture at least 80% of the CO2 that would otherwise be released at its Gorgon LNG project. But the company has said it fell short of the target by 5.23Mt and will buy the equivalent amount in carbon credits while also investing $40m in unspecified “low carbon energy projects” in the state. Based on today’s prices for carbon offsets – which analysts say are rising – Chevron would have to pay between $78m and $194m. Chevron announced last month it made more than $8bn profit in the most recent financial quarter. The Morrison government is prioritising CCS technology as a way to lower emissions, even though its impact after decades of promises and about $4bn in Australian taxpayer cash has been marginal. Environmental campaigners said the shortfall in emissions reductions at Gorgon showed CCS should not be relied on as justification for allowing fossil fuel production to increase. Chevron has not said what kind of accredited carbon offsets it will buy, but analysts told the Guardian the cost to Chevron could range from $15 per tonne for some overseas credits to as high as $37 per tonne for Australian credits. Calculated over a five-year average with the clock starting in July 2016, Chevron said it had missed the 80% target because of technical problems that delayed the CO2 injection into geological formations under Barrow Island. Since injection started in August 2019, the company says it had captured and stored 5.5Mt of CO2. In the 2020/21 financial year, the report says there was 3.17Mt of CO2 available for capture and storage from its gas treatment plant under its agreement with the WA government, but only 2.17Mt – or 68% – had been injected. Chevron owns 47% of the Gorgon LNG project together with other joint venture partners ExxonMobil (25%) and Shell (25%). Chevron said the joint venture partners had collectively invested more than $3bn in the carbon dioxide injection scheme. As well as buying offsets, Chevron said it would invest $40m in “low carbon energy” projects in the state. Mark Hatfield, managing director of Chevron Australia, said: “The package we have announced will see us make good on our commitment to offset the injection shortfall, and ensures we meet the expectations of the regulator, the community and those we place on ourselves as a leading energy producer in Australia.” Piers Verstegen, policy director at Conservation Council of WA, said when the greenhouse gas emissions generated from extracting, processing and then the use of the gas from Chevron’s customers was added together “the CCS technology would have reduced overall pollution from Gorgon by less than 2%” in the past five years. He said: “This shows very clearly that CCS cannot be relied upon as a technology to allow fossil fuel production to continue and increase.” Chevron said in an environmental performance report released yesterday that it would buy the 5.23Mt of carbon offsets and then surrender them before 17 July 2020. The report lists several different types of offsets it could purchase, including from the Australian government’s accredited market, or from other offset schemes around the world. The cheapest offsets – known as Certified Emissions Reductions or CERs – can cost as little as $2.20 per tonne on today’s market but a Chevron spokesman confirmed the company would not be purchasing those offsets to meet the shortfall. Hugh Grossman, Reputex executive director, said other options open to Chevron would be international credits starting at about $15 per tonne or Australian carbon credit units (ACCUs) that were currently trading at $37 per tonne. John Connor, the chief executive of the Carbon Market Institute, said Chevron would have to buy the offsets on the spot market. The price of ACCUs have boomed from $16.50 at the start of this year. “This won’t be cheap for Chevron,” he said. “There’s a really tight market in Australia for those ACCUs with the spot price going up faster than house prices. It is important that [Chevron] gets high-quality offsets and work to deal with issues with the CCS technology.” The volume of credits Chevron would need to buy is unlikely to be met entirely by ACCUs, Grossman said, because of a lack of supply. “There would be question marks over the capacity of the Australian market to support that size of transaction,” he said. A spokesperson for Sanderson said she would “have regard to relevant international agreements for carbon offsets and integrity principles which ensure that carbon offsets represent genuine and credible emissions”.After Fearless earlier this spring, Taylor Swift reaches the second instalment of her project to re-record (and regain ownership over) the six albums she released for label Big Machine, which were apparently sold out from under her to an old foe. Held up as a classic, 2012’s Red is one half some of the greatest pop songs of all time – I Knew You Were Trouble is the rare pop-EDM crossover that still stands up, the chorus drops hitting like bratty stomps of frustration at her own naivety; We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together is a euphoric cheerleader chant so ingratiating you wonder how nobody came up with it before – and one half schmaltzy stuffing, including collaborations with Ed Sheeran and Snow Patrol’s Gary Lightbody. It’s the album on which she embraced synth-pop, presumably making its faithful replication slightly easier than the primarily organic Fearless – simply set the controls and go. The new version is more widescreen than the original, which was by no means a wallflower to start with. But revisiting this earlier material there was always going to be the problem that Swift’s voice is richer and more mature than it was a decade ago. She has often wielded her innocence as a weapon, but nowhere more so than on Red, where she used it to rebuke the older man (widely reputed to be actor Jake Gyllenhaal) who broke her heart at 21. The lack of burn and twang here slightly blunts the rabid, deliciously vindictive edge that fuelled the original’s tumultuous depiction of heartbreak, sketched in appropriately vaulting shades of pop, country, balladry and electro-tooled aggression. While fans enjoy poring over the granular differences, the “From the Vault” bonus materials – that is, previously unreleased tracks from the Red sessions – suggest how the original album might have taken on a different cast. There is a fair amount of the saccharine stuff among these newly added tracks: another Sheeran duet in the generic intimacies of Run; forays into new sounds in the beachy, skippy pop-ska of Babe; and Message in a Bottle, a Max Martin production that sounds horribly like tropical house via Coldplay and was probably dropped from Red in favour of the melodically similar but much better 22. Mercifully, these tendencies were nipped in the bud – and just two years later, Swift perfected her own gleaming, 80s-influenced take on pop with the album 1989. The keepers, though, entrench the album’s brutal obsession with time: how long it takes to get over someone; the shelf life of any young woman’s appeal; the pitiful plight of emotionally frigid ex-boyfriends forever doomed to stagnate in their obsessions with status over love. Better Man (a Swift song previously recorded by country band Little Big Town) is a richly filigreed Nashville ensemble number about defying the demeaning expectations of an older man by actually daring to leave him. She still misses him, she admits, before donning the Swiftian velvet gloves: if only he’d been less of a schmuck, well, they might have stood had a chance. If that bloke underestimated her youth, Swift, then in her early 20s, was also acutely aware of her novelty fading. “People love an ingenue,” she sings on Nothing New. It’s a rueful, softly strummed vignette from a night of drunk paranoia, during which she feels crushed by time passing and her self-knowledge evaporating with it, and anticipates the cruel turnover of young women in the public eye. The original lyrics imagine her one day meeting a teenage star who has “the kind of radiance you only have at 17 / She’ll know the way and then she’ll say she got the map from me” – but by re-recording this archival track as a collaboration with Phoebe Bridgers, a younger songwriter, noted fan and fellow lowercase girl, she defies that culture of replacement and rivalry. Bridgers, too, may be Swift’s best duet partner (albeit in a catalogue of often baffling pairings), her lovely hangdog shrug a great foil for Swift’s irrepressible brightness. Nothing New articulates observations that Swift wouldn’t make publicly for years to come – not until the overexposure of the 1989 era, and several public missteps, briefly made her a pariah – and you wonder (other than the fact that it’s thematically similar to The Lucky One) whether the people she worked with thought its incisive lens beyond the scope of what a Swift song could be at that time. That much could be true of the biggest selling point of this re-recording: a version of the already epic All Too Well expanded to honour Swift’s original 10-minute draft, every verse restored (in addition to the straightforward re-recording of the shorter version). It’s one thing to faithfully re-record a beloved album; it’s another risk entirely to mess with the song generally considered the Swift ur-text, one that eviscerates her slick ex in a series of ever-more climactic verses that never resolve to a chorus, just a shuddered realisation of how vividly she recalls his disregard. (“You call me up again just to break me like a promise / So casually cruel in the name of being honest” may be her most quoted lyric.) One new line early on feels jarringly out of time: “You were tossing me the car keys / ‘Fuck the patriarchy,’” she sings. The official lyrics sheet makes clear that she’s quoting someone else, but you can’t hear the quote marks, and that sort of punchy, boilerplate feminist retort wasn’t common currency at the turn of the 2010s when she wrote this song. That’s the only stumble: the other new verses double down on melodrama mixed with piercing observations of the emotional vampire who stood her up on her 21st birthday; who couldn’t call what they had love “‘til we were dead and gone and buried / Check the pulse and come back swearing it’s the same after three months in the grave”. By that point, she sings that her body is withered by shame, and then a later verse makes clear the physical toll of his treatment as Swift, who has been open about experiencing disordered eating, describes herself as a “soldier who’s returning half her weight”. It is a supreme public flogging, but the elongated recriminations also act as a form of life support, keeping the affair alive to finally understand exactly how its blood used to beat. “Missing him was dark grey, all alone,” Swift sang on the album’s title track. Red (Taylor’s Version) adds satisfying hues of deep, gothic black.The loch is fringed with Scots pines that are mostly mirrored perfectly by the water, except where, far out, the surface is rippled by the flutterings of a line of 20 or so goldeneye. It’s the gloaming and I’m here to see if the wintering geese arrive, but I’m too early and there’s still enough light to wander through the woods. Often, we associate the coming of autumn with changes in colour – indeed, the heather’s faded, the bracken is a deep rust. But I’m listening as much as looking. A coarse cacophony makes me head to the lochside in time to watch a clamour of rooks grow in twos and threes, swirling and sweeping above the water. When the crows depart I hear, faintly, the deep roar of what can only be stags rutting. They must be over on these far hillsides, and when I cock my head and tune in to their bellows, I hear them from multiple directions. In autumn, stags will tussle in the battle for control of their territory and herd, and the sound of distant ruts can haunt the night air. It’s an uneasy baying, low and resonant and unearthly, and even though I know what it is, it can still unnerve. As night falls, Jupiter is the first to gleam on to the water, and stars begin to speckle the sky. I’m about to give up when I hear a distant honk that multiplies and gets louder. One, five, 10 geese fly over me just to the east, though it’s so dark that I can’t see them. Perhaps this is an advance party of greylags returning to their night-time roost. The breeze strengthens, coming from the north, and the clouds thicken and take away any remaining light. The loch begins a rhythmic slap against the shore, and with the hiss of the wind through the trees, all other sounds are lost. I’m cold and have been standing still for too long. I head home, knowing I’ll return, a wee bit further into the night’s dark, to listen again. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryWe all understand how important it is to visit our dentist and GP for regular checkups. But eye checks also play a vital role in managing our health. A visit to the optometrist is about more than just determining whether you need a new pair of glasses. Eye checks also screen for eye health issues, and regular visits can help catch any irregularities before they become bigger issues. “A regular eye check is important because it gives your optometrist a good chance to really look over your eyes and document what they look like today,” says Kahla Best, an optometrist with OPSM. “That means that in the future if there’s any changes it will be a lot easier to pick up.” Best recommends most people get an eye check every 18 months to two years, though some Australians may require more frequent visits. Booking a test is easy: with OPSM, you can simply book a slot online. If you have a valid Medicare card, a standard appointment will be bulk billed. Regular checks are especially important because many eye conditions and diseases can be asymptomatic. Here’s why early intervention can make a huge difference in managing our eye health – as told by the Australians who’ve lived it. ‘I didn’t know that there were deeper problems until I had a regular checkup’ A routine appointment alerted Johannah Marshall to a change in her eye health. “I was wearing glasses at that point anyway, but I didn’t know that there were deeper problems until I had my regular checkup,” she says. Marshall lives with type 1 diabetes, and learned at her eye check that she had begun to develop diabetic retinopathy, a condition that can lead to vision loss. It’s a common complication in those who live with diabetes long term – up to 80% of those who live with diabetes for 20 years or more will develop it. But most cases can be reduced in severity with treatment and regular monitoring of the eyes. The fact that diabetes can cause eye health problems is “one of the things you get drilled into you” as a person with diabetes, Marshall says. Because of that, she has always made regular trips to the optometrist. It was through one of her standard regular appointments that she learned there were problems. Diabetic retinopathy had caused Marshall to develop scar tissue in her eyes, and she underwent laser surgery to prevent further damage. Getting to the optometrist when she did stopped her retinopathy from progressing further, and now eye checks every six months are part of her routine. “It is something that I have to watch and keep on top of very closely,” she says. “I think if I was to give anybody advice, it would be to just be aware. Even if you think you’re healthy, it doesn’t hurt to go and get an eye test done and just check that there’s no underlying issues.” Diabetes Australia has a program called KeepSight that is used extensively across the OPSM network. It offers patients regular reminders to have their eyes checked, so they will hopefully never miss an appointment. *** ‘Eye checks are important for everyone’ For Shelly Ames, eye health is both a personal and professional concern. As an optometrist at OPSM, Ames regularly helps clients manage their eye health. And as someone with type 1 diabetes, monitoring her own eye health is of critical importance. “As far as regular eye checks go, well, they’re important for everyone,” she says. “But they’re particularly important for diabetics because of the risk of diabetic retinopathy.” Ames has not developed diabetic retinopathy, but she has to remain vigilant for signs of the condition. She stresses that eye checks are easy and generally only take about 30 minutes, or an hour for people with diabetes, who require extra testing. An optometrist’s role is not just to prevent and treat, but to educate, Ames says. “One of the problems with a lot of people who’ve been diagnosed with diabetes – particularly the ones [diagnosed] late in life – is their doctor tells them to take this medication or that medication, and unfortunately a lot of them don’t get any further education,” she says. “So as optometrists, we’re in a unique position where we can provide a bit of education when people come for their eye checks. Because one of the most important things for all aspects of diabetes and reducing risk of complications is good control of your blood sugar levels. “And for me, I’m in a position where I can actually empathise with people and understand exactly what they’re going through. But all optometrists are in that position where we can provide a bit of education to these patients.” *** Other eye conditions to watch for Diabetic retinopathy isn’t the only eye health issue Australians need to be vigilant about. Kahla Best says macular degeneration and glaucoma are two common eye health issues in Australia. “Those are diseases we tend to get when we’re a little bit older,” she says. “However, glaucoma can affect people at any age, which is why it’s always good to get regular eye checks.” Australia’s high levels of UV radiation mean we are also at risk of developing sun damage on the eyes, making it really important that we wear sunglasses, Best says. But even indoors, there are still factors that affect our eyesight. “One of the more common things that we’re seeing right now, particularly with lockdowns and working from home, is a lot of people getting eye strain and eye fatigue, as well as things like dry eyes or irritated eyes,” she says. “That’s because we’re inside and using our screens a lot more.” Regular checks can help us stay on top of any changes to our eye health. Signs there could be a problem with your eyes include seeing things floating, flashes in your vision, experiencing red or watery eyes, or a change in vision in one or both eyes. “With most things, if we pick it up earlier, they’re a lot easier to manage and early intervention is usually a lot better than late intervention,” Best says. “So, for example, if we know that someone’s already got sun damage, we can recommend wearing sunglasses and that can prevent that damage from getting worse. “But also things like glaucoma are really important to pick up early because they’re very treatable. Glaucoma is a disease that’s really easy to intervene. Generally, we can prevent someone from losing their eyesight if we do pick it up and make sure they get treatment early.” Is it time you booked a checkup? OPSM optometrists provide professional eyecare, eyewear and contact lenses. Book an eye test online today.Australian prime minister Scott Morrison has been forced to address allegations he repeatedly lies as the fallout from his disastrous trip to the G20 and the Glasgow climate conference continues. Two weeks after the French president, Emmanuel Macron, labelled Morrison a liar on the world stage, the Australian leader defended himself against accusations he is routinely loose with the truth, culminating with a talkshow radio host baldly asking if he had ever told a lie in public life. “I don’t believe I have, no. No,” he said on Friday morning, before laughing. At the conclusion of the G20 meeting in Rome, Macron told assembled media that he “knew” Morrison had lied when asked if he thought the leader of Australia’s centre-right Coalition government had lied over the cancellation of a $90bn submarine contract Australia had held with France. Morrison’s predecessor as prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, was quick to back Macron’s characterisation, telling reporters at the Cop26 conference his former treasurer “lied to me on many occasions”. “Scott has always had a reputation for telling lies,” he said. Since then, Morrison has been forced to defend his record, a prospect made more difficult as he attempts to re-position his government’s climate record after almost a decade of obstruction and denial. The Labor opposition has seized on the prime minister’s discomfort, accusing him of “lying about lying” as Morrison attempts to re-write some of his previous public comments on issues such as electric vehicles and the Australian vaccination roll out. During the last election campaign, Morrison rubbished electric vehicles as being unable to tow boats or trailers and accused the opposition of wanting to “end the weekend”, after Labor set an aspirational target to encourage EV uptake in the sluggish Australian market. In launching his own government’s electric vehicle push earlier this week, which includes a threadbare policy aimed at expanding hydrogen refuelling infrastructure and assisting the private sector in setting up charging stations, Morrison denied he had ever criticised EVs. Morrison claimed he had “never” attacked electric vehicles, despite his on-the-record comments, and wrongly insisted there had been a “massive change” in the technology in the 950 days since he made the original comments. It was the same tactic he deployed when faced with questions over his repeated claim Australia’s vaccine rollout was “not a race” – a comment he made on multiple occasions earlier this year as Australians struggled to access a Covid vaccine. Scrambling to deflect criticism over his government’s role as much of Australia laboured under a Delta earlier this year, Morrison denied he had been speaking about the vaccine program itself and had been referring to regulatory approval (despite the vaccines having already been approved when he made the comments).It’s one of Melbourne’s closest suburbs, with leafy parklands, historic buildings, and a diverse, multicultural dining scene. Not to mention an internationally renowned racecourse. So why isn’t Moonee Ponds more of a household name? If you ask a local, it’s because visitors just haven’t taken the time to discover it yet – but word is starting to get out. Teresa and Vincent Arcuri, owners of Quest Moonee Valley, say it often surprises people to learn just how much there is to see and do in the suburb. Born and raised in Moonee Ponds, Vincent has seen the area grow and evolve over the decades. However, there’s one aspect that has remained constant throughout: the close-knit community. This is Moonee Ponds Teresa says: “I know it’s a bit of a cliche, but it really does feel like a small town. It’s a community. You walk down Puckle Street and recognise the same faces each day; you know their names. And many of the stores have been run by the same family for decades.” Keen to discover its unique charms? Rather than just search “Things to do in Moonee Ponds” and get the same tips everyone else does, ask a local. After all, they’re the ones who walk its streets every day, who know its history and the stories that bring it to life. With that in mind, this article will “pay it forward” by asking locals to reveal a hidden gem, and the next local to reveal theirs too. Explore for yourself For Teresa at Quest, it’s the Moonee Ponds Creek Trail that instantly springs to mind. Weaving for 19 kilometres amidst native grasses and under sections of leafy trees as it follows a historic creek bed, it’s the kind of spot where you’ll see locals out cycling or on their daily walk. Today the base is concreted along much of its length, but the creek once acted as a food and water source for the area’s traditional Wurundjeri Woiwurrung landowners – and there are ambitious plans to restore it to how it once was. “Some parts are lush and green, while others are old with bridges covered in graffiti, which I quite like,” Teresa says. “It’s a great spot to start the day.” Race to Tote Park Paying it forward, Teresa recommends Tote Bar &amp; Dining, a new upscale hospitality venue housed in a heritage-listed building at Moonee Valley Racing Club (and conveniently just across the road from Quest Moonee Valley). Tote’s culinary director, Luke Kinniburgh, says: “I love the social aspect of Moonee Ponds, from community sports to days here at the racetrack, at the park or in the amazing hospitality precincts we have. People don’t realise just how close we are to the CBD too. How easy it is to access.” Kinniburgh’s hidden gem is Tote Park, half a hectare of parkland opened in late 2020 and overlooked by Tote Bar &amp; Dining. He describes it as a beautiful space with exciting sculptures and a large playground for kids, and a great social asset to the community. Look for the queues Less than 10 minutes’ walk away is 20 Young Street Cafe and our next local expert, Paul De Vincentis. Tucked away down Penny Lane off Young Street, the popular sandwich bar regularly draws a lunchtime crowd. Just look for the queue to find it. Although not a resident of the suburb, De Vincentis has proudly run 20 Young Street Cafe for more than 26 years. He says the Moonee Ponds community is unlike anywhere in Melbourne, including the suburb he lives in. “You walk down the street, and you always bump into someone you know,” he says. “I’ve seen generations of people walk through my doors and later return with kids of their own. Now I’m serving their kids.” De Vincentis is a big fan of Queens Park. Although the Edwardian-style park is well known outside Moonee Ponds, he says it’s only locals who take the time to really explore it. Within its leafy borders, the park has a 50-metre swimming pool and bowling club and was also the first stop of explorers Burke and Wills on their ill-fated journey in 1860. Take a stroll through the shops Another long-time local retailer is Rob Furness, whose family has run Sims Sports on Puckle Street for 86 years. The multi-generational business is a Moonee Ponds icon. In addition to nearby Maribyrnong Park, Furness feels a little-known feature of the suburb is its newly expanded shopping precinct, which now extends beyond Puckle Street, down Mount Alexander Road and into many of the streets and laneways that lead off it. “If you don’t want to leave Moonee Ponds, you don’t have to,” Furness says. “We have amazing restaurants and bars, great coffee, and it’s just a wonderful place to be.” Time to check out with Teresa. She believes the greatest thing about Moonee Ponds is what the future holds. “Moonee Ponds is changing, and I think it’s for the better,” she says. “When our family settled from Italy, they lived right here. I’ve seen it evolve and grow, and there’s now so much diversity and choice. As a local, what really excites me is what it will become.” Travel as local as you like it with Quest Apartment Hotels.Picks of the week Hooked “Let’s be clear here, I’m not saying it’s OK to rob a bank … but I found a way to justify it pretty quickly.” Tony Hathaway has spent the past three years explaining his descent from family man and Boeing design engineer to opioid addict and prolific bank robber to journalist Josh Dean. The result is a nail-biter of a podcast – Apple’s first original series not linked to a TV show – that puts a human face on the US opioid epidemic. Hannah J Davies A Show About Animals Convinced you can talk to your dog? Self-confessed super nerd and Vice reporter Arielle Duhaime-Ross wants to find out if we really can have conversations with animals. Cue a deep dive into the case of Koko the gorilla – who made headlines when psychologist Penny Patterson claimed Koko had learned sign language. Hollie Richardson Sweet Bobby This terrifying, twisty hit from Tortoise Media tells the story of Kirat and Bobby’s not-so-normal romance. Not normal at all, in fact, considering we learn within the first few minutes of the show that it involved death, deception and witness protection. Alexi Mostrous unpicks a chilling catfish saga. HJD Operator Produced by the platform that brought us Dr Death and British Scandal, Tina Horn’s new podcast charts the rise and fall of the phone sex industry – from the booming 1-900 craze of the 90s to its difficult years of being usurped by free internet porn. “Telephone Pimp” Mike Pardes dishes the dirt on the schemes and strategy behind the business, but there’s also a look at the stigma operators faced. Hannah Verdier For Colored Nerds Hosts Brittany Luse and Eric Eddings resurrect their much-loved podcast after a four-year break. The duo, who have genuine best-friend chemistry and arguments to match, promise to “peel back the layers of Black culture we rarely discuss in mixed company” with help from guests including Tracy Clayton and Insecure’s Jay Ellis. HV Producer pick – Seriously…: Waiting for the Van Chosen by Christopher Cherry Waiting for the Van is a moving audio doc, following Scottish drug reform activist Peter Krykant’s heroic act of civil disobedience. One year ago, in an attempt to challenge 50 years of failed drug policy in Scotland – a country that leads Europe in drug deaths by an appalling margin – Krykant opened his specially kitted out van to Glasgow’s drug-dependent community, supervising heroin and cocaine injections, providing clean equipment, and intervening to save lives in cases of overdose. Journalist Dani Garavelli is with him from the beginning, sensitively recording the impact his compassion has on disregarded people on the outer margins of society, and the heartbreaking impact the work has on Krykant himself. Today the van is no more, but Scotland is at last beginning to see the stirrings of change on drug policy. This is the story of how those in power were forced to listen, and take action. Talking points The podcast-to-TV boom continues apace, with Apple’s adaptation of The Shrink Next Door – based on Wondery’s hit series about a cuckoo in the nest psychiatrist who took over his patient’s life – available from today. Read our feature on the rise in podcast to TV transfers here. Why not try: The Long Time Academy | Dot Com: The Wikipedia Story | Dead Eyes Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureLet’s Eat Grandma arrive in a cafe after their Guardian photoshoot, looking exactly like a pair of pop stars. Jazzed up in opulent jewel tones and immaculate eyeliner, they are both tall – about 5ft 9in – but the resemblance ends there. Rosa Walton has the plump red curls of a 40s movie star, while Jenny Hollingworth channels something of the young Kate Bush. They find it funny, being back in band mode after three years away, says Hollingworth, “because we view ourselves as just …” “… us,” says Walton. It feels right that the pair, both 22, spend much of the next two hours talking to each other. It’s easy to bask in their fervent, thoughtful, funny company. In robust Norfolk accents, they offer each other backup and emotional reassurance, cackle at absurdities, and tenderly analyse their personality traits from the perspective of an 18-year friendship (one that started over mutually appreciated snail drawings). Their tight bond drew fans in from their debut album, 2016’s lurid, sludgy, swaggering I, Gemini. Some critics couldn’t believe that two Norwich college girls had made this fantastically inventive music without a bloke pulling the strings. In 2018, the duo challenged that assumption with the single Hot Pink, an industrial, bubblegum piledriver of defiance “all about the misconceptions of masculinity and femininity”, says Walton. It led off their second album, I’m All Ears, which embodied the rushing emotions of their brilliant, impressionistic lyricism with euphoric synthpop. Nominated for an Ivor Novello award for best album, it made clear that they were massive generational talents. “We were viewed less like a novelty band,” says Hollingworth, pleased. Due next April, their third album, Two Ribbons, is their best yet, balancing fierce adrenaline with a new sense of space. It frequently plays out as a conversation between the pair from a time when their friendship had faltered. The cracks started to show in early 2018 when they found they could no longer finish each other’s sentences. In March 2019, Hollingworth’s boyfriend, the musician Billy Clayton, died of a rare form of bone cancer aged 22. Faced by these awful, random cosmic realignments of what had once seemed certain, somehow they still had faith that the band would survive. It took on a spiritual purpose. “Not in the sense of religion,” says Hollingworth, “but we were at a point where life felt very stripped of meaning. We were looking for a reason to live our life.” Before that, though, they tried to fight change. They were rehearsing for the I’m All Ears tour when they realised their relationship felt off. They assiduously tried to fix it, says Hollingworth, “because that’s what we’re like: Let’s have 50 discussions about it!” “We were talking but we weren’t really saying anything,” says Walton. Unsurprisingly, it didn’t work. “It wasn’t as simple as: ‘Oh, you hurt me by saying this,’” says Hollingworth. “It was like: we are fundamentally misunderstanding each other in some way.” The confusion coincided with Walton moving from Norwich to London. She craved independence and a new chapter – “somewhere busy with loads of exciting things going on and opportunities”. How did the reality compare with her expectations? “Oh, it didn’t!” she laughs. She quickly burned herself out. “And then ended up spending a lot of evenings in by myself, and feeling quite isolated and lonely.” Hollingworth jumps in, kind and enthusiastic. “Because you’re actually a very sensitive person underneath all the spontaneity and excitement, sometimes you forget that side of yourself and then it’s crying out for help.” Walton agrees. “Mostly I’d describe myself as an extrovert but then sometimes I go too hard with that.” It’s where they balance each other out, she says. “Jenny is much more measured and less risk-taking.” Walton tried to write through this strange period. The pugnacious, clattering Levitation describes experiencing a breakdown on a bathroom floor yet still managing to find hope in the promise of connection: “Shooting stars in your direction as I’m losing grip on my reflection.” It’s a surreal, vivid marvel about feeling “out of it and disoriented”, says Walton. “But at the same time, you feel up in the clouds and quite elevated. I quite often get it when I’m anxious: things look bright and there’s a lot of creativity.” Back in Norwich, Hollingworth understood why her friend had moved – though she stayed with her weekly as she travelled for therapy sessions in the capital – but couldn’t help feeling left behind, especially as her life shrank. She had met local musician Clayton in 2017, the pair bonding over their love of avant-garde pop production crew PC Music. At first, she admits, she found him annoying. “I got on with him better than you!” Walton hoots, her glorious laugh sounding like someone inhaling bubblegum. Hollingworth says she can be standoffish sometimes (though she is nothing but gregarious in person). “I was very drawn to him in a way where I didn’t realise that I liked him,” she says. They describe Clayton as “a massive sweetheart”: vibrant, witty – always taking the piss out of Walton’s not inconsiderable height, because he was “proper tall” – and very sensitive. He loved music and his idol Charli XCX had taken him under her wing. “But things were very complicated,” says Hollingworth. Clayton had been diagnosed with Ewing’s sarcoma. He was doing all right when he and Hollingworth accepted that they were, unavoidably, an item. She once said Hot Pink was partly about not feeling respected in past romantic experiences, but says Clayton – her first boyfriend – treated her as an equal. “We were always learning from each other. He was very focused. I was a lot more scattered before but he knew what his goal was creatively.” His drive emboldened her. “Maybe I didn’t have that much confidence in myself when we were doing I’m All Ears.” But in autumn 2018, as Let’s Eat Grandma’s profile rose, Clayton’s condition worsened. “And it wasn’t back from that, really,” Hollingworth says. She sounds surprised that she’s getting choked up, although her composure when narrating this horrendous period of time is frankly astonishing. I offer to move on but she doesn’t want to stop talking: “I’m just trying to get it right, that’s the hard thing.” The duo ploughed ahead with touring. Hollingworth felt a responsibility to the band and their crew “to keep going and not make a fuss”, even though she felt totally out of it. And Clayton needed space. “It was hard for him to be vulnerable with me because he didn’t want to be defined by his illness,” she says. “And that’s not how I saw him.” He eventually let his guard down, but told her to finish the tour. “He wanted me to have a good time with the band. It was hard because he really wanted to be doing music himself.” To survive on the road, she had to compartmentalise. “It was hard because you really wanted to talk to me about things,” she says to Walton, “but I couldn’t access that.” “It’s such a massive contrast to being on tour where everyone’s very excited all the time,” Walton replies. “That must have been even more alienating for you.” Hollingworth still agonises over whether she made the right decisions back then. “I always tried to ask him what he wanted and then that’s what I did.” “And that’s the best thing,” says Walton. “But I lost sight of myself because I was doing all these different things that I felt like I needed to do – that I wanted to do,” Hollingworth says emphatically, “because I wanted to be there for Billy, to be with him, because I loved him.” In spring 2019, the band were preparing to tour the US. Hollingworth had been staying in Cambridge so she could visit Clayton, who was receiving treatment at Addenbrooke’s hospital. She eventually left to give him his dignity. He died two days later. Even after that, she worried she was letting people down by cancelling the band’s imminent shows, although they still played the US Coachella festival to honour Clayton, who had dreamed of performing there. “I don’t regret that because I felt so numb, I don’t know what else I would have even been doing anyway,” says Hollingworth. It took her a year to be able to write again. The tough, desolate Watching You Go is an obliterating distillation of the rage and futility she felt after Clayton’s death. “A lot of the emotions I found quite frightening; I didn’t know how they could get any more intense without me feeling like I was actually going to die,” she says. She was stricken by anger, which in turn provoked “a deep sense of shame because I felt like this is not a normal reaction. It’s not socially acceptable to be really angry and particularly when you can’t explain exactly where it’s coming from.” She passed those fraught months in nature, discovering a sense of acceptance in the natural cycles of growth and death, accompanied by the music of 60s folkie Tim Hardin and Suede (a favourite of Clayton’s mum, Becky, “a legend” with whom she’s very close). Although Clayton was cremated and not buried, Hollingworth found solace spending time in graveyards. She knows some people found the way she processed her grief unhealthy. “How can I view death purely in a negative way when someone who I really love is dead?” she counters, with heart-piercing clarity. Clayton dying so young made Hollingworth reconsider what she wanted from life. She realised she was “overwhelmingly passionate” about music, and found empowerment in writing Two Ribbons – reclaiming her voice, and music, after the stress of the previous tours. Still, she says, it “was an agonising process”. The head of their label insisted she didn’t need to push herself so hard with her writing. “I was like, I’m not suffering because of the songs!” she laughs. “I am anyway, and I’m just trying to get that represented well.” The band wrote separately for the first time (although they contribute to each other’s lyrics), and the words on the new album are phenomenal. “It was quite a moving experience to be able to express ourselves to each other,” says Hollingworth. Some songs are about distinctive personal experiences: Hollingworth’s about grief; Walton’s about a breakup with her long-term boyfriend and the discovery of her bisexuality, one that made her feel as though “everything was coming to life”, she says. “I’d had these internal experiences of how I imagined it being with a woman,” she says, getting giggly, “even through watching films, or … getting any content on the internet that’s out there!” “Not necessarily video content!” Hollingworth clarifies, with comic primness, and their laughter echoes off the cafe walls. But they also write to each other. “It’s OK to say what you wanna say / And that we’ve grown in different ways,” Walton sings on Happy New Year. “Have we lost sight of the same light?” Hollingworth wonders on Insect Loop, a song that teems with anger, sadness, guilt and tenderness. “It’s nice not to be afraid to express difficult emotions about a person, and that not be seen as a shameful or a bad thing to do,” says Walton. The problem that had emerged in their friendship, they realised, came down to assuming that they each knew how the other felt. “Which is how we used to be,” says Walton, describing their childhood bond as “telepathic”. “Creatively and as individuals, we’ve always done so much together, it’s almost like we didn’t have the confidence to do things individually,” says Hollingworth. She remembers how as kids, and even on their debut album, they portrayed themselves as twins, hiding behind matching waterfalls of curly brown hair. “Bants!” she laughs (back then they also revelled in telling the press entertaining fibs). “It felt necessary because we needed to be a united front.” “Protecting each other,” Walton agrees. “People always talked about how similar we were, but we’re actually so different, and I don’t think we really realised that,” Hollingworth continues. They’ve come to recognise their differences: although Walton is more spontaneous and extrovert, she values precision, right down to creating colour-coded spreadsheets to organise her parts in the recording studio. Hollingworth may be cautious as a person, but she has more faith in following her mood creatively. She wonders whether she would ever have joined a band without Walton. “Particularly when I was younger and lacking in confidence, you would be like: ‘We’re going to do this.’ You pull me out of my comfort zone.” “That’s a nice thing to say!” Walton grins. The pair live close to one another again now – Hollingworth in Norwich, Walton in nearby Diss – and they understand that their friendship has changed for good. For Walton, who struggles with change in any relationship, the album is about accepting these shifts. Hollingworth wants to emphasise that Two Ribbons doesn’t offer any answers. “It’s question after question,” she says. That open-endedness underscores her newfound confidence. She’s less concerned about the pressure of expectation this time around, “because I feel much more connected with my purpose now, and also more confident in my ability to advocate for what I need”. You can hear it in the closing lines of the album, from the softly strummed title track, which refuse any sense of resolution: I wanna find the answer but I can only be your best friend And hope that that’s enough But I know that’s not enough Although she wrote the song about Walton and Clayton, that part was about the sheer fact that no amount of love could prevent her boyfriend’s death. “The end result of that song is someone dying or a relationship washing away,” says Hollingworth. “It’s in some ways hopeful, but also in some ways completely devastating. I never wanted it to sound like sticking a plaster on it.” • Two Ribbons is released on Transgressive on 8 April 2022.Health experts have raised the alarm over “serious” delays in diagnosing children and young people with cancer, as a study reveals the number found to have the disease during the pandemic fell by almost a fifth. The University of Oxford found a “substantial reduction in childhood, teenage and young adult cancer detection” in England last year. The research, being presented on Friday at the National Cancer Research Institute (NCRI) festival, showed a 17% drop in cases diagnosed in the under-25s last year compared with previous years. The impact of Covid on adults with cancer is well known. However, previously little has been known about the toll on younger patients. As well as the fall in the overall numbers of children diagnosed with cancer, researchers found that even those whose cancer was spotted last year were more likely to have been diagnosed only after being admitted to intensive care. That suggests long delays in accessing care may have made them much sicker, experts say. Kate Collins, the chief executive of the Teenage Cancer Trust, said: “Until now there was limited evidence about the impact of the pandemic on the cancer diagnosis of children and young people. Too often young people with cancer are forgotten or overlooked, especially in data collection, making them invisible in the system. Even before the pandemic, we knew that young people’s route to diagnosis could be long and complicated. Early diagnosis can save lives. “The fact the pandemic has delayed diagnosis is an enormous concern and it is essential to understand not only the reasons the pandemic affected diagnosis but the impact this is having on children and young people with cancer, and what they need now from the healthcare services who care for them.” Researchers at the University of Oxford obtained data from 1 February 2020 to 15 August and compared this with the same timeframe in the three years before Covid struck. A total of 380 cancers were diagnosed in children and young people during this six-and-a-half-month period in 2020. The study concluded there was a 17% reduction in the number of cases of cancer diagnosed last year compared with the previous three years. The finding was especially true for tumours of the central nervous system, where there was a 38% reduction in new cases, and lymphomas, where there was a 28% fall. The authors concluded: “The Covid-19 pandemic has led to substantial reduction in childhood, teenage and young adult cancer detection during the first wave, with an increase in cancer-related ICU admissions, suggesting more severe baseline disease at diagnosis.” The lead researcher, Prof Julia Hippisley-Cox, said: “A possible explanation is that these children waited longer to see a doctor and, therefore, may have been more unwell at the time of their diagnosis. “Together with the lower numbers of cancer diagnoses in the first wave, this study suggests Covid-19 may have had a serious impact on early diagnosis in this group of patients. As we recover from the pandemic, it’s vital that we get diagnosis of cancer in children and young people back on track as quickly as possible.”Ursula Wanecki has a dream, which is to finally meet Angela Merkel and swap tips with her about how to make Silesian plum cake. “I know for a fact she likes to make it, with a crumble topping. I imagine us sitting in her garden, having a coffee and eating the cake – with a crunchy crumble – away from the public eye.” She has been told “by people in the know”, she says, that her idea is not so far-fetched. Merkel knows about Wanecki, who has been impersonating her for almost as long as she has been chancellor, and has even sent her a signed book, which Wanecki takes to be tacit approval of her unconventional role. Her public presence as Germany’s leading Merkel double in everything from satirical TV shows and supermarket openings to private weddings and birthday parties has kept her busy over the past 16 years, even as she calls it her “hobby” and has retained her day job as an assistant tax consultant. When Merkel, 67, retires from her role next month, 65-year-old Wanecki plans to do the same. “What I’m looking forward to most is being able to wear nail varnish and big earrings again, something Merkel never does,” she jokes. “But I think that ditching the blazers will not mean people don’t continue to shout ‘Hallo Angie’ at me for some time to come. She will not disappear from the public consciousness for some time.” Her second life started almost by accident, with absolutely no effort on her part, Wanecki said in a recent online interview from her modest three-room flat in Attendorn, west Germany. “When he was very young my grandson saw Angela Merkel on the TV news and told his mum: ‘That’s granny.’ Then I wore an apricot-coloured suit at a wedding, something similar to what she had worn – the colour suits us both – and later dressed as her for a laugh to go to carnival. And it went down so well that it took off from there.” She is indeed more or less Merkel’s spitting image, mimicking her down to her slightly stooped posture, even her cautious gait and sometimes childlike glee. In a compelling series of sketches made for a popular TV show, in which she copies Merkel undertaking everyday tasks ranging from drawing money from a bank machine to throwing a stick for a dog, she has Merkel’s cautionary approach down to a T as she hesitates before stepping on to an escalator. “But I swear I never learned the mimicry. It is truly how I am. I hardly need to make any effort, I just put on a bit of makeup and an oversized blazer and when I walk out the door I am simply Angela Merkel,” she said. Despite being taller “by a head” and having a shoe size of 40, compared with Merkel’s 38, as well as “longer, slimmer legs”, she says most people fail to notice the difference, “especially if they’ve never seen Merkel in the flesh”. Wanecki was born in Poland and despite having lived in Germany for years, has a strong Polish accent. “Therefore I am the necessarily quiet chancellor,” she said. “I arrive somewhere in a limousine, walk up the red carpet, hold my hands in her trademark rhomboid position. There’s a gasp when people first see me – the shock effect is what’s most important. But as soon as I open my mouth, the secret is out. Sometimes I’ve joked that I’ve spent too long speaking to Vladimir Putin and his accent’s rubbed off. That almost always draws a laugh.” She has an agent who deals with impersonation requests, who has seen demand grow steadily over the years, reaching its peak in the recent, last months of Merkel’s fourth term. In October Wanecki took part in a feature film, though she is not allowed to go into detail. She has also starred in numerous films and tableaux by the British photographer and film-maker Alison Jackson, who specialises in faux scenarios using celebrity lookalikes, after the artist issued an appeal in the German media for a Merkel doppelganger. Wanecki made the cover of Le Monde in Jackson’s 2013 depiction of the revival of the Franco-German alliance, eating croissants and bretzels with François Hollande. She even made headlines once, a few years ago, after appearing in an advert for a new magazine for gay women, in which Merkel appeared to be in an intimate setting with another woman in what the magazine’s editor said was an attempt to win a reluctant Merkel over to support same-sex marriage. “I come from a strict Catholic family and I had had absolutely nothing to do with homosexuality,” Wanecki said. “But after I was approached by the magazine I started to do my homework and realised what an important topic it was.” But she was unprepared for the reaction that followed. “The furore around it throughout the world was extraordinary. I think it might even have helped Merkel change her mind about gay marriage.” Merkel did not in fact vote in favour of legalising same-sex marriage in 2017, but she made no attempt to block it and subsequently said she supported the parliamentary approval it received. Wanecki has also turned down plenty of offers, in particular, she said, if they appeared disrespectful towards a woman she described warmly as “clever, thorough and an excellent crisis manager”. These included a Russian TV advert for an underwear company, “and various other lurid invitations”. Among the personal highlights was a trip to Greece at the height of the euro crisis to star in an ad in which she had to dip her hand into a barrel of olives and declare: “This is Greek gold with which Greece will manage to clear its debts.” The low points came during the migrant crisis of 2015, when she was showered with offensive remarks while on assignments after welcoming refugees fleeing conflicts in Syria and elsewhere. “That was the first time I felt scared about being mistaken for her,” she said. “And to be frank, the fear has never left me. I always take care, even in my home town, when I’m walking down the street to see who else is nearby. If someone comes up behind me unawares, I’m easily alarmed. In Berlin when I’m standing at the top of a flight of stairs with my suitcase, I always wait until it is clear before hugging the railing and walking down, in case someone tries to shove into me. There are a lot of crazy people out there who maybe want the chance to make the headlines.” Soon Wanecki plans to hang up the blazers. She fancies a cruise and to explore more of her native Poland. “It was important for me in all the years to not lose the essence of Ursula Wanecki, the real me,” she said. “I hope that the same goes for Angela Merkel.” Classic recipe for Pflaumenkuchen mit Streusel (plum cake with crumble) Ingredients For the cake: 680-700g ripe empress plums (Zwetschgen/Pflaumen), stoned and quartered 125g plain flour 1 tsp baking powder 150g granulated sugar 1 tsp vanilla extract ½ tsp grated lemon zest 115g unsalted butter (not chilled) 2 eggs For the Streusel (crumble) 125g plain flour 100g sugar ¼ tsp cinnamon 115g unsalted butter (chilled) Preheat oven to 180C. Lightly grease a 22-23cm springform pan In a bowl, combine the flour and baking powder with a mixer. Add the sugar, vanilla extract, lemon zest, butter and eggs, and beat on a low speed. Once combined, increase speed to medium-high and beat until smooth and creamy. Spread the batter mix into the springform. Place the plums on the dough and press in gently with finger tips. For the streusel: In a bowl combine sugar, flour, butter, cinnamon by hand using finger tips, until the mixture resembles coarse bread crumbs. Spread the streusel by hand evenly over the plums. Bake for 50 minutes or until the top is lightly golden. Bake for a little longer for a crunchier crumble. Let the cake rest for 10 minutes before releasing the outer ring of the springform. Serve warm with hot vanilla sauce or whipped cream.The government faces a legal challenge to Boris Johnson’s decision to back Priti Patel over bullying allegations, throwing a fresh spotlight on the prime minister’s approach to ethics in public life. Alex Allan, Johnson’s independent adviser on the ministerial code, resigned last year after the prime minister chose not to act on a critical report about Patel. After a Cabinet Office investigation, citing instances in which she had shouted and sworn at staff, Allan found Patel had displayed “behaviour that can be described as bullying” and that she had “not consistently met the high standards expected of her”. His report suggested she had breached the ministerial code, even if unintentionally. Johnson decided she had not breached the code, however, and subsequently urged his colleagues to “form a square around the Prittster”. The FDA union, which represents senior civil servants, has brought a judicial review of his decision, probing the legal status of the ministerial code, which will be heard at the Royal Courts of Justice next Wednesday and Thursday. Dave Penman, the FDA’s general secretary, said: “Civil servants should expect to work with ministers without fear of being bullied or harassed. “The prime minister’s decision, which he said reflected the home secretary’s assertion that her actions were unintentional, also potentially allows ministers to avoid the consequences of their behaviour in future by pleading that it should be the intent of their actions which is important, not the consequences. “The result is that civil servants’ confidence in challenging unacceptable behaviour from ministers has been fatally damaged.” He added that 90% of civil servants in a recent survey carried out by the union said they had no confidence in the ministerial code as a way of dealing with bullying or harassment by ministers. Johnson took the unusual step earlier this week of insisting the UK is “not remotely a corrupt country”, amid a slew of sleaze claims after his botched bid to protect disgraced former MP Owen Paterson from a 30-day suspension for paid lobbying. Decisions on whether backbench MPs have breached their code of conduct are taken by the cross-party committee for standards, after an investigation by the independent watchdog, Kathryn Stone, and must then be rubber-stamped by the House of Commons. But the prime minister is the ultimate arbiter of whether the ministerial code has been broken – and Johnson chose to override Allan’s findings in Patel’s case. The home secretary subsequently reached a six-figure settlement with the former permanent secretary of her department, Sir Philip Rutnam, after claims that he was forced out of his job for intervening in her alleged bullying. Whitehall sources said that Rutnam received a £340,000 settlement with a further £30,000 in costs. He had threatened to take the home secretary to an employment tribunal hearing. Resigning in February last year, Rutnam claimed he had been the victim of a “vicious and orchestrated campaign against him”, which Patel had organised. Patel has consistently denied that claim and rejected allegations of bullying. A report from the independent Committee on Standards in Public Life, published last week, urged the government to strengthen the powers of the independent adviser on ministers’ interests – currently Lord Geidt, who was appointed to succeed Allan. The committee said he should be able to launch his own investigations; his reports should be published promptly; and the government should publish the range of sanctions that could be applied to ministers who breach the rules in future. “Meaningful independence is the benchmark for any effective form of standards regulation and current arrangements for the adviser still fall below this bar,” the committee said.100 Foot Wave 10.45pm, Sky Documentaries An alternative to Friday night’s usual schedule of chat and panel shows, here’s the opener of a six-part documentary about a surfer who, after spending more than a decade chasing a 100ft wave, continued to push surfing to even greater heights. Helmed by film-maker Chris Smith – director of Fyre and co-producer of Tiger King – the film intimately captures how Garrett McNamara helped to transform the small Portuguese fishing village of Nazaré into one of the world’s greatest big-wave surf destinations. Radical. Hollie Richardson Young Rock 8pm, Sky Comedy It’s the comedy that sees Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson running for US president in 2032 (and, frankly, why not?). Tonight, he flashes back to Miami 1990, as a college freshman attempting to resurrect a promising college American football career after a devastating injury. But is passion and stamina enough to carry him all the way to the NFL? Ali Catterall Cobra: Cyberwar 9pm, Sky Max The entertainingly melodramatic thriller, starring Robert Carlyle as a permanently beleaguered prime minister, reaches its penultimate episode. Another cyber-attack raises a troubling possibility: is Britain now at war with Russia and China? Suddenly, nothing seems out of the question. Elsewhere, Rachel’s reputation continues to plummet. Phil Harrison The Last Leg 10pm, Channel 4 This week’s guests are Jodie Whittaker, serving out her final term as the Doctor, and the standup comedian Darren Harriott, recently seen in British as Folk. The Leggers will cast a satirical eye over this week’s shenanigans, so expect chat on Cop26 and whatever other inanities the government has inflicted on us this week. AC The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Lady Gaga and Adam Driver – stars of much-hyped House of Gucci – join Graham, alongside Frozen star Josh Gad (he’s voicing a new Olaf series) and TV cook Nadiya Hussain. Rod Stewart also performs his new single (yep, he’s still at it). HR The Big Narstie Show 11.05pm, Channel 4 Big Narstie and Mo Gilligan’s anarchic, Bafta-winning chatshow, peppered with comedy, music and the odd “wait, what?” moment continues. Tonight’s guests: Patrice Evra, Harry Redknapp, rapper Big Zuu and pop star Raye. Hannah J Davies Film choice Lioness: The Nicola Adams story (Helena Coan, 2021), Amazon Prime Video Although women’s boxing is now an accepted part of the sporting world (at least on the amateur side), the story of Olympic champion Nicola Adams shows how hard won that success has been. Helena Coan’s bruising documentary highlights Jane Crouch’s attempts in the 90s to normalise female participation, a baton that passed to a gutsy girl from Leeds with ADHD and a violent father (he denies the allegation), who overcame pig-headed resistance to equality from gyms, the media and the boxing authorities. How she still came up smiling is a wonder to witness. Simon Wardell Live sport World Cup football: Scotland v Moldova 4.30pm, Sky Sports Football. Group F qualifier, Northern Ireland v Lithuania. World Cup football: England v Albania 7pm, ITV. Group I qualifier at Wembley.Nasa is in final preparations to launch the world’s first planetary defence mission. The Double Asteroid Redirection Test (Dart) is scheduled to launch on 23 November and is a joint mission with the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory. Dart is designed to collide with the asteroid Dimorphos and change its orbit as a test for spotting an asteroid on collision course with Earth and deflecting its path. At 160 metres across, Dimorphos is about the size of the Great Pyramid of Giza. It is a moon to the larger asteroid Didymos and completes an orbit of its parent rock once every 11.9 hours. In October 2022, Dart will collide with Dimorphos at a speed of 6.6 km/s. This will change the asteroid’s velocity by about 0.4 mm/s, altering its orbital period by about 10 minutes. If imparted early enough, small changes to an Earth-heading asteroid could be enough to avoid catastrophe. Dart is part of a larger, two-part mission called the Asteroid Impact and Deflection Assessment (Aida) mission. The second part is the European Space Agency’s Hera mission. Scheduled for launch in October 2024, Hera will study the aftermath of the collision in closeup. Dart will be launched from Vandenberg space force base, California, on a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket.Travel is often a form of privilege. It needs time and money, and sometimes a confidence that you are welcome somewhere else. During a pandemic and a climate crisis, with travel clearly playing a central role in both, to regularly move across large distances requires an ever stronger sense of entitlement. Yet the great benefits of travel – social, cultural, economic, psychological – have not gone away. And nor has the power of the travel lobby. When flights to the US resumed for Britons this week, after a long Covid hiatus, much of the media coverage read like an airline press release. There were only occasional hints that today’s transatlantic jets do not fit well with the goals of Cop26. Weighing up the costs and benefits of travel would be difficult for any British government. This is a sometimes claustrophobic country with a limited climate and a range of alluringly different places a short flight away. For half a century, foreign holidays have been a hugely valued mass pleasure: Britons fly more than people in many comparable European countries. And for centuries trade, immigration, emigration, colonisation and the afterlife of empire have made Britain a travel-driven society. Going constantly back and forth from these small islands is what many Britons have always done. With his fondness for private jets and dislike of delivering bad news, Boris Johnson does not feel like a prime minister suited to bringing our travel habit under control. In fact he is still hoping it won’t need to be. In the foreword to his government’s latest plan for reducing carbon emissions, he wrote: “In 2050, we will still be driving cars, flying planes … but our cars will be electric [and] our planes will be zero emission, allowing us to fly guilt-free.” From its enthusiasm for roadbuilding to its refusal to raise fuel duty, from its tax cut for domestic air passengers to its reluctance to close our borders during the pandemic, Johnson leads a government that seems to fetishise mobility. “Global Britain”, the “tilt to the Indo-Pacific” in defence policy and the Aukus alliance with the US and Australia all suggest a country frantically seeking more connections with distant places – while neglecting or actively undermining its connections with its European neighbours. Brexit is not a climate-friendly strategy. For all their patriotic rhetoric, today’s Tories – such as Sir Geoffrey Cox, with his winter preference for the Caribbean over his Devon constituency – often act as if they can’t wait to get out of Britain. Such restlessness has always been a feature of Conservatism. Landowners moving between the country and the city; imperialists sailing away to seize and govern; business executives accumulating air miles; wealthy southerners with second homes abroad; working-class retirees to warmer countries. The party has energetically represented them all. At the same time, the Conservatives have talked a lot about the importance of rootedness, of home-town loyalties, and of protecting Britain against foreign incomers and influences. The party has regularly attacked its opponents as rootless – “citizens of nowhere” – with the aid of newspapers owned by globetrotting press lords. The hypocrisy of it all can be maddening, not least because the left has always contained many people strongly attached to their communities, through activism or socioeconomic circumstances. Many Labour supporters, concentrated in the same urban constituencies for decades, aren’t “citizens of nowhere”, but the exact opposite. Yet it’s important to remember that Conservatism’s double standards can be what makes it appealing to people. As with other freedoms the Tories claim to champion, the party doesn’t really believe freedom of movement should be available to all, as the government’s approach to asylum seekers and migrants makes ever more obvious. Consciously or not, even some non-Tories agree with the government on this. If you believe that this country is too crowded, wanting to get away from it regularly while also wanting the state to stop outsiders getting in can seem a necessary contradiction. Conservative voters appear particularly resistant to cutting back on travel. According to the pollsters Ipsos Mori, they are significantly less likely than Labour supporters to favour a tax on frequent flyers. But there is a chance that this could change. An estimated 15% of the population take 70% of the UK’s flights. Even if all these frequent flyers are Tories – which they are not – that is a much smaller proportion of the population than the party’s total vote. So it follows that many Conservatives aren’t big travellers. Among less wealthy Tories and more environmentally conscious ones, there may be many people who feel – or who will come to feel, as the climate crisis worsens – that protecting the restless lifestyles of the richest Britons should be less of a government priority. It remains hard, though, to envisage a party that so reveres consumer choice seriously restricting flying, let alone driving. Not having to think about the wider consequences of our consumer decisions is one of the seductive prospects that modern Conservatism has always offered. It’s a bit easier to imagine a Labour government, led by Keir Starmer or some other stern figure, telling us that unlimited travel is no longer justifiable – at least until technology makes zero-emission journeys possible. But even with the Tories having a terrible autumn, such a government, like zero-emission jets, still seems a long way off. If we want to be less toxic travellers, for the foreseeable future it’s up to us. Andy Beckett is a Guardian columnistIt’s clear from the first scene of Yellowjackets, Showtime’s genre-bending survivalist series with a host of second-act 90s stars, that the girls of Wiskayok high school, fierce soccer stars on the field and headstrong teens off it, will go feral. There’s blood in the snow, screams of terror, a booby trap, an impaled body (not the first in a series that favors at least three gory shots an episode), a heart necklace hanging from a lifeless body, figures garbed in animal skins and overt suggestions of cannibalism. Cut to weeks earlier, 1996: the Yellowjackets, an undefeated and under-heralded soccer team in suburban New Jersey, are headed to nationals, and their close-knit relationships are starting to fray. Then cut to 2021, when four of the girls, now fortysomethings concealing improbable trauma with cracking glue, are thrown back to the tabloid-heavy drama of their past. The 10-part series, created by the Narcos alums Bart Nickerson and Ashley Lyle, toggles between the (pandemic-less) present and the girls’ traumatic upheaval 25 years before, when the private plane to nationals crashes somewhere in the Canadian wilderness. Lord of the Flies, meet Liz Phair and Lost. One timeline would already provide plenty of fodder for a 10-hour series, but Yellowjackets attempts to do three – a chronological telling of the team’s endurance for months in the woods, a modern mystery of who and what is haunting the middle-aged women, and occasional flashbacks which suggest the Yellowjackets’ survival was a much gnarlier ordeal than their generic line, to inquiring reporters and family members, of “starved and scavenged and prayed” until rescue. Add to that an ambitious yet potshot array of styles including horror, survivalist thriller, buddy caper, trauma study, mid-life crisis drama, suburban malaise portrait, teen romcom and (maybe) ghost story, and the result is an admirably brash, bloody show hampered by tonal turbulence. It’s an ouroboros of provocative elements that, at least in the six episodes made available to critics, appears much better at sketching the outlines of the sinister, occult, psychotic or carnal than digging in. The dual timeline is particularly frustrating in that it halves the time provided to the show’s greatest strength, by far: its roster of veteran 90s stars of canonically dark teen roles as fortysomethings grappling with a metastatic, horrific past. Melanie Lynskey plays Shauna, former star athlete and student deadened by parenthood and a spark-less marriage in the suburbs. Former teammate and punk girl Natalie (Juliette Lewis) has just exited rehab and rolls home a mess of her former self – bottle in hand, deadpan delivery, all curdled insouciance. In a storyline that still barely intersects with the rest halfway through the series, Taissa Turner (Tawny Cypress) is running for state senate with her telegenic wife and young son, a “queer Kamala” despite the teammates’ stated agreement to avoid the spotlight. A mysterious reporter serves to bring the women back in contact (then basically disappears for several episodes), along with a gleefully deranged nurse named Misty Quigley, played with cheery spikiness by Christina Ricci. Exactly what the women are so afraid of, or who sent them a mysterious postcard in the mail, or why a geometric symbol keeps appearing in the 1996 crash wilderness and 2021 suburban New Jersey is, six episodes in, still unclear. As for that crash wilderness: Yellowjackets is significantly better when it strays away from a survival plot that barely tiptoes toward the occult and devastation; halfway through, and the savagery of the opening scene remains barely a speck in the distance. The girls are traumatized and also like teenagers at summer camp; though many of the actors – Jasmin Savoy Brown as Taissa, Sophie Nélisse as Shauna, Sophie Thatcher as Natalie, Samantha Hanratty as Misty, and Ella Purnell as perky captain Jackie, whose adult absence suggests a grisly end – look eerily like their middle-aged counterparts, and the soundtrack and fashion evoke mid-90s girl power, it’s hard not to wish the show had relied on extensive flashbacks rather than a full split between the two eras. Still, it’s refreshing to see another recent series, including Peacock’s Girls5Eva and ABC’s Queens, depict women handling the accumulated confusions of the 40s. Yet after six hours, I wish for more coherence for these post-stardom actors, more space for their characters to breathe, more opportunities to push beyond mystery to something cathartic. Misty will be a divisive character, too jarringly deceitful for my taste but played with relish by Ricci. Lynskey does by far the most emotional heavy lifting of the series, straining for intimacy with her husband and bratty teenage daughter, masking enough rage to massacre a rabbit in her garden with placid smiles. Lewis, too, shines when her performance is allowed to reach beyond stumbling, bitter alcoholic pushing everyone away. Any momentum, however, gets dissipated by persistent diversions – shaky close-up shots to ominous music that reveal nothing, memory ghosts warning of danger only for that danger to fade into 90s pop music, another plot escape hatch. There’s a thicket of alluring storylines here, but it’s hard to see how Yellowjackets will stick the landing. Yellowjackets starts on Showtime on 14 November with a UK date to be announcedThe New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has split with a number of his most senior ministers in opposing a voluntary assisted dying bill, warning that it would “open a door that no one can close”. Perrottet took the unusual step of opening debate on the long-awaited legislation by expressing his strong opposition to voluntary assisted dying and urging his colleagues to consider the “ramifications” of supporting the bill by framing it as “a culture-changing decision” that would “cross a line”. “This debate is fundamentally about how we treat that precious thing called human life,” he said. “Our answer to that question defines what kind of society we will be. This bill, at its heart, enshrines a new principle: that we can intentionally help terminate the life of certain people to end their suffering. “Make no mistake, this is a culture-changing decision. Once we accept the principle of this bill, we cross a line and nothing will be the same, as we will have started to define the value of a life.” The voluntary assisted dying bill was introduced by the independent MP Alex Greenwich in October along with 28 co-sponsor MPs from across the political spectrum. If passed, the bill would make NSW the last state to allow euthanasia, limiting access to people with terminal illnesses who will die within six months, or 12 months in the case of a person with a neurodegenerative condition who was experiencing unbearable suffering. On Friday Perrottet said the debate over the bill was “not abstract” to him, and talked about visiting his dying grandmother in hospital a week ago. “I sat next to her, holding her hand. I could tell that she was in great pain and that she wanted it to be over,” he said. “I got a sense, as much as anyone can have, why those in such pain would want to end it quickly. So this debate is not abstract for me.” One of Perrottet’s first acts as premier was to grant a conscience vote on the bill, and his opposition to the legislation has seen him split from a number of the governments most senior MPs. On Friday, planning minister Rob Stokes, customer service minister Victor Dominello and the now-former transport minister Andrew Constance, who is retiring from NSW politics to run for the federal seat of Gilmore, all spoke in support of the bill. Constance, who has been a vocal supporter of the bill, spoke without notes as he told the parliament the bill was about ensuring people suffering a terminal illness were “able to ensure they are in control of their body and their life”. “I wish this was government legislation,” he said. Opponents of voluntary assisted dying bills both in NSW and other states have sought to argue for an increase in funding for palliative care rather than assistance to die. On Friday Perrottet launched the same argument, saying that as treasurer he had “failed to deliver” adequate palliative care in the state. “Yes, we have increased funding, but not as much as we should have,” he said. During his speech, Perrottet committed to funding “the best palliative care, not just in the nation but in the world”, saying many supporters of voluntary assisted dying “do not have confidence they will have adequate care and relief” when suffering from a terminal illness. “Well they should have confidence and the buck stops here,” he said. “We have failed to deliver that care and as the former treasurer I take responsibility for that. Let me be clear: I failed in my former capacity as treasurer to address this issue, but as premier I will fix it.” But voluntary assisted dying advocates say the focus on palliative care is misplaced. In October Assoc Prof Charlie Corke, a senior intensive care specialist and the acting chair of the Victorian Voluntary Assisted Dying Review Board, told the Guardian that most people who accessed the scheme in the state were already in palliative care. “However much funding you have for palliative care, there will still be a certain number of patients who would like to have control at the end of their lives,” he said. During the debate on Friday, supporters of the bill, including one of its co-sponsor’s, Labor’s shadow transport minister, Jo Haylen, took aim at attempts to “pit palliative care and voluntary assisted dying against one another”. “It is simply wrong, however, to suggest that palliative care and voluntary assisted dying are at opposite ends of the spectrum,” she said. “Palliative care is focused squarely on quality of life and treats the stress and symptoms of terminal illness. What it can’t do is address the underlying illness.” • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She read correspondence from constituents who talked about watching terminally ill family members suffer, including a woman whose aunt “was essentially slowly starving to death” in the absence of access to voluntary assisted dying. Constance too dismissed arguments about palliative care, saying: “this debate isn’t about palliative care. It’s not about advanced care directives. They remain in place”. “What it is about is our ability when diagnosed with a terminal illness and facing death to ensure you can have your loved ones with you holding your hand in a conscious state knowing that you are together in love and support and not going to potentially suffer what is around the corner in terms of a horrendous, horrendous death,” he said. Both major parties have granted a conscience vote on the bill, and it is also opposed by the Labor leader, Chris Minns. Debate on the bill will continue into next year after both major parties agreed to refer it to an upper house inquiry, which is not due to report until February. Constance on Friday took a swipe at that decision, saying he wanted the bill to pass both houses this year. “There is the opportunity for the legislative council to continue to sit and get this bill through and not let people suffer any longer,” he said. Separately on Friday the Greens MP David Shoebridge introduced a new bill to parliament that would lift the age of criminal responsibility to 14. The bill would see the parliament consider lifting the age of responsibility from 10 years old for the first time. “At ages 10 and 11 children are still losing their baby teeth, they don’t have their pen licences let alone driver’s licences,” Shoebridge said.A 160km multi-day hiking trail running the length of the Grampians (Gariwerd) national park will open to the public on Saturday, becoming one of the longest trails in Victoria. Connecting some of the park’s most spectacular peaks, the Grampians Peaks Trail is a 13-day/12-night journey starting at Mt Zero and travelling south over the ranges that make up Gariwerd and ending in the town of Dunkeld, 270km west of Melbourne. The $33.2m project was originally slated to open last year but faced construction delays as a result of heatwaves, a wet winter and the Covid-19 pandemic. But it has been in the making for much longer. “This project has been in the pipeline for well over 20 years from the first idea, so today is a milestone,” said Tammy Schoo, the acting area chief manager for the Grampians national park. “It’s been a really complex project both in its planning and its construction.” The trail has 11 bookable campsites and for most of its length is a grade 4 walk with steep climbs and descents. Some sections are slightly flatter and easier and there are also some more challenging grade 5 sections in the central Grampians south of Halls Gap. The trail was built in stages. The first stage, a 60km section from Halls Gap to Bugiga, involved improving or slightly modifying existing tracks and opened in 2015. Schoo said the work to complete the remaining 100km required construction in remote areas with materials brought in by helicopter. The trail extends over the ancestral lands of the Djab Wurrung and Jadawadjali people and Parks Victoria worked with traditional owners to guide the trail alignment and shape the visitor information and stories. More than 90 wildlife species live in the park and 900 types of plants – 49 of which are unique to the national park. “It’s a fantastic opportunity for people to immerse themselves in the environment and the culture of the area and walk the walk in a respectful way,” Schoo said. The project was jointly funded through $23.2m from the Andrews government and $10m in federal funding provided through the Horsham Rural City council. Lily D’Ambrosio, Victoria’s environment minister, said 34,000 walkers a year were expected by 2025, generating $6.39m in economic benefits and tourism development opportunities. “The value of our parks and reserves has become more evident in recent times, which is why we’re boosting investments in projects that protect our natural places and support local communities and regional economies,” she said. Early in the trail’s development, conservation groups raised concerns about what is known as “infrastructure creep”, which refers to the expansion of accommodation and other recreational infrastructure in pristine areas. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Matt Ruchel, the executive director of the Victorian National Parks Association, said plans for several huts and more high-end accommodation along the trail had been revised, with most now focused in existing town centres. The trail itself features small huts at two of the campgrounds. Ruchel said those changes had helped minimise the intrusion of the trail into unique areas. “We have to be careful in the future that new trails don’t compromise the integrity of the places people come to look at,” he said.Top story: Football jibe rebounds at second-job MP Hello, I’m Warren Murray and I know it’s Friday but there is still a bit to get through, so let us begin. The government faces a legal challenge to Boris Johnson’s decision to back Priti Patel over bullying allegations, throwing a fresh spotlight on the prime minister’s approach to ethics in public life. Alex Allan, Johnson’s independent adviser on the ministerial code, resigned last year after the prime minister chose not to act, following a Cabinet Office investigation citing instances in which Patel had shouted and sworn at staff. The FDA union of senior civil servants has brought a judicial review of the PM’s decision. It will be heard next week. Natalie Elphicke – the Tory MP for Dover who suggested Marcus Rashford should stick to football instead of campaigning about free school meals – has a second job herself, which she has revealed on her register of interests. Elphicke, who earns £82,000 as an MP, also gets £36,000 a year from her role as chair of the New Homes Quality Board, “an industry-led initiative to promote a new code for housebuilding standards together with a structure for an independent New Homes ombudsman”. The Guardian has approached Elphicke for comment. It has emerged that the Conservative MP Geoffrey Cox has agreed to an additional two weeks of work representing ministers from the British Virgin Islands this month while parliament is sitting. Government ministers have pointedly refused to defend Cox against allegations that he has been putting lucrative outside work ahead of his duties to his constituents – something he has denied. Cox says a legal team will perform most of the work and he will only be required to appear for two hours during the period. Cox also makes money by renting out a three-bedroom flat overlooking Battersea Park in south London, which was bought in 2004, partly using taxpayer payments towards mortgage interest costs under the old system of funding MPs. Records show Cox moved to a separate residential property in November 2017 and started claiming £1,900 a month in rent. * * * Scramble to make Cop count – World leaders will have to return to the negotiating table next year with improved plans to prevent disastrous levels of global heating because the emissions cuts coming out of Cop26 are too weak, architects of the 2015 Paris agreement have warned. A draft outcome text for the summit is set to be drawn up by delegates in the early hours of this morning, and discussed ahead of the 6pm deadline for the talks to finish – though previous Cop conferences have tended to go on well into Saturday and sometimes Sunday. Countries’ current plans – known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – would still lead to 2.4C of heating, according to analysis this week by Climate Action Tracker. Countries are currently expected to return with better pledges in 2025 but many are now demanding this be brought forward to next year’s summit in Egypt. * * * ‘Far from ideal but sensible enough’ – Students taking A-levels and GCSEs in England will be asked to sit repeated mock exams in case national exams are cancelled for the third time. Unions and school leaders have criticised the regulator Ofqual for releasing its plan B so far past the start of the school year. Ofqual has advised that a “sensible approach” would be for schools once a term to set assessments under formal exam-like conditions, starting before the Christmas holidays this year, and followed by others in spring and in the first half of the summer term. Julie McCulloch from the Association of School and College Leaders said it was “far from ideal … But not having a contingency plan would risk a repeat of the chaos of the past two years, and therefore, on balance, this seems like the right course of action and the confirmed set of measures appear to be sensible enough.” * * * Charles aide quits over honours offer claim – A former aide to the Prince of Wales has resigned as head of one of Charles’ charities, the Prince’s Foundation, amid an alleged cash-for-honours scandal. The Mail on Sunday published a letter from 2017 in which Michael Fawcett reportedly wrote that he was willing to make an application to change businessman Mahfouz Marei Mubarak bin Mahfouz’s honorary CBE to a KBE, and support his application for citizenship, in response to “the most recent and anticipated support” of the Dumfries House Trust, which later became part of the Prince’s Foundation. In September, Clarence House said Charles had “no knowledge of the alleged offer” and was fully supportive of an investigation by the Prince’s Foundation. Mahfouz has denied any wrongdoing. On Thursday, Clarence House said it was also ending arrangements with Fawcett and his party planning company Premier Mode. * * * Privilege boosts first pay packet – Graduates from poorer backgrounds earn half as much as more well-off peers in their first job after university because they put themselves forward for fewer roles and lack family connections and financial support, research shows. Children of professionals including CEOs, doctors and teachers start out earning an average of £23,457 compared with just £11,595 for those with parents in technical, manual or service jobs. Sarah Atkinson from the Social Mobility Foundation, which produced the report with TotalJobs, said wealthier graduates could hold out for the job and salary they wanted, were better at negotiating their pay and could leverage unpaid work experience to start at a higher level. Atkinson urged employers to take steps such as targeting deprived areas and considering socioeconomic circumstances in recruitment, reporting on the backgrounds of their staff, and supporting disadvantaged graduates with moving to a new city. * * * Collision course – Nasa is in final preparations to launch the world’s first attempt to knock an asteroid off course, in case one day we need to save the Earth that way. The Double Asteroid Redirection Test (Dart) is scheduled to launch on 23 November and nearly a year later will ram into the asteroid Dimorphos at six kilometres a second. At 160 metres across, Dimorphos is about the size of the Great Pyramid of Giza. It orbits a larger asteroid called Didymos. The aim is to slow the orbit of Dimorphos slightly. If done early enough, such small diversions of an Earth-heading asteroid could be enough to avoid catastrophe. Today in Focus podcast: ‘Patients are waiting too long’ If you dial 999, you might expect an ambulance to come in minutes – but in reality, the pandemic has pushed an already creaking service to its limits. This is the story of one shift, and how the people charged with saving our lives are navigating a system on the brink of collapse. Lunchtime read: Red for a second time Taylor Swift has reached the second instalment of her project to re-record (and regain ownership over) the six albums she released for label Big Machine, which were apparently sold out from under her to an old foe. Red (Taylor’s Version) reprises the 2012 album on which she first embraced synth-pop, tweaking songs and adding others to produce a mix of saccharine fluff and superb keepers. Laura Snapes’s review is in. Sport Harry Kane has admitted for the first time that his turbulent summer took a toll on him mentally. The England captain has also said he would love Gareth Southgate to stay on as manager after the 2022 World Cup. A penalty from Spain’s Pablo Sarabia secured a 1-0 victory in their World Cup qualifier away to Greece, ensuring Wales are guaranteed a play-off spot at least. Stephen Kenny’s Republic of Ireland gained a creditable 0-0 draw with Portugal, whose automatic World Cup hopes were hit by Pepe’s red card. Meanwhile, Sadio Mané was withdrawn early on for Senegal against Togo on Thursday to provide Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp with more injury jitters. Azeem Rafiq has described himself as “incredibly hurt” after Joe Root said he has not been witness to any instances of racism during his 14 years at Yorkshire. Emma Raducanu is set to skip the Rugby Football Union’s open invitation to attend an England match this autumn, the Guardian understands, despite Eddie Jones expressing his hope that “we’ll see her at Twickenham shortly”. Matthew Wade’s brilliant late surge of sixes guided Australia to victory against Pakistan and set up a mouth-watering T20 World Cup final with New Zealand. The American Tommy Paul beat Andy Murray in the Stockholm Open quarter-finals to put an end to the Scot’s season, while Dan Evans fell to Frances Tiafoe. Lewis Hamilton has said that he must take victory at this weekend’s Brazilian Grand Prix if he is to stay in touch with Max Verstappen in the Formula One world championship race. And 105-year-old Julia “Hurricane” Hawkins said she was disappointed not to go under a minute despite setting a 100m world record at the Louisiana Senior Games. Business The standoff over Middle Eastern migrants on the border between Belarus and Poland could further increase energy prices in Europe after Minsk’s autocratic leader, Alexander Lukashenko, threatened to cut gas supplies to the west if he is hit by more sanctions. The key Yamal-Europe pipeline carrying gas from Russia’s vast reserves runs through Belarus and any disruptions could cause another shock for fuel and heating costs just as the coldest months are beginning. The pound has slipped again as the US dollar hit 16-month highs. It will buy just $1.336, but is steadier against the euro at €1.167. The FTSE looks like lifting around 0.1% this morning. The papers Our Guardian front-page lead is the Cop climate targets as detailed above but there is a looming crisis of another kind further down: “Belarus threatens to cut off gas to Europe”. Alexander Lukashenko has made the threat as the EU considers sanctions in response to the migration crisis that the despotic president has instigated at the Poland-Belarus border. Thousands of people, mainly from Middle Eastern countries, are camped out as temperatures plunge below freezing. Even darker portents in the Telegraph: “Russia may invade Ukraine, warns US”. From the soup of sleaze emerges a tasty gobbet of irony: “MP who told Rashford to focus on the day job has second job” is the i’s splash. “MPs fill pockets using rent expenses loophole” says the Times, reporting on the tenancy arrangements of Geoffrey Cox and others. “He was asked to keep mask on in hospital 3 times” – that’s the Mirror with another kind of Tory bald-facedness, “he” being Boris Johnson. “999 calls crisis” is the first thing you’ll read in the Metro. Patients experiencing life-threatening emergencies such as heart attacks, strokes and major breathing problems are becoming trapped for many hours in GP surgeries, unable to get to hospital, because ambulances are taking so long to turn up. “Stark reality behind 5.8m NHS backlog” – that’s the Express. NHS bosses have said that many hospitals are now only able to cope with people coming through emergency departments, let alone catch up on the treatments put in abeyance by Covid. The Daily Mail has “Charles’ top aide quits over cash for honours”. The Sun says “She WILL remember them”, reporting that the Queen will be at the Cenotaph on Remembrance Sunday. The FT reports “Xi cements grip on China after vote puts him on par with Mao” – the Communist party has passed a rare, laudatory “historical resolution”. Analysts said it was designed to elevate his status to the level of Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, and help secure his political future after the party removed presidential term limits in 2018. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend. • This article was amended on 19 November 2021 to correct the exchange rate for the pound against the euro.After an exhausting two weeks of speeches, protests, meetings and increasingly tortuous negotiations at the Glasgow climate summit, a sense of simmering frustration and anxiety has gripped many of the 25,000 attenders. Even former world leaders are not immune. “There are times where the future seems somewhat bleak,” said Barack Obama on Monday. “There are times where I am doubtful that humanity can get its act together before it’s too late, and images of dystopia start creeping into my dreams.” The initial text of the climate agreement to be thrashed out by negotiators has done little to ease the anxieties of activists and delegates who wanted to see a major breakthrough to contain disastrous global heating. “Things are still missing from that text and the clock is ticking, it has added to the fear and anger,” said Alexis Pascaris, an environmental policy researcher and activist from Michigan, who added that the climate crisis had, as with many other young people around the world, made her question whether she should have children. “To procreate seems hypocritical,” she said. “If I am bringing up another mouth to feed, that will involve more trees being chopped down and more gasoline being pumped. I tend to think: ‘Am I allowed to add to this mess?’ “I feel dismal and sometimes disempowered. I got into this thinking I’m going to save the world and now I would say maybe I’d inspire one or two human beings because I don’t think large-scale change is feasible. There is this underlying anger, but we have to turn that into action.” For many of the delegates, the looming threat of climate catastrophe is rooted in tangible danger rather than more abstract fears. Maina Talia, a delegate from Tuvalu who took a week to travel from the small Pacific island nation to Glasgow, said his feeling of anxiety “is more than what Obama is talking about”. “It’s part of us now, it’s in us,” he said. “It’s an everyday reality for us, the fear for what the future will look like for us, our kids. There is anxiety and fear, particularly when there are high tides. The water is rising, the waves are crashing against our doors.” The nightmare scenario for Tuvalu and other vulnerable countries is that sea level rise wipes them almost completely off the map. The future viability of certain countries is to some degree being decided in front of anguished representatives in a cavernous convention centre perched on the banks of the River Clyde. “It seems if no action is taken by the international community, we will have to move,” said Talia. “We want to stay on our island, practice our culture. Some of the people are listening to our plea for survival but this is like a game to the oil-producing nations. What can we do?” Anxiety over the climate crisis appears to be growing, especially among younger people, but differs between countries, experts say. Dr Lisa Page, a climate specialist at the Royal College of Psychiatrists – who prefers the term “eco distress” as anxiety is a more clinical term – said young people in the UK often feel fearful over their future and guilty over their role, while their counterparts in Africa are more likely to feel angry and a sense of injustice. “You hear from younger people that they are really worried about this, it causes them at times to feel quite hopeless, depressed and fearful,” Page said. People exposed to climate-driven disasters such as floods and hurricanes could have lingering mental health effects even several years after they happened, she added, with escalating conflict, food insecurity and forced migration set to cause further distress as the world continues to heat up. For those not in immediate life-altering danger, Page said it was important not to view worries about the climate as pathological and to understand such concerns are rational responses to bad news. “It’s not possible to say to young people ‘it’s not going to be that bad’ because the science is saying the opposite – it may even be worse,” she said. “The first thing is to acknowledge that these are overwhelming problems and your ability to counteract them is limited. There is hope, though, so maybe link with other people talking about this, join movements that advocate for higher change. Knowing it’s valid to feel this way is helpful.” For those within the realm of Cop26, however, the experience of being alongside thousands of others worried about the climate crisis has not been entirely restorative. “Being here makes me more worried because this Cop isn’t very inclusive, those on the frontlines of climate change aren’t here to tell their stories,” said Makoma Lekalakala, a delegate from South Africa. “There is a lot of trauma, people who don’t have access to water, people affected by natural disasters, and we cannot bear it any more. We wonder if anyone is listening at all.”Remembrance poppies should be fully recyclable or even biodegradable, say green campaigners, amid fears millions will end up in landfill this month. The Royal British Legion produces about 30m poppies each year. Although the flower and leaf are made from paper, the green stem and black centre are plastic. At present, the only way to recycle the whole poppy – produced annually to mark Remembrance Day – is at Sainsbury’s branches. Campaigners say a large number will inevitably end up being thrown away, discarded or simply lost while being worn, and are calling on the Royal British Legion to introduce a sustainable alternative. “It’s so important that we move away from using disposable things wherever possible, and poppies are an excellent case in point,” said Daisy Hutchison, of the not-for-profit campaign group Plastic Free Hackney. “Royal British Legion could use this as an opportunity to champion reuse, to make something special that supporters can keep and use again each year.” The Labour MP Clive Lewis, a former army reservist, said: “We do all have a part to play and introducing a recyclable poppy would be a good gesture from the Royal British Legion. But the climate crisis won’t be addressed by changes like this while our government refuses to commit to ending fossil fuel extraction immediately.” His colleague Fleur Anderson, a Labour MP who is calling for a ban on all wet wipes containing plastic, added: “From plastic bags to bottles and now wet wipes and poppies, people are rightly asking for plastic-free products. This is forcing the industries to innovate and find other ways to make things that don’t kill millions of fish.” The Royal British Legion said it was working to produce a poppy that has minimal impact on the environment. “We must be confident that the new poppy meets all necessary compliance requirements and is truly better for the environment before we commit to large-scale production,” a spokesperson said. The Peace Pledge Union, which produces non-plastic white poppies often worn as a symbol of peace, said it would be selling fully recyclable poppies from next year. A spokesperson said: “This won’t increase the cost. This has been possible despite our operation being relatively small-scale.”Boris Johnson’s tie was carefully tucked inside his shirt, all the better not to spread infection. He bumped elbows with nurses, rather than shook hands. But when the prime minister posed for the cameras at Hexham hospital this week, he didn’t bother with a mask. He had been wearing one when he turned up, local papers reported – just as every other visitor to the hospital must. But he shed it to do some press interviews and then emerged barefaced for his photocall. Was it just forgetfulness, or a deliberate nod to the strange minority of diehards who still enjoy watching him throw Covid caution to the wind? As ever with Johnson, it’s hard to tell cock-up from calculation. But no other living British leader would, one suspects, have failed to cover their face in a building full of sick and sometimes immune-compromised people. Hospitalisations from Covid have, thankfully, been falling recently, as booster jabs for elderly people help to tackle waning immunity, although daily figures released on Thursday recorded a surprise uptick in cases. But we are not out of the woods yet. There are even hopes of reaching some kind of “endemic equilibrium” this winter, where some people will still get infected but the vaccine is enough to hold rates in check. However, the NHS is still struggling with the long tail of the pandemic, including surging demand from people who missed out on medical care at the height of the crisis and who are now presenting as emergencies. Hospitals are so full that ambulances wait for hours outside A&amp;E to unload their patients, while 999 operators run out of crews to send. The family of 82-year-old Margaret Root described this week how she waited almost six hours for an ambulance after having a stroke, and then another three hours just to get inside the hospital; by then it was too late to give her drugs that could have helped reverse the damage. Nine in 10 health service leaders, in a survey released this week by the NHS Confederation, said their situations were “unsustainable” – and that’s before the weather gets truly wintry, bringing with it falls on icy pavements, and pneumonia cases. Downing Street still insists there is no need to bring in tougher restrictions such as proposed Covid passports, which would force people to show proof of vaccination or negative Covid status to get into nightclubs. Ministers hastily retreated from that idea this summer after rumblings of outrage from all the usual rightwing suspects. But what’s intriguing is that Wales – which in October had the highest rates of infection of all four nations – and Scotland went ahead; and this week the Welsh scheme was extended to cover cinemas, theatres and concert halls. For a good year now, Labour-controlled Wales has been following a more cautious path than England. The jury is still out on what difference that has made; the circuit-breaker lockdown it imposed last October, at a time when Johnson was reportedly declaring that he would rather let the “bodies pile high” than impose it, didn’t stop Wales needing another lockdown later that winter. Nor did a more cautious Welsh approach to lifting restrictions this summer prevent hospitals struggling, or stop case numbers shooting up again once schools reopened. But all this has to be weighed against the great unknowable, which is how much worse things might have been had Wales not been so cautious. The one thing we know for sure is that, far from revolting against the restrictions – as some pundits never tire of predicting – if anything, Welsh voters seem reassured by them. YouGov polling this September found 67% thought their administration had handled Covid well, against only 39% thinking the same of the UK government. Wales’s soaring Covid numbers may have pushed it into hard choices that England has so far avoided, but a wise government would be watching carefully to see how these decisions play out. The Welsh scheme still allows the unvaccinated to secure a Covid pass by producing a negative lateral flow test result. But it makes socialising less spontaneous for the wilfully unjabbed – so as well as keeping infections down, it may yet help nudge vaccination rates up. In France, where a similar scheme covers everything from cafes and cinemas to shopping centres and long-distance trains, President Macron admitted the idea was “to push a maximum of you to go and get vaccinated”. The sky does not appear to have fallen in on French cafe culture, and 76% of a once vaccine-hesitant country is now jabbed. This is what grownup government looks like: different in each country, because each outbreak is different, but always responsive to the demands of the virus. What stops it happening in England is what arguably stops grownup governing from happening on all sorts of issues, to the growing alarm of some Tories watching their poll lead narrow. It’s Johnson’s longing to please the people who put him where he is now. Dancing with the one that brung ya, as Ronald Reagan used to call it, means pandering to an ideology that has been calling the shots inside the parliamentary and grassroots party since the Brexit referendum, its leading figures self-styled as the Spartans but increasingly (for a new generation of Conservatives) known by less printable names. Owen Paterson was a loyal Spartan, so Downing Street marched his reluctant colleagues up the hill to save him from being suspended over lobbying allegations, only to turn and flee when that proved workable. The self-harming trade war we are threatening to start with the EU is chiefly for the benefit of the Spartans, who were told that a hard Brexit would have serious consequences for Northern Ireland but wouldn’t listen. Spartans tend not to like facts that contradict their ideological worldview. In his book Spike, the former Sage science group adviser Jeremy Farrar recalls a Zoom meeting last autumn with Tory MPs from the lockdown-sceptic Covid Recovery Group, in which he tried to persuade them of the case for restrictions. Farrar reeled off the numbers on rising infections, hospitalisations and deaths, proof of an epidemic exploding. In return, he writes: “They asked questions like, ‘What should I say to my constituents who don’t see much Covid?’” There is, to put it mildly, a theme emerging. In the wake of the Paterson debacle – which not only trashed parliament’s reputation but started a war on Conservatives with lucrative outside interests – some Tory MPs are asking hard questions about who has the prime minister’s ear. The mask, in more than one sense, is slipping, and in future they may well push back harder when asked to do things that don’t sound right. Well, it’s progress of a kind, I suppose. What a shame that, for the sake of the rest of the country, it has come several years too late. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistHunting gray whales has long been a sacred tradition for the Makah Tribe, dating back thousands of years. But in recent decades, the practice has faced severe scrutiny from conservationists, and the tribe, located in Washington state, has fought a lengthy legal battle to try to resume the historic practice. Now, the situation could be finally gearing up to a resolution. On Saturday, a public comment period is set to close, opening the doors for a key determination by the National Marine Fisheries Service on whether to grant the tribe a special waiver. The granting of such a waiver would set Makah Tribe members on a path to finally resume the sacred whaling practice that dates back at least 2,700 years. The comment period came after a recent recommendation to the US Department of Commerce in support of awarding the tribe a waiver under the Marine Mammal Protection Act, which bars the killing of marine mammals. Administrative law judge George J Jordan stated in his recommendation that the eastern North Pacific gray whale stock “will not be disadvantaged by the issuance of a waiver” and the authorized take “will not meaningfully affect its distribution, breeding, or migratory habits”. According to a spokesperson for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa), such a recommendation could have a major influence on the final decision. Jordan’s recommendation included proposed regulations, such as allowing Makah tribal members to hunt for only four months beginning on 1 July on odd years, and strike up to two eastern North Pacific gray whales. During even years, they would be allowed to hunt for six months beginning on 1 December and strike no more than three. In the ensuing weeks, community members and environmental groups submitted over 100 comments in response to the recommendation. The majority, based on an examination by the Guardian, were against whaling, with some claiming the tribe no longer needed whales for sustenance, while others argued the creatures needed to be protected. Some that did support the waiver, cited the tribe’s sovereign rights and long history of whaling. Noaa Fisheries’ decision on whether to grant a waiver – the timing of which is unclear – is expected to be based on such documents as the judge’s recommendation, submitted comments and a forthcoming supplement to the 2015 draft environmental impact statement. The Makah Tribe, which today includes about 3,100 enrolled members, features the sentient creatures in their dances, songs, visual arts and family crests, explained the Makah tribal council chairman, Timothy J Greene Sr. At the same time, whale hunting has long been completed through a process of giving thanks and acknowledgment for a gift given to them by the Creator. And if the hunts were successful, according to Chairman Greene, tribal members used virtually every part of the creatures, from their bones and meat to their intestines and baleen. “We acknowledge the life of the whale in the process and ceremonies,” he said. “We give that life the respect that it deserves. We believe that that life isn’t taken by us, but that the creature chooses to give its life to us to sustain us and carry out our connection with the ocean and with that part of the natural world.” In the Treaty of Neah Bay of 1855, the tribe gave up hundreds of thousands of acres of land, while explicitly securing the right to whale in “usual and accustomed grounds and stations”. In the 1920s, with commercial whaling and a clear decline in the whale population, the tribe voluntarily paused the hunts. Chairman Greene said the tribe’s most recent successful hunt was in 1999, soon after gray whales were removed from the endangered species list. The lead-up to the hunt involved community members praying and fasting, as well as intense training and other preparation by the whaling crews. The hunt “was a moment that really brought joy to the community, it brought the community together in a way that I haven’t seen since”, he said. But there was also intense pushback from conservation groups, including from the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, a non-profit marine conservation organization based in Washington state. A spokesperson for the organization declined the Guardian’s request for an interview. Now, after years of working through the legal process of trying to return to whaling, tribal members will probably soon see a key decision made. But even if the waiver is granted, there are more steps involved before they could actually go out and hunt, including the tribe having to apply for a hunting permit. DJ Schubert, wildlife biologist for the Animal Welfare Institute, which opposes the Makah Tribe resuming gray whale hunting, said it was impossible to humanely kill such a large creature. He said their opposition also stems from the decline in the eastern North Pacific gray whale population since 2019 due to an unusual mortality event, as well as concern that the endangered western North Pacific gray whales could be mistakenly hurt or killed. “While we respect the Makah, we respect their culture and their traditions, and we firmly believe that they should continue to celebrate whales through dance and song and storytelling and so on and so forth, we simply disagree with them as to whether or not it is legally or scientifically or ethically appropriate to hunt gray whales,” said Schubert. Chairman Greene compared the community no longer hunting whales to a member of the Catholic church being denied communion. “It’s that deep,” he added. John Hocevar, Greenpeace USA oceans campaign director, said in an email that whether or not the Makah assert their treaty rights and continue their tradition of whaling should be up to the tribe. He said: “Subsistence hunts by Indigenous peoples have a long history, and have never put entire populations at risk … As we think about the major course corrections that humanity must undergo today, we might benefit from seeing what we can learn from Indigenous communities that have been much more successful at living in balance with nature than those who colonized their lands and waters.”Pick of the week The Wheel of Time Given that it has already been renewed for a second season, Amazon clearly has high hopes for this lavish fantasy drama. Based on Robert Jordan’s novels of the same name, The Wheel of Time stars Rosamund Pike as Moiraine, a member of the Aes Sedai, a sect of women endowed with magical gifts. It’s pitched somewhere between Game of Thrones and Britannia but, initially at least, lacks either the former’s seething intrigue or the latter’s wayward irreverence. However, the world-building feels subtle and patient enough to be worth persevering with. As we join Moiraine’s tiny band they’re in retreat but strong bonds are forming in adversity. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 19 November *** Crime Irvine Welsh’s 2008 novel is brought to grimy life as Dougray Scott plays troubled Edinburgh murder detective DI Ray Lennox, who’s just about holding it together while storming furiously in and out of AA meetings. It’s an admirably nuanced performance – Lennox’s rage and anguish is mostly internalised but his simmering intensity still takes some handling, as his new sidekick DS Amanda Drummond (Joanna Vanderham) learns. Searching for a missing schoolgirl, Lennox is haunted by “Mr Confectioner”, an almost mythical, uncaptured evil suspect. But does he even exist? BritBox, from Thursday 18 November The World’s Biggest Druglord Pablo Escobar and Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán never enjoyed the profits that virtually unknown drug lord Tse Chi Lop made, according to this very dramatic look at the criminal mastermind. And yet, the man behind the largest drug trafficking operation in history managed to remain below the radar for more than a decade. In this crime-thriller documentary, Harvard professor Laura Huang charts Tse’s rise, from committing petty street crimes to becoming the unofficial CEO of the global drug trade – until, of course, he was finally caught. Discovery+, from Sunday 14 November *** This Girl’s Changed Growing up in Huddersfield, Persephone Rizvi was a big party animal. But her chaotic lifestyle needed to change and the steps she decided to take were dramatic. Five years ago, she adopted Islam and removed herself completely from her old life. But how did that sit with her old friends? In this fascinating documentary, Rizvi looks at the pros and cons of a total life change as she attempts to reconnect with some of the people she left behind. How do they feel about her transformation? And does she owe them an explanation? BBC Three, from Tuesday 16 November *** Tiger King 2 We’re about to learn whether the interest in this odd, gloomy, marginal story endures beyond the unique circumstances (the panicky beginning of lockdown) under which people binged season one. Already, it’s proved controversial – Carole Baskin has taken legal action against Netflix over her continuing presence in the series, which doesn’t speak well of the ethics involved. Meanwhile, Joe Exotic is now behind bars. What, beyond the scurrilous stoking of a freakish but fundamentally grim set of circumstances, will be achieved? Netflix, from Wednesday 17 November *** The Line A grim story of lost morality in the fog of war, this four-part series explores the case of US Navy Seal Eddie Gallagher, who was accused of war crimes after allegedly killing a prisoner of war in Iraq in 2017. The case was complicated by the fact that the only viable witnesses were his fellow Seals. Thus began the process of unravelling interpersonal grievances, tackling the omerta that exists within military realms and trying to retrieve evidence. Then, as if matters weren’t already tricky enough, Donald Trump got involved … Apple TV+, from Friday 19 November *** Cowboy Bebop Back in the late 90s, Japanese sci-fi anime Cowboy Bebop smashed all genre preconceptions, presenting itself as a sort of existentially questioning noir western. This series brings the anime to physical life. It’s a risky gambit given the affection surrounding the original series: is it possible to maintain the wonder and fantasy of a cherished animation while populating it with actual humans? The adaptation wisely concentrates on developing a distinct universe of its own – John Cho stars as Spike Spiegel, the intergalactic bounty hunter at the heart of the story. Netflix, from Friday 19 NovemberThe people who live in Mukuru, one of the vast, sprawling “informal settlements” in Nairobi, used to dread the rains, when the slum’s mud-packed lanes would dissolve into a soggy quagmire of sewage, stagnant water and slimy rubbish. But a few years ago, things began to change. On a newly paved road Benedetta Kasendi is selling sugar cane from a cart. It gives her a clean platform, somewhere she can keep her wares tidy. Her biggest challenge now is what to do with the sugar-cane waste as she does not want to clog up Mukuru’s revamped sewers. “You can have a piece of sugar cane here. The place is clean now,” Kasendi tells Patrick Njoroge, programme officer at the Akiba Mashinani Trust (AMT), a fund that raises capital for slum improvement projects. Njoroge has been working for the past 10 years on a masterplan for Mukuru, and he knows how filthy the place used to be. “This road was more of an open sewer. It is not a place you could have wished to spend an extra second. Walking was dangerous as one risked falling into the sewer. This lady set up here after the road was rehabilitated – slum upgrading spurs new businesses, however small,” says Njoroge. A few metres away, Diana Mwende lines up jerrycans at a kiosk where free fresh water is available. “I used to walk 30 minutes to fetch water. Today, that walk has been reduced to two minutes since these water points were installed in our neighbourhood,” she says. The improvements save her more than time: “I used to pay 400 shillings [£2.70] for water every month and 1,000 shillings to access the communal toilet. Now I have a clean toilet by my house.” Kasendi and Mwende are among thousands who have benefited from a community-based programme to upgrade one of Africa’s biggest informal settlements and whose success will be used to transform similar slums in Kenya and beyond. The ambitious project follows consultations with more than 40 organisations led by the Muungano Alliance, an umbrella body driving reforms in Kenya’s informal settlements, and including universities, civil societies, the private sector and Nairobi county government. The goal is to make the slum a “healthy, functional city neighbourhood”. Community involvement in improving the sprawling 243-hectare (600 acre) slum was the key. A resident was chosen to represent groups of households and thousands of people were asked for their views; 250 community mobilisers were engaged to raise awareness of the project. Residents were trained to collect data – a huge task given the size of Mukuru, which has a population generally estimated to be at least 400,000. Every latrine, water tap and electricity pole in the settlement was mapped. One of the most urgent issues was toilets, and there were many requests to replace the 3,800 filthy pit latrines. Now, 1,000 households have access to flushing toilets and running water. The government has approved the construction of 13,000 new houses in Mukuru, the first social housing project in Kenya. “So far, half of the 52km [32 miles] of roads earmarked for Mukuru have been completed, and residents are already benefiting from a couple of new hospitals that offer 24-hour medical services,” says Njoroge. Mukuru was originally allocated by the Kenyan government to politicians and owners of businesses in the 1980s and 1990s to develop light industries within a two-year period. Failure to do so would see the grantees lose their claims to the land. As years passed without any development, slum landlords descended on the vacant land and built unregulated structures for rent. Mukuru eventually grew to nearly 10% of Nairobi’s population, all living in squalor. There are other hazards too: in September 2011, more than 100 people died in an explosion after a fuel spill in a section of the slum known as Sinai. The victims had rushed to collect leaking fuel when it was ignited. Illegal electricity connections have resulted in similar tragedies. Residents have lived under the shadow of eviction by those originally given the land. Those who had settled on land set aside for public utilities such as roads, railways and power lines have fought endless legal battles with authorities trying to bring some form of order, while others have died when the land flooded. People in Mukuru also have to deal with cartels controlling basic services such as toilets and rubbish disposal. It makes for a tense atmosphere. Jane Weru, executive director of the AMT, part of the Muungano Alliance, was involved in the upgrading plans from the outset. She has been championing the rights of slum dwellers for 20 years, with little input from the authorities. But Mukuru is the first informal settlement in Africa to be declared a special planning area (SPA), with the Kenyan government hoping to replicate this model in other slums such as Kibera, Mathare, Korogocho and Kawangware. “We had not planned to go to Mukuru,” says Weru. “A resident came to us and requested our help in buying the land on which his house stood from the original owner. First, we thought it was just this one person who needed help but more came forward with similar issues. Insecure land tenure, where close to 94% of people are tenants, has led to poor planning and hence lack of basic services. It was a systemic problem that needed a broader and multidisciplinary approach.” The trust also realised that living in a slum was expensive. “The little money each household had was being gobbled up by cartels,” says Weru. “The 2,000 shillings each household paid as monthly rent amounted to more than 180m shillings [£1.2m], yet those collecting this cash paid no taxes. The cartels were charging exorbitant fees for water and sanitation services, while endangering people’s lives through illegal electricity connections.” In 2017, when Mukuru became part of the city administration’s SPA upgrading scheme, a report found slum dwellers faced a “poverty penalty”, paying more for basic services than those in richer suburbs. The report found: “Mukuru households pay 45%-142% more in their electricity bills than residents enjoying formal [mains connection]. The poverty penalty for water is especially crippling as slum dwellers usually consume less water, at lower quality, but at higher costs than residents with formal provision. Residents pay 172% more per cubic metre of water than rates paid by residents living in formal areas.” Mukuru’s upgrading programme has attracted attention in other countries across Africa, including Zambia, Malawi, Sierra Leone and Ghana. Jesse DeMaria-Kinney, the of the Adaptation Research Alliance, a group of nearly 100 organisations helping vulnerable communities says: “Because of the specific risks these communities face due to climate change, we have to urgently support initiatives with inclusive action over rhetoric. “Bringing slum dwellers into the research and policy aspects can ensure that outcomes are appropriate, desirable, actionable and lead to improvements in their lives,” he says. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:x Throughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Antonis Vakos, Greece The seasons as we knew them in Greece are gone. And that’s very disorientating for the bees. One moment you’ve got a bout of extreme weather, the next a sudden change with no warning at all. In late February, as we were heading into spring, it snowed. In summer you’ll have three days, say, of downpours that are the equivalent of two months’ worth of rain. Then 10 days of unbelievably high temperatures as we had in August before the fires. We’ve never seen anything like it. The bees aren’t reacting at all well. Insects are sensitive to climate change. After the blazes, their behaviour changed and they were incredibly aggressive. I’m the third generation in my family to keep bees although the only member to do so professionally. My father first took me to the hives before I even started school. I couldn’t even do up my shoelaces I was that young. You’re not a beekeeper for the money. You have to love nature and be a bit crazy. It’s a whole philosophy. Around 40% of Greece’s pine honey is produced up here in northern Evia. It’s unique in taste and antioxidants. A lot ends up in supermarkets in Europe. To say the fires have been a catastrophe is an understatement. They were the biggest on record and took two weeks to extinguish. We’re still numb. Every tree, every bush, every flower was burned and the whole ecosystem was wiped out. Collecting pollen and nectar is how bees survive. So far we’ve managed to get by feeding them with ecological substitutes. The forest was our treasure. It made you smile. We had more of it than anywhere else on the island and then suddenly it’s all ashes and charcoal. Thank God I’ve lived to see it, thank God, I’ve got memories and the images live on. I had 130 hives. Now I have 35. The rest were destroyed. Each hive has between 30 and 40,000 bees and so my losses have been huge. It will take the pines at least 30 years to regenerate. Pines are vital because they are the source of sap, which nourishes bees and helps them waterproof hives. I’m 48, so I don’t think I’ll ever be seeing them as they once were again. But I’m optimistic by nature. Two months ago there was nothing but black, the landscape was totally bare. Now I see the first green shoots. I’ve begun to smile again.There was no fanfare when the Ministry of Sound opened 30 years ago. There wasn’t even a press release. For decades it has been one of the world’s most famous nightclubs (and one of the world’s most successful independent record labels), yet it opened almost in secret, and that was part of the plan. Justin Berkmann was a young DJ who’d lived in New York and been mesmerised by the Paradise Garage and the mixmastery of its resident DJ Larry Levan. After the Garage closed at the end of 1987, Berkmann returned to the UK with an evangelical determination to create a club in London that was built around a similar state-of-the-art sound system. He met two people who believed in his vision: the entrepreneur James Palumbo and his business partner Humphrey Waterhouse. Speaker stacks and dry ice in the main room, the Box. Below; a mystery DJ in the Box I had been nightlife editor at Time Out for five years, and had reported on and photographed the explosion of acid house, Balearic beats and rave culture, but still I was caught by surprise when Ministry opened. Towards the end of 1990, I’d spoken to Berkmann about his hugely ambitious plans, but since then I’d heard nothing more. I assumed that even if they managed to achieve the near-impossible task of finding the money and the right venue, get an all-night licence, bring in New York’s finest sonic engineers to install the sound system and open a club with an alcohol-free bar, they would want their launch covered in Time Out. A bowl of fruit on the alcohol-free bar. The club had a no-alcohol licence for its first few years I was merely given a flyer announcing that the Ministry was opening the following weekend. Berkmann said: “I don’t want any listings; it has to be underground, strictly word-of-mouth.” Time Out would look clueless if we didn’t even mention it, so we agreed on a brief listing with a phone number for more details. Security personnel with clubbers: David ‘Busta’ Maxwell, in black, and, on the right, Tyrone (Mr T) and Tonya A clubber with the magician, and right – the room 2 crew. News about the new club, opened in a disused bus garage, spread largely by word of mouth So most of the people in these photos, which were taken during the first few weekends at the club, were there because they’d been personally invited by Justin Berkmann, or knew someone who had been. “We didn’t want everyone to know when and where we were opening, so we fed the information to about 1,000 people that we had hand-picked at clubs like Legends, the Wag, the Astoria and Heaven,” he said recently. “It was about doing it from within the club scene rather than coming from above and, you know, flying over with planes and throwing out leaflets. Rather than just opening it to the public, that was the sense that I was trying to give it, of it being secret and naughty.” Rave scene ‘face’ Anton Le Pirate, left, with friends My first impression was that it looked like so many of the warehouses we’d raved in throughout the late 80s: utilitarian and rugged, with industrial sheet metal panels protecting the door. The security team uniform wasn’t black tie as it usually was in the West End; they wore claret-coloured MA1 jackets emblazoned with the Ministry logo. There was such a range of people in the queue in those early months – many were “proper” clubbers sporting shiny Michiko Koshino jackets or thigh-high lace-up boots, with plenty of streetwear and the occasional shellsuit (did he get in, I wonder?), while others looked far more like they might be Diana, Princess of Wales’s cousins who only ever partied in Mayfair, darling, and wouldn’t normally be seen dead anywhere near the Elephant and Castle. Humphrey Waterhouse is the one wrapped up in the fur hat and sorting the guestlist. “He was doing everything,” recalls Berkmann. “He was doing the door, he was counting the money at the end of the evening. He was the man in the middle, playing a very cool game of keeping James the entrepreneurial businessman on board with a fairly maverick thinker who was coming up with ideas that … Well, in today’s world a lot of these ideas may have been thrown out by consultants and advisers saying ‘no, this doesn’t work or that’s too high risk’. But in those days there wasn’t anyone like that. So they didn’t really have any option but to go with what I was saying.” Dancing beside a speaker stack. Many of the clubbers at these early nights were personally invited by co-founder Justin Berkmann The most obvious example of this was that nearly all of their money, around half a million pounds, was spent on the sound system, and on making the main dancefloor, The Box, soundproof and just about bomb-proof according to Berkmann. “We’d built what was fundamentally a nuclear bunker. It was the most absurd construction, but it was done so that no one could ever come along and close us [because of noise pollution]. That’s why we only had about three lights in the club, because we completely ran out of money.” Lynn Davis, the architect, had to improvise with next to nothing. “That’s why the bar was made of poured concrete. Necessity was the mother of invention, so the toilets looked like something you’d find in a shantytown, built with scaffolding and thick plastic sheeting, with guttering for the urinal.” Speaker stacks … and white jeans The amazing sound system – or at least the six-speaker arrays that were the most visible and audible elements of it – was my primary focus, as it seemed to tell the story in one image. I took so many shots of the clubbers around the speaker stacks. Some people were understandably pissed off by me and my flash gun, but in those days of analogue film you could never be entirely sure that you’d got the shot. There was also the huge bar where no alcohol was served, which is why the photos feature bowls of free fruit and bottles of Lucozade and Purdey’s – and that’s how it remained for about three years until the club finally got an alcohol licence in 1994. Chilling in the VIP room The Ministry followed the Paradise Garage template in having a small film room from day one, with movies like Apocalypse Now and Blade Runner screened throughout the night (it was also known as the Snogging Room). New York’s Paradise Garage didn’t have a VIP room, and Berkmann says he’s no fan of the concept, but he was reassured time and again that a London club had to have a VIP area. “There are times during a night out when you want to be silly and other times when you want to be serious,” he says. “The Box is a serious room; it’s a place you get lost in the music. That may not necessarily be something you want all night, and what I loved at the Paradise Garage was that there were rooms with different vibes and different levels of energy and emotion.” What happened in the VIP room didn’t relate to what was happening elsewhere … there were magicians and table tennis The VIP room in the Ministry was essentially independent; what happened there didn’t relate to what was happening elsewhere at all. Musically, they’d play anything from Abba to Sinatra, whatever music the guests would relax to, because it was a place to kick back and chill out on the sofas. “In the VIP it was ‘trash’,” says Berkmann. “It wasn’t that the music was rubbish – it was that it wasn’t ‘serious’, like in The Box. It had a sense of humour, for the people who wanted to go out there and be silly.” Also up in the VIP room was a table tennis table that Berkmann recognises as “my own table tennis table from my childhood home. It only lasted about a month, so these photos were taken in the very early days”. I even saw a magician who’d been hired to entertain people in the queue, working his tricks for the VIPs who certainly weren’t all celebs but a mix of club and music industry types, Sloanes, sport stars and the usual array of lucky chancers. “I’ve had so many people come up to me and say, ‘I met my wife on the dancefloor at Ministry of Sound and now we’ve got three children,’” Berkmann laughs. So how many children have been produced because of Ministry? “It’s got to be in the hundreds at least. There’s a small clan of children that have been created from their parents meeting while off their tits.” Ministry of Sound Classical presents Three Decades of Dance, is at the O2 Arena, London, on 13 November, featuring Paul Oakenfold. Later on Saturday, Justin Berkmann headlines at the Ministry of Sound for the first time since 1992.The crucial UN climate talks in Scotland have produced landmark commitments to phase out coalmining, to call time on the internal combustion engines and to compensate poorer countries for damage caused by the climate crisis. The United States, which has trumpeted its regained climate leadership at the summit, has not joined any these pledges as the talks draw to a close. This disconnect has provided the world with a muddled sense of America’s willingness to confront the unfolding climate catastrophe, with the fate of historic legislation to lower planet-heating emissions still uncertain ahead of an expected vote in Congress next week. Joe Biden arrived in Glasgow vowing the US will “lead by example” on climate change and avoid disastrous global heating beyond 1.5C, dispatching his entire cabinet to the Cop26 talks and making widely praised new promises to cut methane, a potent greenhouse gas, and to end deforestation. Two dozen Democratic lawmakers wearing congressional lapel pins have swept the conference venue this week, all expressing confidence that the vast $1.75tn spending bill will pass back home. “This is the most ambitious climate legislation of all time,” Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, told the summit. “America is back and is ready to lead,” added Kathy Castor, chair of the House select committee on the climate crisis. “Once we pass this historic package, finally, it will help keep 1.5C alive.” But the US is bedeviled by its recent past and – many delegates of other countries fear – its potential future, following Donald Trump’s embrace of climate science denialism and American isolationism. “We have not recovered our moral authority,” admitted Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the progressive New York representative, when asked about the specter of the former president. “I believe we are making steps, but we have to actually deliver the action in order to get the respect internationally. It’s that simple.” There is also mounting criticism that Biden’s actions have not matched his words and that the US president’s negotiators haven’t pushed hard enough for an ambitious deal in Glasgow to secure the deep emissions cuts needed to avoid disastrous warming that will spur ever-worsening floods, heatwaves and wildfires. More than 40 countries announced at Cop26 a promise to end the mining of coal, the dirtiest of fossil fuels, although the US was conspicuously absent from the list. “It’s very disappointing because the science is quite clear that we have to turn sharply away from coal this decade if we are going to meet our climate goals,” said Rachel Cleetus, policy director at the Union of Concerned Scientists. “We need very clear signals that orientate the US towards clean energy,” she added. “The climate crisis is too dire to just wait for coal to fall out. It’s just another signal of the sway the fossil fuel industry still has over US politics.” Despite its attempts to expand the rollout of electric vehicles, the Biden administration has also declined to set an end date for the sale of new gasoline and diesel cars, unlike the UK, European Union, Canada, India and a slew of other countries at Cop26. Its delegation in Glasgow is similarly wary of a push to provide “loss and damage” payments to countries vulnerable to climate impacts and has sought to shift criticism towards the inaction of China and Russia, although the US and China did unveil an unexpected plan to work together on cutting emissions, despite the enmity between the two countries. This reticence, critics claim, undermines Biden’s credibility on climate. Others say the dysfunctional nature of Congress, where sweeping climate legislation to expand renewable energy and wind down fossil fuels is effectively in the hands of a senator who derives most of his income from investments in coal, is to blame. “There is a handful of members of Congress who represent coal-intensive parts of the country who see [climate action] as a threat to their region,” Sean Casten, a Democratic representative, told the Guardian. “It’s kept the president from doing all that he’d like to do.” Pete Buttigieg, the US transport secretary, told the Guardian that the Biden administration aims to give Americans better public transit options, as well as electric vehicle rebates and infrastructure, but that “each country is on its own path” to ending the age of fossil fuel-powered cars. “What we are talking about is a race to the ambitious targets the president has set,” Buttigieg said, adding that the goal of half of all car sales being electric by 2030 will be in itself a “massive lift”. Biden will face further scrutiny almost immediately after some sort of deal is struck in Glasgow, not only over the fate of the Build Back Better bill but also his issuance of permits for oil and gas drilling. An auction of 80m acres of the Gulf of Mexico seabed, an area larger than the UK, will be offered to fossil fuel companies next week, while a new report has warned that the oil and gas that will be burned in the Permian Basin, a geological formation in the south-west US, by 2050 will release nearly 40bn tons of carbon dioxide, nearly a tenth of the remaining global “carbon budget” to stay under 1.5C. “If the Biden administration wants to be serious about its promise to demonstrate US climate leadership, it must first clean up its own back yard,” said Steven Feit, senior attorney at the Center for International Environmental Law. “The Permian Basin is the single largest fracking basin globally, and the continued reckless pursuit of oil extraction from New Mexico to the Gulf coast is the ultimate display of hypocrisy.”Music, football and nightlife have historically been Liverpool’s big draws, but it is no slouch on the food front. Its restaurant and street-food scene is one of the UK’s most exciting. Here are 10 vibrant and creative picks. Lerpwl Best known for their Anglesey restaurant The Marram Grass (temporarily closed at the time of writing), Liverpool-raised brothers chef Ellis and restaurateur Liam Barrie opened this persuasively glamorous spot on the Albert Dock last year. Ellis uses prime seasonal produce from Merseyside and north Wales, including pork reared on the brothers’ own smallholding, and serves it in dishes which, for all the painstaking tweezer work visible in the open kitchen, deliver seriously gutsy flavours. An arrangement of ceps and girolles on grilled focaccia is next-level mushrooms on toast, autumn in edible form. Similarly, a plate of grilled mackerel paired with dill cream, buttermilk and cucumber tartare is, for all its clean, fresh elements, stridently flavoursome. Relaxed, chatty service and a vintage rock and soul soundtrack (nice to hear the chefs singing along) complete an unusually warm fine-dining experience. Menus from £35, outdoor seating available, Britannia Pavilion, Albert Dock, lerpwl.com Buyers Club This stripped-back bar, restaurant and summer garden is a little slice of hipster Brooklyn on Hardman Street. Interesting wines by the glass, Pitchfork-adjacent playlist, a general air of laid-back cool… and there’s substance, not just vibe. In the best Italian tradition, the kitchen’s handmade, fresh pasta dishes use high-quality ingredients (pork and fennel sausage, squash, sage, tomato, olives, capers, sensational rocket pesto) to create vivid flavours. Incidentally, if you are wondering what happened to neighbour The Wild Loaf (awesome baking and grilled cheese sandwiches), it is currently retailing online (thewildloafshop.com) ahead of a comeback at a new location in 2022. Mains from £8, outdoor seating available, 24 Hardman Street, buyers-club.co.uk Lunya Peter Kinsella has spent more than a decade scouring the Catalan region and wider Spain for exceptional artisan ingredients, and you can taste that research in every mouthful. Whether you’re eating seared presa iberico pork (the shoulder muscle, which cannot be air-dried) in the restaurant or grabbing a sandwich from the deli (spicy, rugged chorizo with super-sweet piquillo peppers is a timeless combo), this is Iberian food full of big, punchy flavours. There is a second site, cosy Lunyalita, in the Albert Dock. Tapas £5-£10, card only, outdoor seating available, 55 Hanover Street, lunya.co.uk Xiao Long Bao Supermarket eJoy Asian Foods contains a strip of hot food kiosks and a seating area where you can dig deep into everything from three-meat-roasts on rice to beef tripe noodle broths and spicy braised pigs’ trotters. Do not miss Xiao Long Bao’s wontons, eponymous pork-and-crab soup dumpling or its steamed spicy beef buns. Its garlicky, ginger-mined pork and Chinese cabbage dumplings are sensational and, at £6 for 13, a filling meal at a budget price. Buns from £1.20, dumplings £6, eJoy Asian Foods, 8-10 Myrtle Street Duke Street Market This food hall was an instant hit, and it is easy to understand why. Great staff, good food – Kelp’s fish dishes; Bone And Block’s burger and steaks; Cahita’s Cubano sandwich, among others – and this handsome building combine in a way that makes you want to linger. It just feels right. The mezzanine restaurant space, previously home to the excellent northern Spanish-inspired Pilgrim (reopening early 2022 at a new site), will from 22 November be occupied by “scouse brasserie” Barnacle (snacks £3.50-£10, menus from £28), a collaboration by several chefs, including local legend Paul Askew, chef-owner of the elegant Art School. Barnacle will celebrate Merseyside produce and the global influences that shaped the city. Mains from about £8. Mainly QR-code, card-only ordering; cash accepted at front kiosk and for takeaway. 46 Duke Street, dukestreetmarket.com Maray Alongside the likes of Bold Street Coffee and Gujarati snack slingers Bundobust, Maray is a linchpin of Bold Street’s food scene. Its post-Ottolenghi menu of falafel and shawarma, whipped goat’s cheese and “disco cauliflower” (slathered in chermoula, harissa, tahini, yoghurt, pomegranates and almonds) helped usher in a new era of fashionable, casual food in Liverpool. More recently, next door to its third Albert Dock site, Maray opened The One O’Clock Gun (meals from about £7), a pub-Parisian bar hybrid. It serves eco-friendly tap wines, cans and bottles from local brewers Love Lane, Carnival and Black Lodge and, most notably, pies from one of Britain’s top makers, Great North Pie Co. Its Dewlay’s lancashire cheese pie with caramelised white onions is, like Maray, a contemporary classic. Plates from £5-£12, 91 Bold Street, maray.co.uk Röski A former Michelin star holder at Devon’s Treby Arms, chef Anton Piotrowskicreates beautifully designed and intensely flavoured dishes. But from snacks of, say, sourdough with Bovril butter to a Strawberry Field Forever dessert, via quail Kiev, Piotrowski’s take on fine dining is shot through with a playful sense of nostalgia and fun. Newer dishes, such as nori-wrapped lemon sole with passion fruit beurre blanc, are as chic as this Rodney Street dining room. Menus from £45, 16 Rodney Street, roskirestaurant.com Baltic Market Cains Brewery Village – a sprawling collection of bars, venues, retailers and rehearsal space in the Baltic Triangle – is home to the city’s pre-eminent street food hub, Baltic Market. It is a big, bustling warehouse affair serving tasty food from the likes of Hafla Hafla (lamb kofta and green chilli tahini, or Persian chicken kebabs), breakout lockdown star Bubbas Trap Kitchen, and Pattersons buttermilk-fried chicken. If you happen to be staying in Toxteth, Wavertree or Sefton Park, note that two of Baltic’s best-loved traders – Little Korea in its spin-off Love Kimchi, and Neapolitan pizza perfectionist Little Furnace – both have takeaways on Smithdown Road. (Little Furnace is awaiting a new extension before reopening for eat-in diners.) Meals from about £7, card-only, app-ordering, outdoor seating available. Stanhope Street, balticmarket.co.uk Belzan If Smithdown Road is emerging as a foodie enclave, Belzan has a lot to do with that. Co-owned by chef Sam Grainger, this intimate “neighbourhood bistro” is far sharper than that tag perhaps implies. Quality seasonal produce and plenty of artisan graft (fermenting, home-curing, baking) underpin a menu of clever, globally inspired sharing plates such as rare-breed lamb chops with anchovy, peas and yuzu, or gnocchi with locally cultivated mushrooms (grown in waste coffee grounds), wild Sefton Park garlic and cured egg yolk. The Belzan team also operate the Albert Dock’s Madre, a far bigger, livelier bar and taco restaurant with weekend DJs and, in summer, a packed sun-trap courtyard. Those tacos (£10 or £12 for three) deliver plenty of flavour – try the Oaxaca cheese and slow-cooked beef shin, served with a fantastic spicy beef and onion broth. Plates £4-£16, 371 Smithdown Road, belzan.co.uk Wreckfish In an uncertain world, you can rely on Elite Bistros. Chef-owner Gary Usher’s six-strong north-west restaurant group has created a culture and talent pool that makes it a touchstone of quality. Breakfast is no longer on the menu (it may return in 2022), but otherwise it is business as usual in the exposed-brick interior of this Georgian building. From classics such as beef featherblade with truffle and parmesan chips to torched salmon with a prawn-cabbage dumpling and warm tartare, expect populist, on-point cooking with a modish flourish. Two courses from £20, 60 Seel Street, wreckfish.coIn early 2011, a generation of Egyptians took to the streets, faced down the security forces and defied the old rule that Egypt’s citizens could never be more than cowed, obedient children of a military state. “I am addressing the youth of Egypt today … from the heart, a father’s dialogue with his sons and daughters,” the 82-year-old dictator Hosni Mubarak said as he clung to power. In Tahrir Square, tens of thousands of his “sons and daughters” – most of them not yet born when he inherited power from Anwar Sadat in 1981 – found this new intimacy unconvincing after the teargas and bullets, and chanted for his downfall. By the next day Mubarak was gone, and the protesters were being hailed by the world leaders who had helped keep him in office for so long. (“Egypt will never be the same,” said Barack Obama, whose administration gave the country’s military $1.3bn each year.) One of the best known was the 29-year-old programmer Alaa Abd el-Fattah, already a veteran of street protest and imprisonment, and a champion of the online spaces that gave young Egyptians a virtual escape from the stifling political and social repression within their own borders. To many, he personified the narrative of a fresh start made possible partly by the new tools of global information sharing – what the international media labelled a “social media revolution”. Ten years on, a military dictator is back in power in Cairo and Abd el-Fattah is back in prison, alongside an estimated 60,000 other political detainees. You Have Not Yet Been Defeated is a collection of his writings across that turbulent decade, from essays to tweets to reflections scrawled in pencil and smuggled out of prison, translated and edited by an anonymous collective of supporters. It opens after the euphoria of Tahrir, in the chaotic days of late 2011, veering from fine-grained arguments over a new constitution to visceral reports of the violence the state was still inflicting on those who defied it. “We fought time with slabs of ice and miserable fans,” he says of struggling to preserve bodies retrieved from the Maspero massacre of Coptic protesters; the interim military council locks him up again for his efforts. This mosaic of texts builds a picture of both the principles of resistance and democracy-building and the ugly, absurd, frightening, occasionally joyful experience of living by them in a stubbornly unreformed dictatorship. It’s also a reckoning with the legacy of his much-loved father, the human rights lawyer Ahmed Seif el-Islam, who was imprisoned and tortured under Anwar Sadat and Mubarak. “From my father, I inherited a prison cell and a dream,” Abd el-Fattah writes. In 2011, he is in prison for the birth of his son Khaled, just as his father missed the birth of his sister Mona; in 2014, he misses his father’s death, too. As the public and private tragedies mount up, cracks appear in his usual eloquence and certainty: he describes his sadness at leaving Khaled to meet his nightly probation curfew; his fears that imprisonment will leave him permanently unemployable; his struggle, in a succession of lonely, decrepit cells, with despair. “Our sin was pride, not treachery,” he writes from prison after the military coup that brought Abdel Fattah el-Sisi – later described by Donald Trump as “my favourite dictator” – to power. “We said, ‘We’re not like those who came before us.’” For the revolutionaries, the state’s massacre of more than 900 Islamist protesters after the coup is a brutal turning point “we will never be able to escape”. In the end, Egypt’s past proves impossible to shake. But like the success of the revolution in 2011, its defeat isn’t only an Egyptian story. The rest of us are the “you” of the book’s title, and the speech it is drawn from makes a call to understand and protect the internet as a space for “universal rights and freedoms” – to see and act against tax avoidance, policy interference, the gig economy, algorithms that promote fake news, the exploitation of our data, our reduction to passive eyeballs for advertisers. “Fix your own democracy,” Abd el-Fattah encourages us, from his cell; Egypt’s rulers attempt to isolate, fragment and conceal resistance because it needs a global ecosystem to flourish. What can any one person do with a legacy of pain, struggle and courage? There are no easy solutions here, but You Have Not Yet Been Defeated is a heartbreaking, hopeful answer. • You Have Not Yet Been Defeated, translated by an anonymous collective, is published by Fitzcarraldo (£12.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Modelling of the Morrison government’s strategy to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 shows its “technology not taxes” plan will leave the nation relying on offsets and unknown technology breakthroughs, but leave the gas sector to grow. Released on Friday afternoon, the modelling report suggests the “net zero” plan will see the value of the coal industry drop by half by 2050. The 100-page report reveals a swathe of assumptions made in the modelling to lend the plan credibility, which left some analysts puzzled. Under a catchphrase “The Australian Way”, prime minister Scott Morrison released the long-term emissions reduction strategy last month after confirming the government would adopt a net zero target by 2050. That plan included no new policies, and instead relied on voluntary actions and government backing of technology to cut emissions. But the modelling report shows the government’s technology plan falls 215Mt short of reaching only an 85% reduction by 2050. Australia’s current annual emissions are at 494.2m tonnes. The remaining cuts are made by buying offsets and from “further technology breakthroughs” that are not explained. Left out of the modelling, the report says, is any assessment of the impacts of the climate crisis “or the benefits of avoided climate damages associated with differences in global emissions trajectories”. The report compares the affect of the government’s plan to a scenario where all countries, “except Australia, reduce their emissions to achieve a below 2C global emissions trajectory”. In a section looking at the impact of the government’s plan on the value of different sectors, the report says by 2050 the gas industry will be 13% higher than it was in 2020 but the coal sector would see a 51% cut. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Emissions reduction minister Angus Taylor said: “The modelling shows that a clear focus on driving down technology costs will enable Australia to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 without putting industries, regions or jobs at risk.” He said the government had set out a “credible pathway” to net zero by 2050 “while preserving our existing industries, establishing Australia as a leader in low emissions technologies and positioning our regions to prosper.” Tim Baxter, a senior researcher at the Climate Council, said the report “may as well have been written in crayon”. He said: “The most striking thing about this modelling is that it predicts the government won’t reach its own net zero by 2050 goal. “This is pure spin. A document that has the singular purpose of attempting to legitimise the federal government’s do-nothing approach.” Tony Wood, energy and climate change program director at the Grattan Institute, said: “My concern is not that technology can reduce emissions, but it is the very strange way that this has been done.” According to the report, the results of the government’s technology plan are modelled by assuming a carbon price of $24 per tonne. Wood said: “That seems extraordinarily low, remembering that the carbon price in place between 2012 and 2014 never got above $22 per tonne, yet Tony Abbott wanted rid of it. But now we presume people will just pay that voluntarily? “Suggesting that there are all these advancements in technology under the plan, but there are magically none there without it, does not make sense to me.” Shadow climate change minister Chris Bowen said: “Labor will take the necessary time to consider this detail – as a responsible alternative government should.” Bowen described the long-term emissions reduction strategy as a “scamphlet on net zero”. “The fact they chose to do so late on a Friday afternoon, without an opportunity for questions from journalists, doesn’t bode well.” Greens leader Adam Bandt said the modelling showed the government had a plan for “not zero”. He said: “This is a piece of fiction trying to cover up inaction. Scott Morrison’s climate ambition is so low that he doesn’t even hit net zero in his net zero ‘plan’. “This is a recipe for climate collapse in Australia, with more extreme droughts, floods and fires.”Countries are being called on to accelerate the phaseout of coal power at the Cop26 summit, and to return to the negotiating table next year with improvements to their national plans on cutting greenhouse gases. The second draft of the key outcome from the Cop26 summit, now nearing its final hours in Glasgow after a fortnight of intense talks, showed a slight softening of language in some instances but retained the core demands for a return. The three architects of the landmark 2015 Paris climate agreement have told the Guardian that a return to the negotiating table next year to revise countries’ national emissions-cutting targets – known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – must be the key outcome of the talks if the world is to limit global heating to 1.5C. There was a slight change in the language in the text with regards to NDC revisions – the previous text, published on Thursday morning, “urged” parties to make revisions, while the current draft “requests” them to do so. However, the latter mirrors the language used in the Paris agreement, so the change was not regarded as a significant weakening. The latest draft proposal from the Cop26 chair, released soon after 7am on Friday in Glasgow, calls on countries to accelerate “the phaseout of unabated coal power and of inefficient subsidies for fossil fuels.” A previous version on Wednesday had called on countries to “accelerate the phasing out of coal and subsidies for fossil fuel.” The addition of “inefficient” could help countries that want to retain some fuel subsidies for the poor, while removing subsidies for major fossil fuel interests. This change to the language could also provide cover for countries that want to retain subsidies, however. The issue of fossil fuel subsidies has long vexed climate experts, with calls to reduce the subsidies over two decades going largely unheeded. However, to have any language on phasing out fossil fuels and subsidies to them in the cover decision of a Cop is new and if the provision is retained in the final outcome it will mark an increased determination by many countries to face down fossil fuel producers at the talks. A requirement for countries to revise NDCs reflects the expression of alarm by many parties, including the most vulnerable developing countries, over the chasm between carbon targets and the deep cuts necessary to limit temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. Current national plans – known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – would lead to 2.4C of heating, according to an influential analysis this week by Climate Action Tracker. Countries are currently expected to return with better pledges in 2025, under the Paris agreement, but many are now demanding the deadline should be brought forward. This is seen as the most closely fought area of disagreement as the UK hosts struggle to broker a deal. The question of when and how to revise NDCs is crucial because although the Glasgow talks will continue at least to the end of Friday, and probably well into this weekend, there is now no possibility that governments will toughen their NDCs at this summit. But a clause in the draft text that will form the main outcome of the talks would allow for a return next year to update and strengthen the targets. Developing countries are concerned that there is not enough reassurance for them for them on climate finance, a core issue for countries struggling to cope with the impacts of extreme weather. Helen Mountford of the World Resources Institute said that the draft showed some progress in this area. “Some elements look like they could be stronger, particularly adaptation, finance and loss and damage, that was really very much needed,” she said. These issues are the funding for clean development, adapting to climate impacts and paying for unavoidable damage. “It is now giving specific dates, requesting countries to double adaptation finance by the end of 2025.” But she added: “On the $100 billion [promised] from 2020 annually, there’s still no reference to making up the shortfall since we know countries failed to meet that goal in 2020 and 2021. So that’s definitely a gap.” The $100bn was promised back in 2009, to be delivered in 2020 and the failure has damaged trust between rich donor nations and poorer recipient nations. Experts said on Friday morning that negotiators would now be in close consultation with senior officials in their country capitals, as aspects of the text would need to be decided at the highest levels of government for many countries. The text is regarded as strong by many developing countries, but they expect it to come under fierce attack today from fossil fuel producing countries in particular. Finance ministers are expected to meet at 11am, with a stock take by all parties expected at midday. The UK’s Cop president Alok Sharma is engaged in last-minute shuttle diplomacy among parties. Bob Ward, of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change said: “This text appears to deal with many of the major issues that need to be resolved, but some important aspects still need to be finalised and may take some time to conclude. The text “requests”, rather than commits, countries to deliver updated and more ambitious pledges by the end of next year, recognising that the planned emissions cuts collectively are still not consistent with holding warming to no more than 1.5 Celsius degrees.” But he added: “The call for countries to phase-out unabated coal power and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies is very important and historic. Unabated coal power releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, and all subsidies for fossil fuels are inefficient.” Since the Paris agreement was signed, binding countries to limit temperature rises “well below” 2C above pre-industrial levels while “pursuing efforts” to a 1.5C limit, new science has shown that breaching the 1.5C threshold would lead to disastrous impacts, some irreversible, including the inundation of many low-lying areas. Heating has now reached 1.1C, and extreme weather is already taking hold around the world. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has said emissions must be cut by 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels to stay within 1.5C. The new draft outcome text will be discussed ahead of the 6pm UK time deadline for the talks to finish. However, previous Cop summits have a history of going well into Saturday and sometimes Sunday. • This article was amended on 15 November 2021. The IPCC has said emissions must be cut by 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels, not 2030 levels as stated in an earlier version.Family doctors have reopened their bitter dispute with the government by accusing Sajid Javid of misleading MPs and the public by blaming overloaded A&amp;Es on a lack of GP appointments. The Royal College of GPs has told the health secretary in a strongly worded letter that there is no basis for the claim, which he made to MPs last week and which was widely covered by the media. In it Prof Martin Marshall, the college’s chair, said that its 54,000 members “are dismayed and disappointed at the media coverage of your evidence session, which suggested that the lack of face-to-face GP appointments was placing additional strain on accident and emergency departments”. He disputed Javid’s claim that there is evidence which links the issues. He wrote: “You told the [health and social care select] committee you had seen data which showed that more patients were presenting at A&amp;E departments because they were unable to access primary care. I am not aware of any evidence to suggest that this is happening and would welcome sight of any data you have.” Tensions are simmering between GPs and the government since Javid’s edict last month that GPs in England must see any patient who wants an in-person appointment. Marshall’s letter comes as family doctors vote in an indicative ballot organised by the British Medical Association to gauge their willingness to take industrial action to oppose the plan and its accompanying performance management regime, which would “name and shame” practices that do not offer enough face-to-face consultations. Results of the ballot are due on 18 November. Javid told MPs on the committee on 2 November that “a significant portion of people are turning up for emergency care when they could have actually gone to their GP. “Part of the reason that I think people are turning up at A&amp;E, perhaps when they do not need it, is that they are not able to get through to their primary care services in the usual way.” He told the MPs that “I want to share with you a statistic that I am trying to recall”, to prove his point. However, he then said that “I will refrain from sharing the statistic”, and did not indicate what the figure was, what it showed or who had produced it. He was asked if he agreed with the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM), which represents A&amp;E doctors, that lack of GP appointments had led to the increased pressure A&amp;Es are under. Javid replied: “That general point is correct.” Marshall further underlined his belief that the facts do not support Javid when he told the Guardian that the minister’s link between access to GPs and A&amp;E attendances “is fast becoming received wisdom without scrutiny”. He added: “Yet we are not aware of any hard data to suggest that this is the case and are asking Mr Javid for clarity about the figures he was referring to.” The letter also warns that 14,000 GPs could leave the profession by 2026 due to heavy workloads, stress and the government’s failure to address the workforce crisis in general practice. Javid conceded at the select committee that the government will fail to deliver Boris Johnson’s 2019 pledge of increasing GP numbers in England by 6,000 by 2024-25. The number of full-time GPs is falling and more are going part-time to improve their work/life balance. The Department of Health and Social Care have been contacted for Javid’s response to the letter.The prosecution: Simon I would like my girlfriend to stop reusing teabags, and not to leave her half-drunk mugs of tea all over our flat Emma reuses teabags all the time. She picks them out of old mugs of milky water or leaves them on the kitchen counter for later. I think it’s weird and gross. All that old milk will have been absorbed into the teabag. She’s always making new cups of tea because she forgets how many she has on the go. Our flat is full of half-drunk mugs that she’s lost track of. She doesn’t know how long they’ve been sitting there. I will open the curtain in the morning and there will be three mugs, all full, all with the teabag still in, sitting on the window ledge. I will go to the bathroom and knock over a cup of tea that’s behind the door, and then there’ll be a mug on the side of the bath, too. Recently when I was putting the clothes in the dryer, I found a teabag which had exploded in the washing. I’ve even found a teabag in the drain of the shower – what the hell is that about? She says reusing old teabags is an eco-friendly decision but that’s nonsense: the environment-friendly part is completely cancelled out by the fact that she throws away so much tea on a daily basis – because she forgets to finish her drinks. We work from home together now and I only really need one or two cups a day, but Emma asks for one every 20 minutes, even though she will have a full cup beside her. She says, “Oh, I forgot to drink it”, and tries to defend it by saying she will reuse the bag, but she doesn’t reuse as much as she wastes. Emma needs to stop kidding herself that she is saving tea by picking out the teabags from old cups – that’s just making an excuse for her absent-mindedness. And anyway, teabags are designed for single use, otherwise the flavour goes right out of them – everybody knows that. The defence: Emma It’s fine to use teabags more than once and, as for leaving cups lying around: I’m the one who does the most cleaning I come from a long line of teabag reusers. In my family home, by the kettle, there’s a ramekin, a mug with an old teabag and a tea-stained spoon. It’s ingrained. I grew up on a farm where we reuse food. My grandparents say “waste not want not”. I don’t think teabags are single-use – you can drink from the same one up to three times. People brew tea for up to five minutes, so I make lots of mini brews with the same bag. I’ve found that an oily scum sticks to the side of the mug after one go – you brew that out with subsequent usage. Simon says this is unhygienic. I tell him he needs to think about the planet and stop having a meltdown over tea. Earlier in the pandemic my dad died and I went home to the farm. Simon came to support me, my mum, my brother and grandparents. We all drank a lot of tea – dealing with grief. One day Simon had a blow-out at me and my brother, who also reuses teabags and leaves each one on the side of the kitchen counter. Simon said we were absent-minded, don’t put stuff away, and should try meditation. He was sniffing the fresh produce and checking the [use-by] dates. I told him he needs to try reusing more stuff as in our shared flat he wastes a lot. Simon says I’m using my family history to justify a bad habit, but it’s how I was raised. I drink more tea in the relationship. I won’t apologise for reusing the bags; it’s helping to save the environment. Sometimes I leave old mugs around the house, but so what? I’m the tidy one in the relationship. I do all the hoovering, mopping and dusting. Simon leaves crumbs over the table – he creates dirt, while I just reuse things and sometimes forget where I leave cups. I don’t think he can take the moral high ground: his bad habits aren’t comparable to my hereditary teabag habit. The jury of Guardian readers Should Emma throw her teabags away after each use? I imagine teabags can be multi-use for one person – though sharing teabags risks spreading diseases. There are many other uses for teabags – for example in gardening – that are maybe less contentious. Corinne, 52 The biggest crime here is the weak tea. A teabag should make one decent cuppa. Putting that aside, Emma should reuse the teabags but be consistent: milk and water are resources too, and she doesn’t seem too bothered about wasting those. Adam, 48 Simon, Simon, Simon. There are much more important things than mugs lying around the house and triple-dunked teabags. It’s a well-known fact that if you want to comment on your partner’s housekeeping, your contribution to it must be unimpeachable. Do more tidying, Simon, then you can have an opinion. Maybe. Charlotte, 43 I have no issue with using a teabag for multiple brews, but the prospect of semi-drunk mugs lurking around the home is a mouldy surprise waiting to happen. Treat each brew with the respect it deserves and drink up! Dan, 28 Emma’s statement sounds less judgmental. This conflict isn’t really about teabags or the Earth: what is the real tension you’re trying to negotiate? You both waste and make mess because you’re imperfect – don’t be so hard on each other. Try coming from a softer place and talk emotions, not morals. Anne Marie, 31 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Emma stop reusing teabags? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result Last week, we asked if Naila was being too picky with her baby’s name, something that annoys her husband, Ameen. 93% of you said no – Naila is innocent 7% of you said yes – Naila is guiltyWhen Neal Purvis and Robert Wade were students together in the late 1970s, they formed a band and wrote their own James Bond theme. “It was called Never Say Thunderballs Dr No,” Purvis tells me. “Musically, it was quite good,” offers Wade. The group is still going strong, with Rat Scabies of the Damned on drums. A decade ago, they even played their Bond theme to the producer Michael G Wilson, who with his half-sister Barbara Broccoli is one of the custodians of the franchise. “He said: ‘Don’t give up your day job,’” Purvis shrugs. “Which I thought was a bit unnecessary.” Not too hurtful, though, when your day job is writing James Bond movies. Purvis (60) and Wade (59), have had a hand in every instalment since The World Is Not Enough, back when Pierce Brosnan was still rocking the tuxedo. They oversaw the bare-bones Daniel Craig reboot (Casino Royale), the first Bond movie to be a direct sequel (Quantum of Solace), the death of Judi Dench as M (Skyfall), the return of arch-villain Blofeld (Spectre) and the twists and shocks of No Time to Die. This is no time for spoilers, but it is giving nothing away to reveal that Craig’s swansong is not simply a Bond farewell. It’s an absolute James-changer. It hasn’t all been plain sailing. “When Casino Royale was released, we were introduced somewhere as the people who saved Bond,” says Purvis. “They were forgetting we were also the ones who’d done Die Another Day.” That maligned movie, Brosnan’s last in the role, has come in for no end of stick over the years, mostly for its invisible car. “We actually featured that car in every one of Daniel’s Bonds,” says Wade. “You just never saw it.” We meet in their agent’s London office on the morning that No Time to Die has become the sixth-highest-grossing film in UK box-office history: it took more than £87m in its opening weekend in the UK, while the global tally stands at around $667m. Not bad for a movie that was old news, its release delayed 18 months by the pandemic. “It’s a wonderful way of feeling like we’re coming out of this whole thing,” says Wade, whose sandy-coloured, windblown hair and partially unbuttoned shirt make it look as if he has just stepped off a yacht. Purvis, shaven-headed and stubble-faced, wears a dark roll-neck jumper that calls to mind the Milk Tray man. The smell of expensive aftershave hangs in the air. The duo, who also co-wrote one of the other top six titles (Skyfall, which took £103.2m domestically), mapped out the complete story of No Time to Die in 2017. “You’re always asking yourself: ‘What are people going to fear in a couple of years’ time?’ and ‘What emotional journey can Bond go on?’” says Purvis. They got the fear part right. The film’s villain gains control of a DNA-targeting virus, a concept first pitched for The World Is Not Enough. “If they’re good ideas, they tend to stick around,” says Wade. They flew to New York to pitch the full outline to Craig (“He embraced it immediately,” Purvis says) and to work with him on finessing it. When Danny Boyle was announced as the film’s director, bringing along his regular writer John Hodge, the Purvis and Wade script was set aside; then, once Boyle and Hodge departed over creative differences, they were brought back in. Four writers are now credited on the finished movie: Purvis, Wade, its director, Cary Fukunaga, and Phoebe Waller-Bridge. Others were involved, including Scott Z Burns (Contagion, The Bourne Ultimatum), which is normal for a project of this scale. “The budgets are a million quid a page,” says Wade. Purvis corrects him: “A couple of million now,” he says. “Oh yeah, it’s gone up,” Wade replies, as though they’re discussing the price of a pint. How does it feel to see their film covered in so many other fingerprints? Wade quotes Graham Greene, who likened the average screenwriter to “the only spectator who remembers what happened once – like a man who has witnessed a crime and is afraid to speak, an accomplice after the fact”. Purvis echoes that: “You run your own film through your head as you’re watching.” This can lead to some rash responses, such as when they first saw a cut of Casino Royale. “We gave a couple of pages of notes on what they needed to fix it,” he says. “I don’t think they took any notice. After a while, we realised it’s a really good film.” What surprised them about the new one? “There’s no denying that what goes down very well with an audience is the whole Paloma sequence,” says Purvis, referring to the delirious episode in which Bond teams up with a fizzy CIA operative played by Ana de Armas. “We had Paloma in our script, but she was just a contact. Cary wanted more, so one assumes that’s an area that Phoebe dealt with.” They approve wholeheartedly. “It’s really fun,” says Wade, “and very much like a Bond movie,” Purvis adds. There is an emphatic female presence in the film but Wade dismisses any suggestion that this is a result of the #MeToo and Time’s Up movements. “I don’t think we did anything differently because of that. We’ve never wanted to be sexist: it doesn’t look good for Bond. I’ve got daughters, and I wouldn’t want him not to be a good role model.” Their track record bears this out. In The World Is Not Enough, they introduced the franchise’s first principal female villain and positioned the central conflict as one between her and M, a shift in dynamic that was rumoured to have irritated Brosnan. (“He may have been,” is all Wade will say.) The liveliest parts of Die Another Day involve Halle Berry and Rosamund Pike, while that film ends with a subversive shift to the female perspective by showing the erotic inner life of Moneypenny. Purvis and Wade also wrote a spin-off movie for Berry’s character, Jinx, which was set to be directed by Stephen Frears until the studio pulled the plug. Their boldness has not been confined to gender. Even as the Bourne movies began to encroach on Bond’s territory – “We listen to the Bourne music quite a lot when we’re writing,” admits Purvis – they have kept the character fresh. On their watch, Bond has been left raggedy and long-haired in his North Korean prison cell, alluded to gay experiences, and become a parent. “The most radical gear-shift we effected was probably in Skyfall,” says Wade. “When Bond drives M to the home nobody knew about, that shifted the whole emotional register of what a Bond film could be.” Not everyone was impressed. Purvis mentions an actor friend who sent congratulatory emails after Casino Royale and Quantum of Solace. “We saw him at a party and I said: ‘You never told us what you thought of Skyfall.’ He said: ‘Wasn’t a Bond movie.’” What he will make of No Time to Die is anybody’s guess. It begins with an extended flashback to the early life of a supporting character, breaks the unspoken ban on children in Bond movies by showing two different infants in peril, and is intertwined with the four previous films in a way that is redolent of the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Then there is that ending. How aware are they of bending the formula to breaking point? “We’ve wondered in the past whether we can get away with, for instance, voiceover,” says Purvis. “But you don’t want to go too far because then it ceases to be Bond.” Wade is happy to have brought a ubiquitous aspect of British life to the series. “It didn’t used to rain in Bond movies,” he says proudly. Ask what is next for Bond and they are no clearer than anyone else. Decisions on Craig’s replacement won’t be made until next year; Purvis and Wade don’t know yet whether they’ll be asked back. Who needs more Bond movies anyway? “I think the world would be a lesser place without him,” says Purvis. Wade goes further: “You know you can rely on that guy. He’s everyone’s dad.” Even if they don’t get to write another one, there’s always the band to keep them busy. “We’re still hoping to make it as musicians,” says Wade. “This is just what we’re doing while we wait for that to happen.” • No Time to Die is on general release.Steven Gerrard’s most obvious and urgent task in his new job is to make sense of Aston Villa. The club have big ambitions and trumpeted a vague plan for this season – to use the money from the sale of one great individual, Jack Grealish, to improve the team as a whole. But Dean Smith was jilted, albeit quite ceremoniously, because after 11 league matches there was still a vagueness, even a confusion, to what Villa were doing. How exactly were they trying to win matches? What was their proposition? It was not easy to tell towards the end. It would have been reasonable to give Smith more time to sort things out – he had solved similar problems in the past, still had the support of the players and his chances of bringing order would have been boosted once unforeseeable snags related to injuries and Covid-19 abated – but apparently the people above him concluded that a new manager was more likely to get Villa on track. Gerrard has been given a terrific opportunity to prove he can succeed in the Premier League. He inherits a squad good enough to climb much higher than their current perch, 16th, though probably not strong enough to reach Europe. Villa’s owners have the money to bankroll more big signings but the club have also invested heavily in their youth teams in recent years – and won the FA Youth Cup last season – and expect to see players graduate from the academy to the first team. Smith gave debuts to players such as Carney Chukwuemeka and Cameron Archer, and made the 20-year-old Jacob Ramsey a regular in midfield. Gerrard will be expected to continue integrating young players, and it was noticeable that Villa’s CEO, Christian Purslow, mentioned the new manager’s stint in charge of Liverpool Under-18s when announcing his appointment. But the first thing Gerrard must do is repair Villa’s defence. That was a job Smith accomplished in his first season after promotion, and the signing of Emi Martínez brought even more solidity last season. But those gains have somehow got lost this season, with only Newcastle and Norwich conceding more goals. Curiously, Villa even became more vulnerable at set pieces despite hiring a specialist coach in the summer. Gerrard will be bringing a new one. Individual players have gone backwards this season and Gerrard needs to reverse that. Martínez, perhaps Villa’s highest-calibre player, has been below par in a season where he has had to do an unprecedented amount of international travel; Matt Targett was outstanding last season but has regressed alarmingly; and Tyrone Mings’s form deteriorated to the extent that Smith dropped him against West Ham two weeks ago. Mings has made mistakes but his personality and leadership skills, as well as the lack of a better alternative, mean he remains precious to Villa even when not at his best. Gerrard should be able to build a defence around him and Ezri Konsa. Gerrard must also figure out how to protect that defence. Villa have not been consistently strong in central midfield. Douglas Luiz, a fine ball winner and passer when on form, has shown signs of wear after a summer in which he had no respite owing to engagements with Brazil. Marvelous Nakamba is dynamic but not much of a passer. John McGinn can be brilliant but has not performed to his best regularly. Ramsey is an emerging talent, Ashley Young a dwindling one who is certainly useful but cannot be expected to control central midfield in the Premier League very often. The problem for Villa was that vulnerability in one sector seemed to infect the rest of the team. The softness of Villa’s central midfield contributed to the nervousness of their defence; and the brittleness of the defence seemed to make Villa’s midfield and forwards wary about pressuring opponents too high. Their pressing became haphazard and they were not solid when they sat deep. Villa looked to be caught between two stools, with the result often a mess. Gerrard must ensure the whole team are committed to what they are doing. That probably starts with restoring confidence, which drained away with damning speed, with chronic anxiety apparently setting in after Villa let a 2-0 lead turn into a 3-2 defeat in the last 10 minutes against Wolves last month. The loss of confidence probably has a lot to do with the loss of Grealish. With him, Villa’s defenders, in particular, had a player to whom they could give the ball and be reassured that he would do something productive, or at least take it up the right end. Without him, Villa have often looked uncertain how to play their way forward. In mitigation, they have often been deprived of creative influences such as Bertrand Traoré but the players available have not risen to the task consistently enough. Emi Buendía, the record signing in the summer, has too often been peripheral on the right wing, and Leon Bailey contributed little on his only two starts after some exciting appearances off the bench. Gerrard needs to find a way of getting much more out of those two going forward, and also decide whether, and when, they can fit into the team with both Danny Ings and the club’s most dynamic player, if not the most prolific finisher, Ollie Watkins. The strange thing about Villa this season is that a lot has gone wrong but it will probably not take a lot to set them right. Smith might have done it. Gerrard should.Is talent inherited or something that has to be learned? Twelve-year-old Chanai Owusu-Ansah, currently playing Young Nala in the West End production of The Lion King, thinks it is a bit of both. “I’ve been singing and dancing with my mum for as long as I can remember,” she says. “My whole life revolves around listening to music and performing.” Just down the road at the Sondheim theatre, her mum, Chanice Alexander-Burnett, has the role of Fantine in Les Misérables, which means mother and daughter are starring in two of the biggest shows in the West End simultaneously. “People always predicted she’d follow in my footsteps. But it has some logistical challenges,” Alexander-Burnett laughs. We meet in one of the backrooms of the Lyceum theatre. On the evenings when her daughter is playing Nala, Alexander-Burnett has the operational task of dropping her off while also having to prepare for her own show. “Chanai comes home from school, gets changed, does any homework that she can, and then we both have to run to our theatres to get Covid tested for 5.30pm,” she explains. “It can be very hectic.” Both managed to find time in their busy schedules to watch the other perform on their opening night. “I cried and cried when I saw Chanai walk on stage,” says her mother. “I know how much she wanted it and how hard and long she’d worked, so I couldn’t contain my emotion. I was a mess.” Owusu-Ansah set herself the goal of being part of The Lion King long before she was offered the role of Nala. In the years before her casting, she attended the show’s drama academy Cub School twice a week and she has previously performed in Evita at Regent’s Park Open Air theatre. “Evita was my first show, so it was tiring, but it was great training. It taught me to be aware of myself in a theatre space, and how to stay focused.” Young Nala features in the first half of The Lion King. Her favourite moment? Wearing a baby elephant costume for Circle of Life. “The elephant is absolutely huge, probably the size of this room! It is a really special song,” she says. In the leadup to starring in Les Mis, Alexander-Burnett admits she was a “nervous wreck”. Though she had performed in Book of Mormon and as a swing in Beautiful: The Carole King Musical, Fantine is her first lead role in the West End. “I was longing for a part I could really get my teeth into,” she says. “Singing I Dreamed a Dream is extraordinary. I remember waiting in the wings on opening night and feeling really honoured I’d been trusted with such a classic.” Owusu-Ansah describes her mum as her “critic, best friend and idol”. When she sees her in her costumes, “I just think, oh my gosh, wow!” she says. “I feel so proud watching her.” It’s “magic” when she performs on stage herself, she adds. “Most of the time I can’t really see the audience, but when I see the outlines of people, I have to really tell myself that I can do this and that I won’t mess it up. I have to properly concentrate.” Alexander-Burnett’s own love of performing started late. “I didn’t grow up in a stagey family.” She enrolled for a course at London School of Musical Theatre when her daughter was a toddler. Balancing parenting with her training “did mean that Chanai always grew up around music,” she says. “She’s been immersed in it her entire life.” Do they regularly get to perform together? They mention a time they sang “their song” Don’t You Worry ’Bout a Thing (Tori Kelly’s version of the Stevie Wonder song) as a duet. “I think she’d like to film videos and put them on Instagram or TikTok,” Alexander-Burnett says. “But we probably won’t get to at the moment because we are always at work!” Owusu-Ansah chimes in, adding: “I would love for us to be on stage together, but it might be a little bit awkward!” Her mum admits: “I used to want us both to be in The Lion King together. So she could be baby Nala and I could be big Nala. That would be incredible.” Owusu-Ansah enjoys performing so much, she says, that she would “sleep in the theatre” if she could. Still, in the future, she hopes to have a career as a lawyer. “Acting is my hobby, it makes me so happy and I love being around people with the same interests as me. I guess, if being a lawyer doesn’t work out, I would consider it.” But right now? “Us both being in these two shows at the same time is a total dream.” Les Misérables is at the Sondheim theatre, London, and The Lion King is at the Lyceum theatre, London.You might not think TikTok lends itself to the best of classical music and opera. After all, no classical fan ever said: “What I really want is something recorded on a phone that lasts no more than 59 seconds and repeats itself immediately.” But TikTok does have something to offer – mainly to the intimidated potential listener who wants the music world to be demystified, or a music student who needs to be kicked back into the practice room. Most orchestras, opera companies and venues around the world haven’t yet worked out what to do with TikTok, or have decided to ignore it and hope it goes away, but there are a few major organisations who get it. They come across as being serious about welcoming new audiences, especially younger ones. One is the London Philharmonic, where digital creative Greg Felton has been posting TikToks on the orchestra’s account since January. He tells me he has been pleasantly surprised by the amount of engagement it has generated: not only happy comments from listeners new to the music but informed chats about, say, woodwind technique. Have a listen to the cor anglais solo from Dvořák’s New World Symphony if you want to be wowed by Sue Böhling’s breath control. Solos like this work well in TikTok’s portrait format, while a full orchestra is unavoidably a landscape beast, best left to YouTube. A clip of the LPO’s Benjamin Mellefont playing the Mozart Clarinet Concerto gets lots of engagement thanks to the work being on the GCSE music syllabus, and thanks to Felton’s knack with creating a running musical score above the video. Other clips get you inside the orchestra, like the thunderous few bars from Berlioz’s Symphonie Fantastique. Does all this sell tickets? Not necessarily, says Felton – one thing that the app’s analytics can tell them is that a lot of the viewers are in the US. But that doesn’t seem to be the point: this is a long game, building the LPO’s image as an orchestra keen to make friends outside the M25. A few accounts try to be informative – Wigmore Hall has a TikTok of the baritone Christian Gerhaher that manages to pack a reasonably revealing interview into those 59 precious seconds, and if you understand Spanish the Teatro Real opera house in Madrid has some good peeks into the costume department. But most rely on clips of performers, which can be exciting when it’s a new face and they get the right clip. Eighteen seconds of Konstantin Krimmel singing Schubert on the Wigmore account makes me want to hear more of him; likewise Thando Mjandana singing Una furtiva lagrima on the Royal Opera House’s account. By and large, accounts run by organisations offer the best bits of performance. A few individual performers, for example the violinists Esther Abrami and Anastasiia Mazurok, make social media part of their brand. But household names are thin on the ground. Still, the organist Anna Lapwood and violinist Ray Chen post regularly, mezzo-soprano Jamie Barton has a photogenic cat, and I am here with my violin case open if Hilary Hahn wants to follow up on the mini-lesson she posted just a couple of weeks ago Maybe that’s the point: if you play an instrument or sing in a choir or do anything at all that involves watching a conductor, there’s a world of tips, in-jokes, work-avoidance ideas and musical Squid Game memes here for you. It’s clearly a haven for music students in search of distraction. The two kings of this, on TikTok and elsewhere, are Brett Yang and Eddy Chen of Twosetviolin, two nerdy twentysomething violinists who gave up steady jobs in Australian orchestras to make a living as a niche comedy duo. Thanks to a running joke in their TikToks, I can now play the violin hook from Britney Spears’ Toxic. Who says social media’s a waste of time?Alireza Firouzja, the Iran-born 18-year-old who emigrated to France due to Tehran’s punishments for playing Israeli opponents, has become the third youngest Candidate in chess history, with a chance of a glittering prize, the youngest ever world champion. Firouzja scored 8/11 in the Grand Swiss in Riga to earn a place in the eight-player 2022 Candidates, whose winner will play for the global crown later next year. He reached his target two months younger than Boris Spassky at Gothenburg 1955, and is the third youngest Candidate qualifier, behind only Magnus Carlsen at 15 at the 2005 World Cup and Bobby Fischer at 15 and a half at the 1958 Portoroz interzonal. Garry Kasparov was the youngest world champion at 22 years and six months when he defeated Anatoly Karpov in their 24th and final game in 1985. Carlsen was also 22, but five months older, when he beat Vishy Anand in 2013. Could Firouzja eclipse Kasparov’s record by winning the Candidates then capturing the title? Historical parallels suggest that this challenge may be a bridge too far for a teenager. Spassky and Carlsen won the Candidates at their second try, Fischer only at his third. There were also championship cycles for the trio where they did not compete or were eliminated before the Candidates. Spassky was favourite against Tigran Petrosian, yet succeeded only at his second attempt, while Fischer and Carlsen were odds on to beat Spassky and Anand respectively. Firouzja would probably face Carlsen in 2022 and would be expected to lose at his first try, although it might well be different at a second attempt in 2024 when he would still be younger than Kasparov in 1985. Firouzja also broke through to the top of the world rankings last week, ending up No 5 after briefly touching No 3 before his loss to Fabiano Caruana at Riga. His latest surge seems to have been helped by a conscious change of direction. Up to a few months ago he was one of the recognised top three, along with Carlsen and Hikaru Nakamura, in one-minute bullet chess. Lately he seems to have cut down on or even abandoned bullet, and he also withdrew from the current chess.com speed championship, where most of the top GMs are competing. Instead, his games at Riga showed a notably greater all-round theoretical knowledge and an improvement in his endgames, which used to be his major weakness. The daring and mazy tactical style which was his hallmark has sobered down in favour of a more flexible style waiting for the opponent to allow an opportunity. This weekend Firouzja makes his debut for France in the European championship at Catez, Slovenia (live and free to watch online, 2pm Friday start), with the extra incentive that a high scoring performance could advance his ranking all the way up to world No 2. France’s squad, which also includes the world No 10, Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, is seeded No 3 behind Russia and Azerbaijan, with Poland No 4 and England No 5. England’s team is David Howell, Michael Adams, Luke McShane, Gawain Jones and Ravi Haria. Firouzja won his opening round game against Austria’s Markus Ragger and advanced to No 4 in the live ratings, but England had a poor day. The open team lost 1.5-2.5 to Norway as Jones won, Haria drew but McShane and Howell lost, while England women lost 0-4 to Spain. Howell shared the lead with two rounds to go at Riga, but fell back after his penultimate round loss to Firouzja and finished in a multiple tie for fourth, but ninth on tiebreak, on 7/11. Places 3-8 qualified for the 24-player Grand Prix in Berlin next spring, where the top two will earn Candidates places. Unlucky … It would have been a career-best performance for the three-time British champion from Seaford in Sussex, who turns 31 on Sunday, to qualify for the Grand Prix. It could still happen if a player withdraws or, less likely, if he is awarded either the Fide or the organiser wildcard. Realistically, though, the Fide wildcard is likely to go to China’s world No 2, Ding Liren, who due to the pandemic has played too few games for an automatic place, while the organiser choice will probably be a German or a regular participant in a Bundesliga team. Eleven Grand Prix spots go to the top players on the December 2021 Fide rating list who are not otherwise qualified, and this may create an unexpected opportunity for Michael Adams. Unofficial calculations claim that the Cornishman, a seven-time British champion who turns 50 next Wednesday, would be second reserve for the 11 Grand Prix rating places. Adams, whose best career performances have come in world title competitions, is only two rating points behind the lowest qualifier, Russia’s Andrey Esipenko, on the unofficial live ratings and so has a big incentive to turn back the years, perform well in the nine-round European Teams, and gain crucial points for the December rating list. Meanwhile, Carlsen continues to relax with one-minute bullet games on Lichess as he prepares for his $2m, 14-game world title defence against Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi starting in Dubai on 26 November. Following last week’s 10-0 against the speed expert GM Andrew Tang Carlsen, also known as Dr Nykterstein, won 10-0 again, this time against the Belarus GM Sergei Zhigalko, but found it harder against 21-year-old Nikolas Theodoru. The little-known Greek GM, though losing heavily overall in a marathon series of around 100 games spread over two or three days, actually checkmated the world champion on at least six occasions. Guardian reader Peter Ballard points out that Firouzja is the fourth, not third, youngest Candidate. Vlad Kramnik, the 2000-2007 world champion, qualified as a Candidate at 18 years and one month at the 1993 Biel interzonal. 3789 1 Rg1! threatens 2 Rh3+! gxh3 3 Qh6+ Kg8 4 gxh3+ winning. The best Black can do is 1...Qd7 2 Rh3+ gxh3 3 Qh6+ Kg8 4 gxh3+ Kf7 5 Rg7+ Ke8 6 Rxd7 Kxd7 7 Qxf8 Rb1+ 8 Kg2 fxe5 9 Qg7+ Kd6 10 Qxa7 and the a6 pawn wins.Olympic gold medallist Cate Campbell says female swimmers have been subjected to body shaming, with the attitude of many male coaches being “the skinnier the better”. In a new book she has written with her sister Bronte, the champion Australian swimmer said girls were told to use smaller plates so they would eat less and were criticised in front of other swimmers if they gained any weight. In an extract from the book to be published in the Sunday Telegraph, Campbell writes about the impact of this obsession with the weight of female swimmers. “Weight was, and still is, always a topic of conversation on pool decks or in swim teams. At one competition she said “all the girls were specifically told to use smaller plates at dinner so we wouldn’t overeat”. “Swimmers in other programs were subjected to weekly weigh-ins – in front of their entire squads – and publicly admonished if they had gained even a few hundred grams. “The general consensus from most other male coaches was: the skinnier the better. “Some of this mindset had begun to rub off on me.” The book, called Sister Secrets: Life Lessons from the Pool to the Podium, will be released on Tuesday. Jodie Hawkins from Swimming Australia said the organisation will continue to work towards “developing better ways of coaching.” “We continue to work with our network of coaches and athlete leaders on developing better ways of coaching and communicating with our athletes to enable them to perform at the highest level.” Campbell won gold in the women’s 4x100m freestyle and medley relays at the Tokyo Olympics earlier this year. She also took Bronze in the 100m freestyle. Campbell had previously won gold with the women’s 4×100m freestyle team at the 2012 and 2016 Olympics. She opened up about her struggles with mental illness in an Instagram post in October, where she revealed she was diagnosed with depression last year. “In July 2020 I was diagnosed with depression, in June 2021 — four weeks before the start of the Tokyo Olympics, I finally admitted I needed some medical help, and I am so grateful I did,” she wrote. “Mental health is not a sign of weakness. It does not discriminate. It is very real, and most of us will face it at some point in our lives.”And that is it for Friday’s news. As always, it was a delight to spend the day with you team GA. Thank you for your company. Let’s go through the big ones for today: There was wild weather through large parts of eastern Australia again today. With severe flood warnings issues in SA, QLD, NSW and Vic. NSW assisted dying laws were debated in parliament. Legendary entertainer Bert Newton was farewelled with a state funeral in Melbourne. Australia hit the 90% first-dose vaccine milestone. Scott Morrison gave a press conference where he announced the government’s net zero modelling would be released. Fifteen minutes after that press conference the modelling was released, to widespread condemnation from climate scientists. Crown resorts disclosed it received $291.2m in jobkeeper. I am off to quickly walk the dog before it starts raining again. If you are in a region severely affected by the wild weather, please keep an eye out for updates from the BoM. I’ll see you all again on Sunday. Go well. The NSW transport department has been ordered to pay more than $300,000 in damages to a manager sacked for helping a police investigation into a woman’s murder. The case involved the 2018 killing of Nicole Cartwright, allegedly at the hands of former transport department employee Dennis James Pietrobon. Tomorrow NT will bring in a vaccine mandate. It will cover people who work with children, those in customer-facing roles, those who work with vulnerable people and those who work in Aboriginal communities and community services sector. It also applies to people employed in high-risk settings or in the healthcare sector or people who work in essential infrastructure and logistics. A full list can be found here. If you missed the blog this morning on Bert Newton’s funeral, we’ve got a run down here... I’ve got some quotes for you from today’s debate in NSW parliament about the voluntary assisted dying legislation. In support: Liberal MP for Pittwater, Rob Stokes: “At the heart of love is freedom and at the heart of freedom is choice. I hate death and the pain it wreaks but love is greater than death. “While none can escape death we can demonstrate love to those who want to die and those who want to live by empowering them with genuine support for the choice they make.” Against: Labor MP for Prospect, Hugh McDermott: “(The bill) is the most heinous piece of legislation ever introduced before this parliament. The debate must be framed for what it truly involves - a failure of public policy and human rights.” Modelling of the Morrison government’s strategy to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 shows its “technology not taxes” plan will leave the nation relying on offsets and unknown technology breakthroughs, but leave the gas sector to grow. Released on Friday afternoon, the modelling report suggests the “net zero” plan will see the value of the coal industry drop by half by 2050. A 160km multi-day hiking trail running the length of the Grampians (Gariwerd) National Park will open to the public on Saturday becoming one of the longest trails in Victoria. Connecting some of the parks’ most spectacular peaks, the Grampians Peaks Trail is a 13 day/12 night journey commencing at Mt Zero and travelling south over the ranges that make up Gariwerd and ending in the town of Dunkeld. This now from AAP: Accused drug lord Mostafa Baluch did not attempt bail for a second time after allegedly cutting off his ankle monitor before police found him trying to cross into Queensland. The fugitive was shackled and flown back to Sydney from the Gold Coast on Thursday evening under police guard before his matter was called on Friday morning. Magistrate Margaret Quinn confirmed in Central Local Court that his bail had been officially revoked after prosecutors filed fresh charges to ensure he remained in prison. The northern beaches restaurateur is being held in Silverwater while undergoing a quarantine period, Acting Corrective Services NSW Commissioner Kevin Corcoran told 2GB radio on Friday. He confirmed Baluch will then be transferred to Goulburn Supermax prison. “They will be keeping a very close eye on him,” Mr Corcoran said. Before he was first granted bail he was already deemed an “extreme high-security inmate, with Mr Corcoran saying that could also be upgraded. “He has been very compliant so far,” he said. Baluch’s desperate bid for freedom ended when he was found hiding in a grey Mercedes concealed in a shipping container being transported on the back of a truck. More than two weeks earlier, police say Baluch cut off an ankle monitor while on bail and sparked “one of the largest fugitive hunts in the country”. Police allege he was planning to flee overseas from Queensland. Defence lawyer Moustafa Kheir said his client need not appear via video link on Friday and confirmed he would not be applying for bail. He declined to comment outside court, while the matter will next be called on December 1. Baluch is charged with a string of drug offences related to a 900kg shipment of cocaine into Australia that had a street value of $270 million. Following a tip-off Queensland officers searched dozens of trucks before zeroing in on the container after noticing it wasn’t properly secured. After a night in the Southport Watchhouse, Baluch’s extradition application was consented to without objection. Wearing prison greens, with hand and leg restraints, Baluch left Southport about 1pm under police escort. He was taken to Coolangatta Airport and flown by PolAir6 - a Cessna Grand Caravan - to Bankstown Airport. Before his arrest in Queensland, the accused kingpin was last seen in Bayview on Sydney’s northern beaches on October 25, days after being granted bail. He was released on strict conditions, including $4 million surety on a waterfront home at Bayview. The man who was driving the truck in which Baluch was found - who police say owns a transport company - was also arrested. The 46-year-old has been charged with doing an act intended to pervert the course of justice and denied bail. Woolworths Group have also admitted to getting jobkeeper this afternoon. Over the 20/21 financial year, $429,000 was paid to 286 workers for a subsidiary of the Endevour Group. The money has been paid back. Lots of flood warnings coming through for regional NSW. Keep an eye out. God, I got so caught up in the net zero modelling I almost forgot about the pandemic. Joke. Here is some cool vaccine data Remeikis said Australia’s journalists need to call lies out when they see politicians make them, instead of helping normalise it. “It’s not normal for public officials to lie to you, especially so blatantly.” Remeikis is talking about how the question of ‘does Scott Morrison lie’ bubbled up into the middle of Australia’s political discourse over the last few days. “He was the one who raised the old John Howard question … who do you trust,” Remeikis said. “At the moment whether people trust Scott Morrison’s word is at the forefront. “We have seen Scott Morrison basically say ‘oh I never said that’ on things that he did. So we’ve got a long way to run on this question.” Crown Resorts Ltd has disclosed that it received $291.2m in jobkeeper, a $40m increase on the figure it reported in March. In 2019/20 it received and paid on $92.87m to 10,341 employees; in 2020/21 it received and paid on $198.34m to a similar number. Crown has not made any voluntary repayments of the wage subsidy. Although credited with saving 700,000 jobs, jobkeeper has become controversial due to the failure of the Morrison government to legislate a clawback mechanism for companies that didn’t meet the required downturn threshold. Some $38bn was paid to companies that didn’t meet the downturn threshold - although as Crown’s casinos were shuttered by public health orders, it would not be among them. Amy Remeikis is on ABC now, she says the PM’s policy on electric vehicles is not a complete 180 - because there is actually nothing serious to help people buy them. “There is nothing to encourage electric vehicle take-up. The policy is ‘we’re going to look at charging infrastructure’. “There’s nothing to make them any cheaper … This is serious because a lot of the developing world are talking about phasing out traditional fuel cars. “Scott Morrison is talking about electric vehicles like they’re a saviour but the government doesn’t have anything to make it easier or get Australians to take them up.” Greens leader, Adam Bandt, has called the government’s net zero modelling a plan for “not zero”. “The plan is built on more coal and gas and a vague hope that the private sector will voluntarily offset 159m tonnes of someone else’s pollution,” he said. “The prime minister fundamentally misunderstands ‘can-do capitalism’ if he thinks big corporations will voluntarily hand over a big bag of cash for permits they’re not obliged to buy. “Under the Liberals’ plan, in 2050 Australia won’t have a safe climate and it won’t even have net zero emissions,” Bandt said Australia needs to reduce 75% of its emissions by 2030. “Under the Liberals, in 2050 Australia will emit 94m tonnes per year in 2050, a larger amount of climate pollution than countries like New Zealand or Greece emit right now in 2021.” Let’s go to Nino who has been covering Victoria’s IBAC hearings. https://twitter.com/ninobucci/status/1459028530134540291 Mazengarb says business and investors need better knowledge of what the transition actually looks like. “Businesses and investors, the energy sector, really want that detail to know where we’re going. The modelling doesn’t provide it. “The plan doesn’t really provide it and I think there’s still questions and uncertainty is still there. And the government is still going to be asked for that detail.” Mazengarb says there is a lack of detail in the report. “This modelling does sort of look like something that’s been sort of put together right at the last minute. It has come out after the policy has been announced. “We heard through Senate estimates the government was still writing the modelling report even after they made the policy announcement.” Michael Mazengarb from Renew Economy is on the ABC talking about the modelling. “The government’s plan has outlined a few different sectors where they expect the emissions reductions to occur. “They expect around 60% of those emission reductions to occur within the Australian economy itself. So this is through reduction in electricity emissions, cuts to waste transport emissions. “There’s another 25% or so which the government is expecting to through international carbon offsets. So buying offsets from overseas. “And there’s this remaining 15% gap which the government has basically just said we might be able to beat our assumptions in terms of emissions cuts in the electricity sector or new technologies might emerge that we haven’t expected. “And that’s what they’re counting on to give them the last 15% and really we don’t know what that is. It’s just a bit of a guess, really.” We’ve got a bit more info on Victoria’s new consent laws here for anyone who wants to read further: WA police have called off the search in Lancelin for missing man Matthew Phillips, who is believed to have been attacked by a shark on the weekend. Members of the public are asked to keep watch for any diving equipment that may be located in the water or washed ashore in Lancelin and any waters/beaches to the immediate north and south. Of particular interest are any signs of the diving suit, diving bag, equipment and flippers seen in the attached photos of Phillips’s diving gear. Any member of the public who finds such items is asked to record the exact time and location (GPS coordinates if possible), take a photo of the equipment in-situ, and contact police immediately on 131 444. Guardian Australia’s very own Amy Remeikisis about to appear on Afternoon Briefing with PK to analyse the government’s net zero modelling. I’ll bring you the best bits of that for those who can’t tune in. Police in New South Wales argued against a proposed public health order that would have allowed vulnerable Aboriginal communities to choose to lockdown in the event of a coronavirus outbreak. The ABC reports that the NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, proposed the health order in March 2020 in response to a request from some remote Aboriginal communities to restrict access and travel to those communities to prevent the spread of Covid. There are still flood warnings in place in South Australia, Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria. NSW is being hit hardest, with parts of the state copping almost 100mm of rain in the last 24 hours. For those on the southeast of the country, you can expect a wet, cold and in parts wild weekend. Tame said she felt heard and hopeful after the meeting: “There are incredible achievements that we have already seen from state to state. I guess, what the aim is of the meeting like this ... is getting the states and territories to get together and identify which of the best existing models of legislation in this area and rising to that model and that standard.” Australian of the year, Grace Tame, has addressed a meeting of attorneys general this afternoon, calling for sexual abuse legislation to be consistent across states and territories. She is on ABC right now and says: “Currently we have eight jurisdictions with eight different sets of legal definitions. “These jurisdictional inconsistencies actually lend themselves to being exploited by perpetrators of sex crimes.” I’m just going to interrupt the net zero analysis to bring you the sad news that yesterday one of Melbourne’s Collins Street falcons died. It is survived by its siblings. For those who can’t remember, here is our story on their birth last year: WA police are investigating after a man allegedly offered a nurse administering Covid vaccines money in exchange for her saying he had received the dose. This from the police: “South Hedland Detectives have charged a 31-year-old man after an incident that occurred at a health campus in South Hedland. “During the morning of Wednesday 10 November, the man attended an appointment at the health campus to receive a COVID-19 vaccine. “Upon attending, he was escorted to a booth where he handed the nurse a note offering money in exchange for a fraudulent vaccination record. “The nurse refused and the man left the health campus. “The 31-year-old man from Port Hedland has been charged with one count of attempted fraud. He received bail and will appear before South Hedland Magistrates court on 22 November 2021.” There’s also some bad news for Australia’s fossil fuel exports in the net zero modelling released by Angus Taylor. It said: “The modelling projects a rebalancing in mining activity driven by shifts in international demand. Specifically, global demand shifts beyond Australian control are expected to reduce the value of coal production by around 50% to 2050, and slow the growth of gas, but mining overall grows by 5% in real terms to 2050, reflecting increased demand for critical minerals and other mining activities. “This shift is projected to occur over several decades, with most impacts observed beyond 2030 as countries make progress towards their decarbonisation goals. Increases in other mining activity is projected to more than offset expected declines in coal and other traditional energy sources.” Gas has a slightly longer shelf life than coal though: “The outlook for gas is more positive, with demand projected to grow until 2040, before turning lower. This is consistent with other analyses.” The minister for energy and assumptions about future emissions reduction, Angus Taylor, has released the modelling underpinning the Morrison government’s claim it can reach net zero by 2050. Taylor has said Australia’s gross national income will be 1.6% higher, and people would be nearly $2,000 better off on average in 2050 compared to a scenario where no action was taken. The main sleight of hand is in this assumption: “All action is taken voluntarily by the private sector, even where there are marginal costs up to $25 [per tonne of carbon dioxide or equivalent]. In this case, the action taken is still interpreted as being entirely voluntary as the cost is consistent with, or lower than, the marginal cost of voluntary action widely observed today.” So, basically, the government thinks businesses will pay up to $25 per tonne to reduce their emissions, voluntarily, even though we have no carbon price to incentivise them to do that. This action is “supported by the government either through an emissions reduction fund-style incentive for abatement activities that are additional to business-as-usual, or by other enabling actions” including co-investment. Some might call that an implicit carbon price, but for the Coalition it’s just “direct action”. And where does the $2,000 per person come from? The modelling says it is due to: Higher global growth due to lower abatement costs The creation of a new cost-competitive global hydrogen sector, worth more than $50 billion in 2050, lifting national income by about $1,000 per person Avoiding the imposition of a capital risk premium on Australian investors and firms assumed in the ‘no Australian action’ scenario There’s a pretty big caveat in all this, which is that the model “is not a precise prediction of how trends in technology or the Australian economy will unfold over the next three decades”. It said: “In particular, the quantity of emissions reduction or offsets generated in the model should not be interpreted as requiring a specific reduction or output from that sector. Australia’s net-zero emissions by 2050 target is a whole-of-economy target. Australia does not have any sectoral emissions reduction targets.” Coal mining is forecast to fall by 51% by 2050 under the government’s net zero plan ... unclear if this would happen anyway given how unviable it has become. New analysis from CARE shows most climate finance for developing countries is not new money. Across the 23 donor countries analysed, only 6% of climate finance in 2018 was in addition to aid targets, despite agreement that it should be “new and additional”. As negotiations in Glasgow wound up, the Alliance of Small Island States said the draft COP26 outcome does not provide strong enough assurances of support to at-risk countries. The aid agencies also condemned Australia’s failure to update emissions reduction targets for 2030. Based on our wealth and emissions, Oxfam and ActionAid have calculated that Australia’s fair share of climate finance should be $12 billion annually by 2030. The aid agencies are calling on the Australian Government to step up and immediately increase climate finance to $3 billion over the next five years, in addition to the aid budget. The agencies also call for Australia to rejoin the UN’s Green Climate Fund, as supported by neighbouring countries in our region. For those playing along at home the government has finally dropped the net zero modelling here. I’ll see if we can get some expert analysis for you. And that is it from Albanese. We’ll have more on the government’s modelling when it drops this afternoon – as I am sure you are all keen to have a look. Albanese is defending Labor’s policies on climate change. He says they will have more to announce. “We have a policy for community batteries, for solar. We have a policy of new energy apprenticeships to make sure that Australians can benefit from that job creation. “We have policies when it comes to climate across the board, but we have more to say, and we will have more to say during the election campaign. What we won’t do is promise things that we can’t deliver. “We want to have an ambitious program but one that’s realistic, one whereby people know, when they vote for us, what they’ll get in their first term.” Now we are going to Anthony Albanese in Melbourne. He is attacking the PM for not legislating net zero by 2050. “It should be legislated. This is a government that actually stand up and say, they’re trying to make legislation a pejorative word. I don’t know what they think goes on in parliament, but in most parliament’s they’re call legislatures because what they do is they debate laws and legislation.” Morrison is now attacking Labor for not having a plan on climate change. “They have no plan and no modelling in terms of how they say they’re getting to 2050. They say they want to put policies in place that tell you what to do, rather than allow you to make the choices.” Each is attacking the other for not having a plan ... when neither has a clear plan. Welcome to pre-election time folks. Morrison is asked if he needs a more ambitious plan on climate change ahead of the election, especially to keep voters in Victorian seats like Higgins or Kooyong on side. He says the government will release the modelling behind its net zero 2050 plan at some point today. “And today, as modelling will be released on our plan to get Australia to net zero by 2050, a plan that is about technology, not taxes, it’s about choices, not mandates. “It’s about having a portfolio of technologies that we can have brought to scale and at the right cost to ensure that our economy can be on that path, that ensures that we have affordable, reliable power.” Now we are on to net zero and the government’s modelling. Morrison says: “But this is the point, when you make assumptions about achieving technology targets, now, you will be familiar with the technology targets we have set up with the low-emissions technology program. “Hydrogen for $2 a kilo, for example, when you can get technologies at the right price so they can be commercialised and introduced at scale, then you know how that will impact on industrial processes and how these fuels are used in Australia. “And that’s how you work that through your modelling of the economy, to understand its impacts on being able to lift up jobs.” Morrison is now talking about the Aukus agreement and our fallout with the French after dumping the $90bn submarines contract with France. Here are the main quotes: “Of course the French are upset. “I decided, and my government decided, that Australian needed better and that we needed nuclear-propelled submarines. “I am prepared to make those decisions and if they are upset with me, I understand. But I’m not going to have Australia’s best interests intimidated by people who might be a bit upset with me over things like that.” The PM said Labor want to “push” people into buying electric vehicles – even though there was no mandate in their policy. “Labor wants to control what you do. They want to control your life, they want government more involved in your life. It is not how we will secure the economic recovery.” The prime minister is speaking in Melbourne. MPs have a conscience vote and debate is expected to go all day, until 5 pm, so we’ll have more on that as it goes along. We’ve also heard from NSW Labor MP Joe Haylen who co-sponsored the bill – she spoke in support. “I can only speak for myself when I say that this is a choice I would like available to me if I was terminally ill. “When it is my time to go, if I am suffering and unable to benefit from further care, I would want to say goodbye on my own terms, surrounded by my family with the same respect and dignity with which I try to live my life.” And we have an update from the NSW parliament where members are debating the legislation to legalise voluntary assisted dying. The debate has started and it is already passionate. Premier Dominic Perrottet is opposed to the bill, which was introduced by independent Alex Greenwich. Perrottet started the debate, saying his grandmother is currently dying from pancreatic cancer and although she is suffering, he does not think voluntary assisted dying is the answer. He promised to fix the NSW palliative care system. “Our society is judged by how it treats its most vulnerable. The sick, the frail, the elderly, the disabled. “It sees them as a blessing, not as a burden. It stands in solidarity with those who suffer. And it accompanies the sick and the dying on their journey. Not offering death but care, comfort and compassion.” After a slow start, 90% of Australians aged 16 and over have now had their first dose of a Covid vaccine. On Twitter the health minister Greg Hunt said: “Thank you to each and every Australian who has had their vaccination. You are protecting yourself, your loved ones, your community and helping Australia to reopen and stay safely open.” A massive funnel web spider with fangs so long they could bite through a human fingernail has been donated to a lifesaving antivenom program at the Australian Reptile Park. The arachnid has been named Megaspider, and the park says she is roughly twice the size of a typical funnel web spider, more comparable to a tarantula. Debate on a controversial piece of pokies legislation in Tasmania went late into the evening yesterday, with independent upper house MP Meg Webb spending 6.5 hours on her feet delivering what other MPs called a record speech against the bill. The Gaming Control Amendment bill marks the end of a 50-year monopoly on gambling licences in Tasmania held by a company called Federal Group. The Liberal state government argues the legislation will deliver an additional $8.5m a year in state revenue for essential services and community needs. But Webb and other critics of the bill say it is a missed opportunity for reform in a state where gaming interests have long held sway. They say the tax cuts embedded in the bill are robbing the state of millions of much-needed revenue, and that the gambling harm minimisation measures proposed are inadequate. Tasmanians as a whole lose an average of $15.5m every month to poker machines. Webb was scathing in her speech of the Liberal and Labor parties, who she said had a “gut-wrenching fear … should this industry decide to turn against them at a future election”. The bill will not go on to an upper house inquiry to be further interrogated, as its critics wanted. Justifying her marathon contribution, Webb said in her concluding remarks that she wanted her concerns put on the public record so “there could never be an opportunity to say there wasn’t grounds for us to properly and thoroughly scrutinise this [bill] in a comprehensive way.” German car manufacturer Volkswagen has lost its appeal bid in Australia’s highest court against a $125m fine for breaching diesel emissions standards, AAP reports. The company admitted contravening Australian consumer law through false representations about its vehicles’ exhaust emissions between 2011 and 2015. But Volkswagen sought special leave to appeal a 2019 federal court penalty on the grounds it outstripped a deal struck with Australia’s consumer watchdog, the ACCC, for a $75m fine plus $4m in legal costs. The high court on Friday refused Volkswagen’s application for special leave to appeal. Volkswagen lost a federal court appeal in April 2021 over the original fine for conduct characterised as an “egregious breach of Australian consumer law of the worst kind imaginable”. The federal court was told Volkswagen evaded emission standards in Australia by installing a “two-mode software” causing different emissions to be released depending on how the vehicle was operated. One mode of operation reduced pollution while the other increased it. “It suffices to note that the software was designed, created and in due course implemented for the purpose of evading and defeating emissions standards tests,” justice Lindsay Foster said when imposing the original penalty. Perth Airport has become the first major airport in Australia to acknowledge the Traditional Owners of destinations across the country. Boarding gates will now show both the commonly used name of the destination, along with the name of the Traditional Owners of that place. The screens will rotate between the commonly used place name and the name of the Traditional Owners. A flight to Adelaide will be displayed as Adelaide/Kaurna Country and flights to Newman will be Newman/Nyiyaparli Country. Perth Airport CEO Kevin Brown said that acknowledging Traditional Custodians is an important part of the reconciliation process. “Acknowledging Country demonstrates respect for Aboriginal traditional cultural practices and promotes greater appreciation and respect,” Brown said. “This is a small but meaningful step in our efforts to create a better understanding and appreciation of Aboriginal culture and traditions. This is coming out of Kew in Victoria. David Davis is a former health minister, lives in the electorate and is broadly popular with members there. He is known to be more progressive than Tim Smith. Kew is a safe seat for the Liberals and Davis has been tipped as a potential future leader depending on the outcome of the next state election. New Zealand has reported 201 cases of Covid-19 today, the second time the country has cracked 200 cases in the last week. All of those cases were in the North Island, with the vast bulk (181) in Auckland, the city at the centre of the outbreak. There were 85 people in hospital with the virus, including eleven in intensive care. The total number of cases in the current outbreak has now passed the 5,000 mark, hitting 5,196 today. According to the Ministry of Health, 90% of eligible New Zealanders (those aged 12 and up) have now had their first dose of the vaccine, and 80% are fully vaccinated. There are ongoing concerns that Maori and Pacific New Zealanders will bear the brunt of the outbreak, due to lower vaccination rates and younger populations – 76% of eligible Maori have had at least one dose and 59% are fully vaccinated. Among Pacific New Zealanders, 87% have had one dose and 74% are fully vaccinated. The ministry said in a release that those who tested positive should reach out if their condition deteriorated, following several deaths among people self-isolating in the community. And the ACT has recorded 15 new locally acquired COVID-19 cases today but there are no cases in hospital. And we’ve got some extra detail about today’s Covid numbers from Victoria. The state recorded 1,115 new infections - that’s down from yesterday’s figures and nine people have died. There are 426 people in hospital and 82 in intensive care. On vaccinations, just over 86% of eligible people are fully vaccinated, and 92% have had their first dose. Let’s get some more info on Queensland, where the state has recorded two new Covid cases. There have been two locally acquired cases who are both known contacts of an existing outbreak, which is good news. They are a child under 10 and a young woman in her teens. Queensland health authorities are still concerned about the unlinked cases on the Gold Coast, announced yesterday. There were 2,000 tests on the Gold Coast in the last 24 hours. Schoolies is meant to be next week. In Melbourne, the final farewell prayer for Bert Newton is about to begin. Many have commented on social media that Newton’s funeral has been playing on every free to air channel - showing just how big his impact was. Queensland has recorded two new locally acquired cases of Covid, both of which are linked and in quarantine. Lauren Newton also shared this anecdote of Bert as a grandfather: “We had so many special times together, and I am so glad he got the chance to know my children. They loved Poppy so much, and his love for them was clear to see. He would spend hours playing games with them, his favourite game being hospitals and hotels. “Mum and I wondered why he liked that game the best, then we realised it was because all he had to do was lie on the bed and rest. “He was my kids’ most captive audience. He even got the job of introducing them on stage when they played, and I wondered if they knew how lucky they were. He even put his good voice on, like he was doing the Logies. “I knew it was one of his favourite gigs ever.” At Bert Newton’s funeral, Peter Smith also read out a moving eulogy written by Bert and Patti’s daughter, Lauren. “I’m not sure where to begin, or if I could ever put into words how much I love my dad. From the love I felt as a child, to watching him with my own children, he made us feel so special and always brought laughter and fun to everything we did,” she said. “I always felt lucky I had two dads: one on TV and one at home. “Family always came first for dad, and he included us in everything he did. He and mum were a team and he wanted us to be involved in everything. He made me feel very special and I knew I could always count on him. “When my car broke down on the freeway and had to be towed, dad raced to be by my side with a Diet Coke in hand for us both. That was him, he was always there when I needed him, he was always interested in everything I did. “He was the greatest father I could’ve wished for.” Some parts of Australia are experiencing the heaviest rainfall this year and there are several severe weather warnings in place across Vic, QLD and NSW. We’ve been sent this amazing picture from North Star NSW. And you can see how bad some rivers in NSW are already getting in the video below ... In NSW 94.1% of people aged 16 and over have received a first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, and 90.6 % are fully vaccinated. And we now have a detailed breakdown of today’s Covid numbers from NSW. NSW recorded 286 new locally acquired cases in the 24 hours to 8pm last night. There have been two deaths. The total number of cases in NSW since the beginning of the pandemic is now 77,762. There are now 236 Covid patients being treated in hospital, with 34 people in intensive care, 15 of whom require ventilation. The federal government has committed $1.1m toward establishing a national scheme to ensure the traceability of horses, which animal welfare groups hope will provide better data on the number of horses going to slaughter. But the working group established to figure out how the proposal would work has yet to report any meaningful progress. The national scheme was recommended in 2019 after a Senate inquiry called by the Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi, off the back of a report on the ABC’s 7.30 program on racehorses going to slaughter and a report in Guardian Australia on horse auctions in Victoria. The proposed scheme will ensure the traceability of all horses and ponies in Australia — not just racehorses — to ensure better animal welfare, better disease control, and potentially reduce safety issues. The proposals being considered include mandatory microchipping and registration of horses, currently optional outside of the thoroughbred industry. Agriculture minister David Littleproud said horse welfare was “part of the rural social fabric on which Australian agriculture’s continued productivity relies”: Reliable national horse identification and traceability supports good biosecurity, exports, food safety and animal welfare outcomes. The Australian government is prepared to do its part, to support the horse industry and state and territory regulators, to kick-start practical traceability arrangements that benefit the horse industry and community. Establishing appropriate national arrangements will also help to bolster trading partners’ confidence in our arrangements, including animal welfare attributes — and in turn assist access for horse product exports to markets. Horse traceability will safeguard our rural and regional industries and communities and the enviable horse health status on which they rely. The funding will go toward implementing the yet-to-be-released recommendations of a working group established by state and federal agriculture ministers, led by Victoria. That group has yet to make any reportable progress. It is yet to use the $50,000 in funding it received from Littleproud in March. Faruqi said the funding was welcome but “means little without a clear implementation plan from the working group, which was established over a year ago and appears to have made little progress”: We need movement from the working group and a clear commitment to getting this register off the ground as a matter of urgency. The eulogy was read by family friend Peter Smith. And Matthew Newton has paid tribute to his father from New York: I am very sorry that due to the pandemic I can’t be with you. Growing up, I never really watched Bambi or Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. I didn’t want to – what fascinated me were the movies that created the black and white glow from my dad’s office. A lot has been said about my dad’s sharp wit, but my two favourite lines weren’t said on TV, or even in front of an audience. Once was in a doctor’s office and there were only two people in the room – one was a doctor, the other was an 11-year-old me. Good morning and a very big thanks to Matilda Boseley – who has, as always, left some impossibly big blog shoes to fill this morning. Let’s go back to Melbourne, where we are saying goodbye to entertainment legend Bert Newton. Those at the state funeral are now listening to a scripture reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians. Daniel Andrews was the first to address mourners earlier and you can watch a bit of his tribute below: With that I shall pass you over to the wonderful Cait Kelly, to take you through the rest of the day’s news. Federal MP Bob Katter has slammed proposed federal voter ID laws, labelling them “blatantly racist” against Indigenous people. Perth airport will become the first in the country to acknowledge the Indigenous names of Australian destinations on boarding gate signs. The West Australian newspaper reports that boarding gates at the airport’s domestic terminals will rotate between the commonly used place name and the name used by the traditional custodians. For example, a flight to Adelaide will now read as both Adelaide and Kaurna country. This will be rolled out across terminal 1, terminal 3 and terminal 4. Today’s is Victorian Labor powerbroker Adem Somyurek’s last day of hearings in the branch stacking inquest by the state’s Independent Broad‑based Anti‑corruption Commission. Nino Bucci is providing updates for us: The Victorian government has just announced that as part of a suite of changes to sexual assault laws, the state will now adopt an “affirmative consent” model, and amend the wording of legislation to make explicitly clear that stealthing (that act of removing a condom during sex without the other person’s consent) is a crime. This comes just a day after affirmative consent laws passed the lower house of the NSW parliament. Critics of Victoria’s proposed new pandemic powers legislation say it is the “most extreme of its kind” and will give the premier and health minister too much control, while the legislation has become the focus of anti-lockdown and anti-vaccination protesters in Melbourne since restrictions eased. Daniel Andrews cancelled a press conference in Bendigo this week due to security concerns related to a small group of protesters targeting the Victorian premier over the bill. The legislation passed the legislative assembly last month, and is due to be debated and potentially passed in the legislative council next week. Key upper house MPs such as the Reason party’s Fiona Patten, Greens leader Samantha Ratnam and Animal Justice party’s Andy Meddick have faced abuse and death threats in attempts to persuade them to vote against the bill. So what will the new pandemic legislation actually do? To find out all the details, check out the explainer below: Not 100% sure about the choice of photo for this tweet. Dan Andrews: Ladies and gentlemen, everyone knows, when we think and speak of Bert Newton, we are really reflecting on a duo. A double act. Bert’s partnership with Patti was everything. Both formidable talents, both deeply in love. Theirs is a story for the ages. Christmas 1974, Bert flies from Melbourne to LA and eventually on to New York to board a cruise ship unannounced and unprepared. He is travelling with the hope that the woman he loves but hasn’t seen for quite some time will accept his proposal of marriage. And during a rainstorm in the Caribbean on Australia Day 1974, she did. Bert and Patti were partners in every way. Husband and wife, parents and grandparents, best friends, entertainers performers and soulmates ... He found a love that lasted nearly five decades, and he led a life that was full. He entertained his audience because he respected his audience. He never forgot where he came from and he lived his values. Compassion and kindness, generosity and empathy. Always working to lift those around him to new heights. Always so giving and so generous, never for a claim or fuss or fanfare. On the half of all Victorians I offer sincere condolences to Patti and the family. We are all richer for his life and poorer for his passing. Dan Andrews: He was a pioneer, an icon, a legend. But Bert’s stories much more. A shy working class kid from no apologies and no prisoners North Fitzroy who loved trams and going to the pictures. His life however changed in June of 1950 when the seventh Brunswick Boy Scouts took him to see his very first live radio broadcast of a show called Peter’s Pals. When Bert walked into the 3XY Spring Street Studios he was just trying to get his scouts badge but by the time he left he found his calling. Not his love, we will talk about that in a moment, but his calling. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews is speaking now at Bert Newton’s state funeral at St Patrick’s Cathedral in Melbourne: My grandfather, a devout Catholic, and a train driver absolutely loved Bert Newton. I’m certain it was his Catholicism that sealed the deal. He would often speak to me about the gift of faith. Bert Newton had that gift. And I can’t but help think that he’d be so honoured to be farewelled with a full mass here at Saint Patrick’s Cathedral ... Bert Newton was a great entertainer and life itself was his stage. He was always there, omnipresent on our screens and in our hearts. To Australia, Bert wasn’t just a man on a screen or an actor on a stage. He was someone we all felt we knew. Like a fireplace on a cold night, families gather around their TV sets drawn in by his warmth and his inviting ease. He was more than talent, he was trust. His story is the story of Australian television and, while he was first beamed into our homes in black and white, Bert was colour TV long before technology arrived. Mourners have arrived at St Patrick’s Cathedral in Melbourne for the state funeral of Australian TV legend Bert Newton. Scott Morrison has just arrived at the state funeral of Bert Newton. Surging energy costs and export restrictions from usual overseas suppliers are leading to record high fertiliser prices in Australia, with analysts predicting farmers could be forced to ration its use, potentially disrupting global food supply. Modelling from Thomas Elder Markets shows the price of fertiliser in Australia is at a record $1,320 a tonne for purchase, freight and discharge. Agricultural market analyst Andrew Whitelaw says fertiliser prices had been rising since the start of the year but have skyrocketed since August. He said as a result “we’ll see more rationing, as farmers will use less fertiliser because it’s too expensive” which could disrupt the global food supply chains. You can read the full report below: Looks like we will be hearing from the Queensland premier at 10am Brisbane time, 11am Sydney and Melbourne time. Yesterday she warned that if there continued to be mystery cases discovered in the Gold Coast further restrictions may need to be brought in, so likely this one will be worth keeping an eye on. Ummmmmm ... A national effort to save the Murray-Darling by returning 2,750 gigalitres of water to the system is under way, but climate change could see roughly the same amount evaporate. The extra water is needed to save ecosystems in the southern basin. Top CSIRO scientist Francis Chiew says while it is a better scenario than not delivering the water at all, global heating means it is effectively giving with one hand and taking away with the other. A reduction in flows means “Armageddon” in South Australia, Conservation council of South Australia chief executive Craig Wilkins warns, threatening wildlife and agriculture that depend on the water. You can read the report below: Just under 93% of Victorians aged 12 and over have received at least one vaccine dose and 86% both, reports AAP. Almost all restrictions are set to be scrapped for the fully vaccinated when the state reaches 90% double-dosed, forecast to occur by 24 November. Yesterday the state’s chief health officer warned that several vaccination deadlines are approaching. The controversial mandate, which sparked violent protests across Melbourne in September, requires all tradies to have had two vaccine doses by tomorrow to continue working on Victorian construction sites. The deadline for residential aged care workers is also fast approaching, as they must be fully vaccinated by Monday to continue working. About 1 million of Victoria’s essential workers will be required to be double jabbed by 26 November. OK taking you back for some more highlights from that 3AW interview. Neil Mitchell: You’ve got a former prime minister of Australia, the French president, both calling you a liar, and it doesn’t worry you? Even politically? Scott Morrison: No, because I’m making the right decisions, Neil. I’m making decisions to protect Australia’s national defence interests, to ensure that we got rid of, and didn’t proceed with, a contract that wasn’t going to do the right thing for Australia ... I was prepared to make the decisions that I had no doubt was going to draw some flak, and people would disagree with it. And if you don’t have the strength to do that, if you don’t have the strength to deal with the sledges and other things that come your way, well, you shouldn’t be in this job. And I have certainly got a pretty good track record of being able to cop what comes, and be able to keep focused on the job and get things done and stand up for things right. Mitchell: Do you want Malcolm Turnbull out of the Liberal party? Morrison: That’s not a judgment for me, it’s a matter for the Liberal party. I don’t see the need for that. I mean, if others do, that’s fine, but it’s just not something I think about. Scott Morrison has revealed that Australia has passed the 90% first dose vaccination rate for those aged 16 and over. In a wide-ranging interview with 3AW, Morrison took credit for Australia’s low fatality rate and high vaccination rate during the Covid-19 pandemic but also claimed that into the future the Liberal-National government will seek less “control” over citizens’ lives. Morrison brushed off Malcolm Turnbull’s suggestion that he is a serial liar: It’s important not to have a thin skin, not to get bitter, and to stay focused on the job ... If you haven’t got the thick skin to deal with that, you’re in the wrong job. I don’t tend to take things personally. Morrison said he didn’t believe he had ever told a lie in public life: He rounded out the interview with the same lie he told yesterday , that Labor wants to put up the price of petrol (or its policy would indirectly have that effect – it’s not clear, because he hasn’t explained the basis for this claim). Morrison made his pitch for re-election, noting that it’s “true” he is the underdog for now but the Coalition will focus on “securing the economic recovery” and “shifting from the pandemic mindset of the government telling everyone what to do” to government “supporting” individuals and businesses. Here is probably the most interesting exchange from that Scott Morrison 3AW radio interview. Host Neil Mitchell: Prime minister Scott Morrison, have you ever told a lie in public life? Morrison: I don’t believe I have, no. No. Lord help us, I’ve just been told Labor leader Anthony Albanese was speaking with ABC radio Melbourne at the same time as Scott Morrison was on 3AW. Give me a moment, I’ll get you all the highlights from both! Between all the grandstanding from Neil Mitchell about the Victorian emergency management legislation, I missed that the prime minister just confirmed that Australia has now passed the 90% first dose vaccination milestone! Scott Morrison is chatting to Melbourne radio station 3aw at the moment and has been asked about the state government’s new emergency management legislation. But despite constant prompts from host Neil Mitchell encouraging him to condemn the state government’s approach, the prime minister is staying well out of the fray: This is a matter for the Victorian parliament and the Victorian government. And you know, that’s the thing about the federation. We’re all responsible for the things we’re responsible for, and we’re accountable for them ... Mitchell: Do you agree it is this legislation is deeply scary and undemocratic? Morrison: Well, as I said, I mean, we’re going the opposite direction. Now. No, but what I just like to bring up so this is something for the Victorian people to determine and to the Victorian government determine what I’m saying is Australians have had about government’s telling them what to do ... Mitchell: But as prime minister, you are able to have a view on it, [others in government have said] it’s scary and undemocratic. Do you share those concerns? Morrison: Well, look, I’m always respectful of the federation, and I am respectful. I don’t give lectures to through this pandemic. I respect the federation. I work with all the premiers and chief ministers but the key message about this is it’s your call your responsibility and don’t expect the federal government to go and argue your case when it’s not a policy that we have. The issue of whether the contraceptive pill – the first choice of birth control among Australian women using contraception – should be made available over the counter has divided the medical community. Other countries have already made access to the pill easier. In New Zealand, some oral contraceptives have been sold over the counter after a consultation with a pharmacist since 2017. The pill is also available over the counter in China, Greece, India, Turkey and other countries. But the Australian drug regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration, made an interim decision in October not to approve over-the-counter access to the pill. A final decision will come before Christmas; final submissions on the topic closed on 1 November. The last time the TGA considered the issue, in 2015, it also rejected making the pill accessible over the counter. You can read the full report below: Watch out, ACT! A severe thunderstorm warning has just been issued for you, with heavy rains and damaging winds expected. Extremely important update: Accused drug smuggler Mostafa Baluch is due to appear before NSW court today after he was recaptured, extradited from the Gold Coast and slapped with an additional outstanding arrest warrant charge. It’s alleged that Baluch is the financier behind a 900kg shipment of cocaine into Australia, and was on the run for nearly two weeks after allegedly cutting off his ankle monitor. He was found this week hiding in a container on the back of a truck that had just crossed the NSW-Queensland border. After a night in the Southport watch house, Baluch’s extradition hearing was held on Thursday. Unvaccinated for Covid, Baluch remained in isolation and unable to appear in court so listened to the proceedings by phone. His lawyer, Nicholas Andrews, consented to the extradition application without objection. You can get up to date on the whole situation below: Federal finance minister Simon Birmingham has responded to protesters piling dung outside his electoral office, encouraging gardeners in the area to come pick up some “spring fertiliser” so the poo doesn’t go to waste. Sixteen people have died while in Australia on the government’s troubled seasonal workers program since the beginning of the pandemic. The figures have come to light as the scheme faces widespread accusations of exploitation and “inhumane conditions”, as well as a potential class action. The spike in fatalities has also raised concerns that the Pacific Islanders coming to Australia under the program are not being given adequate safety training. The 16 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic were in contrast to zero recorded between 2018 and 2019 and three between 2017 and 2018. You can read the full report below: Extinction Rebellion protesters have marked the last day of Cop26 by dumping a large pile of dung outside the office of federal finance minister Simon Birmingham, declaring that the UN climate summit was a “shit show”. Here’s what a spokesperson for the group said in their accompanying media statement: Extinction Rebellion’s message is simple: the Cop26 climate summit was bullshit, and Australia’s contribution stunk most of all. Not only did the Morrison Government take a weak, non-binding ‘plan’ with no new policies or mandates, it also refused to sign global pledges aimed at limiting methane emissions and phasing out fossil fuel production. Instead, the Government continued to spruik coal and gas, with the major carbon polluter Santos taking centre stage at Australia’s pavilion in Glasgow. Today also marks the last official day of Cop26, but UN chief António Guterres says the emission reduction commitments from countries so far are “not enough” and he has urged the global community the “pick up the pace”: The announcements here in Glasgow are encouraging – but they are far from enough ... Promises ring hollow when the fossil fuels industry still receives trillions in subsidies. Cop26 president Alok Sharma warned that time was running short to clinch a deal before the meeting’s scheduled end on Friday evening, reports AFP: We still have a monumental challenge ahead of us. Quite a lot has been achieved. But we are still some way away from finalising those very critical issues that are still outstanding. He welcomed a joint China-US pact to accelerate climate action this decade, which experts said should allay fears that tensions visible early in the summit might derail the talks. In Melbourne today hundreds of family members and friends of Bert Newton will gather today to farewell the Australian TV legend at a live broadcast state funeral. Newton died at the end of October, aged 83, at a private Melbourne clinic. Today’s ceremony will be held at St Patrick’s Cathedral in East Melbourne from 10am. It is not open to the public, due to Covid-19 restrictions, but the service will be streamed online, with TV networks Nine, Ten and Seven also broadcasting. A bill that would give terminally ill people in NSW access to voluntary assisted dying is due to be debated in NSW parliament today, reports AAP. NSW is the only state that is yet to pass voluntary assisted dying laws. A “respectful” debate on the voluntary assisted dying bill 2021 will take place in the lower house according to its proponent, independent Sydney MP Alex Greenwich: Following a year of consultation and many months after the public release of the legislation, I’m pleased that debate can finally begin on Friday on this compassionate and conservative bill. Greenwich’s bill has a record 28 co-sponsors from across the political spectrum. Both Labor and the Coalition have indicated they will allow a conscience vote on the issue. But premier Dominic Perrottet and Labor opposition leader Chris Minns have said they’ll vote against it. The SMH reports Perrottet will take the unorthodox step of being the first government speaker to respond to the bill. Greenwich introduced the bill on 12 October but debate won’t finish before 2022, after the government and Labor agreed to refer it to an upper house inquiry. The inquiry will hold hearings throughout December, with a report due back on next year’s first sitting day. Greenwich has accused his parliamentary colleagues of stalling. But he said the debate would begin before lunchtime today “assuming no further procedural games”. Good morning all and welcome to Friday. It’s Matilda Boseley bringing you all the news updates you need as we count down to the weekend. Of course, the big news today is the vicious rain and winds causing flooding across the east coast, with some areas of NSW receiving more than a month’s worth of rain in a matter of days. Colder temperatures, showers and gusty west to north-westerly winds are expected around the state today, and the Bureau of Meteorology has warned sheep graziers that the weather may be so bad that their animals might not survive the day. Victoria’s emergency services have also warned that heavy rain may lead to flash flooding in parts of Gippsland. The heavy rain trapped an empty school bus and three 4WDs between two fast-rising creeks near Narrabri on Wednesday afternoon. In Bingara, the SES were forced to ferry stranded holidaymakers out of a flooded caravan park. It seems there could be more scenes like this today, with flood warnings in place for the Lachlan River at Nanami, and for the Gwydir and Mehi rivers at Gravesend, Pallamallawa, Yarraman Bridge and Moree.When his two daughters were abducted from their university dormitories by armed men in April, Friday Sani volunteered to deliver the ransom. In two bags he carried banknotes to the value of more than 40m naira (£70,000), the price to free Victory and Rejoice, and 37 others taken from the Federal College of Forestry Mechanisation in Afaka, Kaduna. In April and May more than 70 students were abducted from the federal college and the nearby Greenfield University. With little faith that police could help, a group of parents went to the kidnappers, through an intermediary, and paid to get their children back. “I personally went with the provost of the college to a location in the Giwa local government area. I held the two bags myself,” Sani says. Those young people were returned. Five from the Greenfield group were killed. Kidnapping has become endemic in northern Nigeria. Bandits – heavily armed militants, many of them ethnic Fulanis – are waging their own insurgency, killing, abducting and terrorising impoverished communities. The lawlessness has evolved from years of conflict between farmers and herders, fuelled by economic crisis, police inaction and the authorities’ refusal to intervene. Some state governments in the north have made controversial peace deals with the bandit gangs to stop the violence but many see these agreements, widely suspected to include money, as simply incentivising criminality. Since the kidnapping of the Chibok schoolgirls in 2014, abductions by armed groups have become a highly lucrative crime, with ransom demands of hundreds of thousands of pounds. Children are prize targets. The groups face minimal resistance at boarding schools and universities and have grown bolder, with some kidnappers cultivating a celebrity image, making ransom demands on radio stations and granting interviews to journalists. After each kidnapping, a network of negotiators emerges, including clerics, former militants and security forces personnel. When the federal college students were kidnapped, the families sought the help of Sheikh Ahmad Gumi. Gumi, an influential if controversial imam and government critic based in Kaduna, has close connections with the gangs and has acted as a go-between in several cases. The parents say Gumi gave them contact details for former bandits who claimed to know the kidnappers. Some parents suspected the intermediaries were working with the gang, especially when ransom demands suddenly rose. Gumi told the Guardian that his connections with the gangs did not mean he agreed with, or financially benefited from, kidnappings. “Parents approached me and I tried to appeal to the bandits,” he says. “Many of them [bandits] are very young and they are angry because they say they do not get justice, when farmers and some of these communities are going after them.” He says the farmer-herder conflict had pushed many Fulanis to banditry. “This is difficult to hear in Nigeria but there are real grievances,” he says. “There’s no way this can end without dialogue. We have to come to a settlement, or else this situation, as we are seeing it, will get much worse.” More than 2,000 children and young people have been abducted in Nigeria this year, according to the UN. The most recent incident was in Zamfara in September when 73 pupils were abducted from a secondary school. In July, 140 pupils at Bethel Baptist high school in Kaduna state were snatched, although 25 escaped. Peter Hawkins, head of the UN children’s agency Unicef in Nigeria, says the insecurity is causing an education crisis, setting back gains made in pupil retention, particularly among girls. “There was a girls’ school in Zamfara where 300 girls were kidnapped and the impact of that was the other parents saying, ‘we’re not taking kids to school.’ There is really a serious crisis in education that is happening today but the impact will be over the next seven to 10 years for Nigeria,” says Hawkins. Kidnappers are becoming more brazen in their attacks, undeterred by the consequences they could face. The attack on Greenfield University was led by a criminal known as “Sani Jalingo” and often referred to as “Baleri”, who initially demanded 800m naira (£1.4m) for their release. He is thought to have also led the kidnap at the forestry college. When the money was not forthcoming, the kidnappers killed five of the young people and then called Nasiru Adamu El-Hikaya, a presenter on the Voice of America Hausa radio station. In the call, part of which was broadcast, Jalingo boasted about the abductions, then forced some of the kidnapped students to make an appeal to their parents. “He called and said he’s ‘Sani Jalingo the kidnapper’. He said he had something to say and had asked for my number, so I decided to record him,” says Hikaya. One of the students forced to appeal was Hamza Nasiru, 25. “I think he was crying,” Hikaya says. “He was asking for help. When you are talking from the den of kidnappers and you get an opportunity to talk to someone that can raise alarm, you will do it because your life depends on it.” Jalingo sounded “reckless”, Hikaya says, and on a high. “He was laughing, boasting. He was comfortable in what he was doing, saying he believed he is doing the right thing, that he’s even proud to be a kidnapper. He was saying the weapons they usually get could defeat the military. That they are really like the government of the forest, of the bush.” Ahmad Idris, Nasiru’s uncle, was distraught. “He is almost like my own son; I felt it like as if it was my child.” When, soon after the kidnap, the abductors called the students’ relatives and issued their demands, some parents got in touch with the authorities; others contacted Gumi. All of the surviving students were eventually released. Nasiru is slowly recovering from the trauma, his family says, and is waiting to continue his education. Greenfield University has relocated its campus to a more secure site in Kaduna town, while plans to move the forestry college have also reportedly been drawn up. Many communities affected by the kidnapping gangs have been dismayed at the lack of government support. The fact that the kidnappers are often not pursued even after ransoms have been paid has caused a lot of anger. It was a struggle for Sani and the other parents to find the ransom money. Many sold all their possessions. But after the students came home, the security forces “didn’t even bother to dig further to find the kidnappers”, says Sani. Victory and Rejoice have not yet resumed their studies. “If I had my way I would move my children out of this country for education,” he says. “Our major concern is how our children can get back to school.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Eastern and central Victoria are bracing for flash flooding and damaging winds after another day of heavy rain soaked parts of New South Wales and Queensland. Residents in East Gippsland and West and South Gippsland have been warned there is the potential for flash flooding, with rainfall totals of 30-60mm expected on Friday night. The Central and North Central regions are set to face winds averaging 55 to 70km/h with peak gusts of around 90km/h, with the Bureau of Meteorology urging residents to avoid travel if possible. It comes after large parts of the east coast of Australia were soaked by another day of heavy rain and thunderstorms. Flood warnings and strong wind warnings remain in place across three states. Bureau of Meteorology forecaster Jonathan Howe told the ABC there was heavy rainfall throughout parts of central and south-east Queensland overnight, and in parts of northern New South Wales and the Hunter region. More showers and storms are expected in parts of the tropical north Queensland coast on Friday, including Cairns and Townsville, with showers along the eastern seaboard through to Brisbane, the Gold Coast, and northern NSW. A deep low pressure system is moving across Victoria and southern NSW, with a severe weather warning for heavy rain across eastern Victoria. A severe thunderstorm warning was in place for Canberra, Cooma, Yass, Wagga Wagga, Young and Tumbarumba on Friday morning, with damaging winds and heavy rain likely. The bureau has warned sheep graziers around the state the weather may be so bad that their stock might not survive the day. Howe said catchments are saturated, and there is minor to moderate flooding expected across the Gippsland rivers. There’s also a strong wind warning for parts of the central and Macedon ranges in Victoria, with strong easterly winds. Some rivers in New South Wales already experiencing minor to moderate flooding, including up to the Queensland border. South Australia’s Flinders Ranges were hit with heavy rain over the past two days and although the severe weather has moved away from SA rivers and creeks remain high. Flood watches have been issued for Gippsland, parts of north east and central Victoria, and the Otway coast, with rainfall totals of 30-60mm forecast across the north-east ranges and Gippsland on Friday, and up to 60-80mm possible across the Gippsland high country. Twenty-40mm were forecast over the Macedon ranges and the Otways on Friday, and between 15 and 30mm were forecast for central parts of the state. On Thursday Dubbo in NSW was hit with 43mm of rain, with most of it falling in just 30 minutes. Up to 9am on Friday, Orange received 77mm and Newcastle 71mm. Cessnock (63mm), Lake Macquarie (57mm), Lord Howe Island (51mm), Cowra (49mm), Bathurst (46mm), Goulburn (44mm) and Nowra (39mm) also received significant falls. Narrabri already received more rain than it typically expects for November after 76mm fell overnight on Wednesday into Thursday. The heavy rain trapped an empty school bus and three 4WDs between two fast-rising creeks near Narrabri on Wednesday afternoon, however the SES was “heartened” to see they called for assistance and did not drive through the flood waters. In Bingara, the SES ferried stranded holidaymakers out of a flooded caravan park. Tibooburra, near the NSW, South Australian and Queensland borders, was hit with a 104km/h wind gust shortly after midday on Thursday, which also brought an intense torrent that dumped 13mm of rain in 20 minutes. The Gwydir river peaked at 6.75m on Thursday afternoon before receding to about 6.11m at Gravesend, causing some minor flooding. Flood warnings are in place for the Lachlan river at Nanami, the Gwydir river at Gravesend, Pallamallawa and Yarraman Bridge, and the Mehi river at Moree.Britney Spears’s conservatorship case will be back in court on Friday for a highly anticipated hearing that could restore the singer’s independence for the first time in nearly 14 years. Los Angeles judge Brenda Penny is expected to rule on requests to end the controversial legal arrangement that has allowed a network of people to control the pop star’s finances, career and personal life since 2008. Spears has repeatedly called for the conservatorship to be terminated. Her father, Jamie Spears, has also recently said he supports ending it, as have other parties who oversee the arrangement. The hearing comes one month after the judge suspended Spears’s father from the conservatorship in a major victory for the singer, who has been fighting for years to be freed from his control, alleging that he was abusive. If the judge approves full termination, it would mark an extraordinary end to an unusual arrangement that has sparked fan protests across the globe. Fans from across the US and beyond showed up to the courthouse on Friday, leaving messages of support for Spears on a pink Christmas tree advocates of the pop star brought to the rally. “I want her to know that Mexico supports her and people from around the world support her. She deserves to be free,” said Pamela Flores, 21, who came from Veracruz, Mexico for the court hearing. Davis Luong, 34, and Frankie Adams, 35, came from San Diego. The two met in 2013 at a Pride event and were both wearing Spears merchandise. The friends stayed connected through online fan groups. “Britney represents growth and strength and standing up for yourself and being who you are,” Luong said. “Today is a day of liberty, a day of freedom, a day to rejoice.” A year ago, “we felt like the conservatorship was never going to end,” added Adams. “She is going to make legal history today, not just for herself but for everybody under a conservatorship.” Fans and longtime supporters have organized plans for a “Freedom Party” on Friday evening if the judge ends the conservatorship. “It’s emotional, because I feel like Britney’s prayers are finally going to be answered,” said Junior Olivas, a fan and advocate who was one of the first to demonstrate at a #FreeBritney rally three years ago. The conservatorship has faced major upheaval since June when Spears, 39, publicly spoke about it for the first time, saying she was forced to work against her will and that her father and others controlled intimate details of her life, including her birth control, her social life and her romantic relationships. Her testimony followed a New York Times documentary that raised questions about why the arrangement was established in the first place and why the courts considered her incapable of making basic decisions even as she continued her highly successful music career. A second documentary in September alleged that her father had hired a security team that monitored her private communications and secretly recorded her in her bedroom. Conservatorship is a form of court-appointed guardianship that is typically established for elderly and infirm people who can no longer make decisions for themselves. But critics have argued that the process is frequently exploited, and that those involved in Spears’s arrangement have taken advantage of her, reaping millions from her estate. Spears was placed into a conservatorship while she was suffering vicious paparazzi abuse and facing apparent mental health struggles, and for years she has been forced to pay an army of lawyers and professionals on all sides of the case. The case took a dramatic turn in July when Spears was allowed to hire an attorney of her own choosing for the first time. Her new lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, has since fought to dissolve the arrangement and vowed to investigate her father’s role in it. Rosengart recently requested all documents related to the alleged surveillance of Britney Spears. Jamie Spears long defended the arrangement and argued for its continuation, but after Rosengart began investigating him and pushing for termination, he said he would support shutting it down. Jodi Montgomery, a licensed conservator responsible for Spears’s healthcare, has also signaled support for termination. Spears has said she wants the conservatorship ended without having to face further evaluations. Before the hearing, fans expressed optimism that their demands for termination would finally be met. “It feels really surreal, because we went so long with so little progress,” said Megan Radford, a longtime #FreeBritney organizer. “Once Mathew Rosengart came in in July, it just changed direction really fast … I knew this day would come.” Olivas, who has been a regular presence at the courthouse for the last several years, said he hoped this was the last day he had to rally for Spears’s freedom. “Britney’s happiness is the ultimate goal here,” he said. “Whether it’s retiring and having a family, continuing to work, traveling the world, going back to Las Vegas – it doesn’t matter as long as she’s eternally happy and she’s able to make her own decisions.”Detroit rapper Danny Brown’s Atrocity Exhibition – his 2016 opus on exorcising inner demons via self-destructive excess – might not seem the most obvious starting point for revered Brazilian singer Juçara Marçal’s latest solo album. But Marçal collaborated with guitarist Kiko Dinucci, also of her São Paulo experimental group Metá Metá, and both musicians were intrigued by Brown’s process of writing his lyrics to ready-made, unpredictable beats, and decided to do the same on Delta Estácio Blues. Starting by building a rhythmic and sparsely melodic foundation, Dinucci and Marçal then began a back-and-forth with songwriting collaborators to produce fleshed-out arrangements, to which they finally added Marçal’s vocals. The finished compositions balance intricate arrangements with an improvisatory feel. Just as Brown’s work veers from bombastic horns to choral chants and R&amp;B balladry, so these 11 tracks are as erratic as they are engaging. Opener Vi de Relance A Coroa uses harsh, kick-thumping sound design from experimental producer Cadu Tenório to frame Marçal’s crystalline voice and Dinucci’s plucked melody, while Corpus Christi pairs Marçal with a bossa nova shuffle. Sem Cais and Crash reference Brown producer Paul White’s open-eared aptitude for chaos with their clattering mix of industrial drum programming and rolling 808 bass lines. Marçal’s voice is just as playful and experimental as the production, veering from the melodic softness of Ladra, in which it counters the heavily distorted instrumentation, to the impassioned spoken word of Crash, and her warped lower register of Oi, Cat. It’s her mutable voice that gives this wildly varied album its sense of coherence – as well as its message. In her lyrics, Marçal consistently rails against Jair Bolsonaro’s dysfunctional, populist government, turning Brown’s introspection outwards to focus on a worthy target. But in approaching such a serious topic with a sense of radically open creativity, Marçal and Dinucci stress the role that remaining open-minded can play as a bulwark against repressive regimes. Also out this month Venezuelan folk singer Isaac Sasson combines his silken voice with the traditional stringed instruments of the bandola llanera and charango on Canciones de Isaac (Olindo Records), creating a soothing collection in tribute to the music of his home country. Accordion player Mario Batkovic explores the symphonic qualities of his instrument on Introspectio (Invada Records), moving between choral ambience, neoclassical grandeur and quiet folk melody. Algerian singer-songwriter Majid Soula releases an out-of-print selection of his infectious synth-funk Berber music from the 1980s on Chant Amazigh (Habibi Funk).Film of the week The Salesman Asghar Farhadi, the Iranian director of A Separation, is a master at luring you in with the everyday, only for the weight of events to take their toll later on. In this 2016 film, the plot offers an early dramatic hit, but its deepest effects are cumulative. Married actors Emad (Shahab Hosseini) and Rana (Taraneh Alidoosti) are staging a production of Arthur Miller’s Death of a Salesman. One night, while alone in their new flat, Rana is attacked. They discover the previous occupant was a sex worker, so Emad takes it upon himself to find the assailant, presumed to be a client. How this connects to Miller’s play only gradually becomes clear, as the couple’s relationship fractures over their reactions to the incident. Saturday 13 November, 12.55am, BBC Two *** The Colour Room Her work is now sought after by collectors, but the famed art deco pottery designer Clarice Cliff was once a lowly factory girl in 1920s Stoke, albeit one with grand designs. Her rise to success is the focus of this amiable biopic directed by Claire McCarthy (her Ophelia is on Wednesday on BBC Two). Phoebe Dynevor has a warm screen presence as the infectiously optimistic Clarice, who works her way into an influential position at Wilkinson ceramic factory in the Potteries, where she impresses the co-owner Colley Shorter (Matthew Goode) in more ways than one. Out now, Sky Cinema Premiere *** They Shall Not Grow Old The colourisation of vintage black-and-white footage can be a fraught business – there are some horrific manglings of classic movies out there. But Peter “Lord of the Rings” Jackson is far from a slipshod film-maker. His stupendous first world war documentary, with computer-treated footage of the western front from the Imperial War Museum, is a faultless exercise in bringing the conflict to colourful life. Using audio interviews with veteran soldiers, and with actors lip-syncing any onscreen chat, the experience of war is grounded in individuals who live and breathe before our eyes. Sunday 14 November, 9pm, BBC Four *** Days of the Bagnold Summer The soundtrack of Simon Bird’s 2019 feature directorial debut, an adaptation of Joff Winterhart’s graphic novel, epitomises the emotional fine-tuning at its heart. In the deliciously awkward spot between the teen angst of Belle &amp; Sebastian and the death metal loved by its 15-year-old protagonist sits a closely observed comedy about a boy and his mother. Daniel (Earl Cave, son of Nick) is in a sulk after his absent father in Florida cancels his holiday there; even worse, he now has to spend more time with his mum, Sue (the superb Monica Dolan). A low-key jewel. Sunday 14 November, 11.20pm, Film4 *** While We’re Young A childless fortysomething couple – Ben Stiller’s Josh, who lectures about documentary film rather than finishing the one he’s been making for eight years, and his producer wife Cornelia (Naomi Watts) – are lured into the seemingly carefree lives of hip twentysomething film-maker Jamie (Adam Driver) and his spouse Darby (Amanda Seyfried). Noah Baumbach’s smart 2014 comedy plays slyly with notions of authenticity as the younger pair exploit Josh and Cornelia’s desire to fend off the evils of middle age. Sunday 14 November, 1.25am, Great! Movies *** Charulata Based on a novel by Rabindranath Tagore, Satyajit Ray’s moving 1964 drama is one of the great Indian writer-director’s most effective explorations of tangled romantic relationships. In Calcutta in the late-19th century, bored young wife Charulata (Madhabi Mukherjee) finds her intellect and creativity stimulated when her husband, political newspaper editor Bhupati (Shailen Mukherjee), invites his would-be poet cousin Amal (Ray favourite Soumitra Chatterjee) to stay and entertain her. As their friendship deepens, she finds herself falling for the handsome, soulful Amal. Thursday 18 November, 3am, Channel 4 *** Tick, Tick… Boom! Before Rent, which only became a success after his early death in 1996, Jonathan Larson was a struggling New York composer of stage musicals. Lin-Manuel Miranda’s song-filled film is a vibrant adaptation – part staging, part fiction – of Larson’s one-man show about his attempt to get a sci-fi rock musical off the ground. Andrew Garfield plays Larson as an engaging, Tigger-like obsessive; he worries about turning 30, about his relationship, about the 90s Aids crisis, but mostly about emulating his Broadway idol, Stephen Sondheim. Friday 19 November, NetflixWatching Dopesick (Disney+) is, appropriately enough, like being given a series of bitter pills to swallow. The eight-part drama – based on the non-fiction book of the same name by Beth Macy – examines the dreadful causes and effects of the opioid crisis unleashed in large part on the United States by Purdue Pharma, and its “non-addictive” painkiller OxyContin. Fictionalised in the details but telling a factually correct story, it is a powerful illustration of the power of people unconstrained by financial or moral limits, and the suffering induced by corporate greed unfettered by an overwhelmed and under-resourced regulatory and legal system. The miniseries comprises three strands. The first is the tale of Dr Samuel Finnix, played with commendable unshowiness by Michael Keaton. Finnix is a devoted doctor in a tiny Appalachian mining town, targeted by Purdue as part of its mission to overcome doctors’ reluctance to prescribe opioids for long-term use because of their well-documented addictive qualities. He is persuaded by eager young Purdue rep Billy Cutler (Will Poulter) to start some patients on the new drug. An early prescription goes to Betsy (Kaitlyn Dever), who works in the mines alongside her father, and suffers a back injury. She can’t afford to miss work, especially as she and her girlfriend are saving to start a new life in a more welcoming town. As she becomes dependent on OxyContin, Betsy’s story combines the impoverished circumstances, bad luck and sense of hope that turned such towns into ground zero for an epidemic so explosive it would virtually remake the country. Almost the first words Finnix speaks on screen are at a hearing in 2005, speaking about his patients: “I can’t believe how many of them are dead now.” The second strand concerns the legal efforts to pursue Purdue and its owners, the Sackler family. Peter Sarsgaard and John Hoogenakker play two real-life figures – assistant US attorneys Rick Mountcastle and Randy Ramseyer respectively – who eventually brought a suit against the company. It is largely through them and the composite character of Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) deputy director Bridget Meyer (Rosario Dawson) that we come to understand the dangerously porous nature of the boundary between public and private work – allowing, for example, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulators to leave government employment to work for the people they had previously been regulating. We also see how Purdue’s marketing strategy changed attitudes towards pain and pain management among both the general public and the medical profession, and appreciate the massaging and outright abrogation of truth and responsibility required to create a market for OxyContin in the first place. The third strand focuses on the Sacklers – specifically Richard (Michael Stuhlbarg)– the prime mover behind making OxyContin palatable for wider use in order to supersede a lucrative patent held by the company, which is about to run out. He takes a lesson from his Uncle Arthur’s playbook, who was commissioned by 1960s pharma giant Roche to develop a marketing campaign for their anti-anxiety medication Valium, despite its effects being virtually the same as another of their products, Librium. Arthur invented the idea of “psychic tension” as a Valium-specific condition, and the rest is diazepam-coshed history. In Richard’s case, the opioid oxycodone is given a slow-release coating that will supposedly give 12 hours of relief without a high, and consequently avoid addiction and abuse, and Americans are vouchsafed a vision of a pain-free world. And why not! It must be OK because the FDA has labelled it safe for moderate pain use. The chief that did so would a year later go to work at Purdue for $400,000 a year. When the effects prove not to last 12 hours, patients’ discomfort is rebranded “breakthrough pain” and the solution touted by the makers is to double the dose. There is almost too much going on in Dopesick. The strands stretch and spread rather than twining tightly round each other, and its structure – jumping forwards and backwards across the different timelines – dissipates both narrative sense and momentum. The result is a series that is far more chaotic than it needs to be; the more familiar you already are with the Sackler story and the opioid crisis, the more you will get out of it, which is not the dramatic ideal. But the main points and the outrage are clear. It is perhaps best experienced as a companion piece to the excoriating documentary on the same subject, The Crime of the Century. Perhaps, just this once, we should welcome a double dose of medicine.“I’m somebody who is a critical thinker,” Aaron Rodgers said, completely without irony, during his credibility-immolating interview on The Pat McAfee Show last week after news of his Covid-positive result broke the internet. And who couldn’t take the NFL MVP at his word as he sat on this Zoom call before a shelf full of books that may or may not have featured an anthology of MLK malapropisms. What’s more, the 37-year-old confessed that his decision to bypass the Covid-19 vaccine for a homeopathy-based immunization protocol didn’t only stem from fears of an allergic reaction to the Pfizer and Moderna shots. It was also informed by medical experts he empaneled himself, and by more than 500 pages of self-guided research on the efficacy of vaccines and mask wearing – not least an Israeli study of 2.5 million people comparing natural immunity to vaccines. Never mind that Rodgers thinks he knows better than the overwhelming majority of scientists who say Covid-19 vaccines are the best way of preventing serious illness and death from the virus. Or that a recent study published in the Annals of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology found no evidence that polyethylene glycol, the mRNA vaccine ingredient most suspected of causing severe allergic reactions, is a threat. Or that the Israeli study that Rodgers was alluding to found the highest levels of immunity in people who had recovered from Covid after receiving at least one vaccine shot. “I believe strongly in bodily autonomy and the ability to make choices for your body,” Rodgers said. Clearly, when your body is your business, you’ll do anything to gain an advantage. And through the years high-level athletes have proven especially keen to champion pseudo-science, even as claimed benefits turn out to be total junk. Before Rodgers was donning his sideline cape like a lab coat, Tom Brady was the NFL’s resident health authority whose tight embrace of Alex Guerrero (a self-taught masseur who has twice been investigated by the Federal Trade Commission) caused a rift in the New England Patriots organization. Together, the quarterback and the shady trainer hawk the TB12 method, a suite of high-end fitness plan designed to improve muscle pliability – an idea that Stuart Phillips, a muscle physiology expert at McMaster University, dismissed as “balderdash.” On the tennis court Novak Djokovic is just as stretched in the role of wellness guru. Among other things, the world No 1 believes in telekinesis, testing gluten allergy by pressing a bread slice to the skin, avoiding surgery so the body can heal itself and using positive thoughts to detoxify food. At the Olympics the world was once again riveted by the sight of swimmers covered in dark circular bruises – yet more evidence of cupping, an alt-therapy that one anorak compared to bloodletting. It’s enough to make you wonder how differently the NBA might look today if Michael Jordan believed drinking Gatorade was responsible for his unparalleled successes rather than his grueling, unglamorous and mostly conventional fitness work with longtime personal trainer Tim Grover. A decade-old National Institutes of Health survey reckoned around 40% of Americans had tried alternative therapies, but that number has surely climbed as reiki massage and cryotherapy have become more accessible. That was as studies of elite athletes showed 50-80% experimented with alt-therapies specifically to enhance performance. The urgency for any physical edge, however slight, makes them especially easy marks for big promises. And for many in this high-stakes body game, the absence of scientific proof is the attraction. (These millionaires didn’t arrive at their station in life by reading peer-reviewed studies, after all.) Only in an industry where winning is everything do you get Major League Baseball players taking the field in titanium-infused necklaces that were said to sooth aching muscles, improve focus and encourage relaxation – despite the inability to measure any of those factors. The placebo effect is a helluva drug. Even more intoxicating: the fear of missing out. Of course anytime peak performance is pursued this doggedly, there are bound to be athletes who cross the line from quackery into outright doping. And surely Lance Armstrong, Alex Rodriguez and Marion Jones won’t be the last to see their legacies tarnished by their affiliations with trainers whose alternative methods strayed too far from established rules. But whereas the impact of their misguided health decisions only damaged them and their sport, Rodgers’s choice to hide his vaccination status, have a far wider societal implications during a pandemic that thrives in large part due to the spread of misinformation. And a week after appearing with McAfee – who had enough sense to let the QB hoist himself by his own petard – Rodgers returned to the show on Tuesday to take “full responsibility” for misleading the public about his vaccination status while taking exception to the criticism of his purposeful deception. Maybe Joe Rogan– the anti-vaxx bullhorn whom Rodgers said recommended he treat his Covid with ivermectin, a horse de-wormer – can prescribe something for those hurt feelings? So far Rodgers, the league’s comeback artist supreme, has yet to Hail Mary his way out of this drubbing. Prevea, a Wisconsin-based healthcare company that arranges Covid jabs, dropped Rodgers as a spokesperson, while everyone from Terry Bradshaw to Howard Stern rained down condemnation – and when you’ve lost those two, you’ve pretty much lost the United States. “I do realize that I am a role model,” Rodgers said at the start of his walkback interview. Sure, snake-oil salesmen are as old as civilization itself, but few would’ve figured going into this season that Rodgers would turn out to be one of them. But before you make “Throw Rogan” (or is it “QAAron”?) out to be the white Kyrie Irving, understand this: Irving, at least, had the courage of his convictions. Rodgers clearly hadn’t considered much besides what he personally stood to gain by not following the rules, and it’s not like he can hide inside his cryo chamber until the heat dies down. Oh well. A more critical thinker might have gamed his wellness deception all the way out.On the screen of my phone, Brian Molko is trying to dodge the camera’s gaze. I’m in Colorado, video calling him in London, watching him chain smoke from across the Atlantic. He sometimes casts glances at the lens, mostly doing his best to forget it’s there. Over the past 25 years, Molko’s band Placebo have often grappled with the question of image; with being seen, photographed and surveilled. Alongside co-writer and multi-instrumentalist Stefan Olsdal, Molko has carved out a dark and daring aesthetic universe, wrangling topics deemed taboo within alternative rock and culture. There are Placebo songs about abuse, co-dependency, violence and addiction; many seem to ring out from past the end of the world. In 1999, a few years after David Bowie took notice of the band and invited them to open for him – they later duetted on a version of the Placebo song Without You I’m Nothing – REM’s Michael Stipe dedicated It’s the End of the World As We Know It to Placebo at a festival in Belgium. Inside the gloom, though, a sense of thrill flickers. With their distinctive palette, defined by downtuned guitars, electrified overtones and Molko’s metallic, androgynous voice, Placebo extol the pleasure that can come from kink, unbridled infatuation and queer sex. Back in 1996, when Placebo released their self-titled debut album, Molko and Olsdal wore dresses and makeup onstage and in photoshoots; Molko’s bratty, girlish affect broadcasted a way of moving through the world that flouted binaries. He cultivated a gendered and sexual expansiveness decades before the term “non-binary” slipped into mainstream vernacular. “We did what we could within the framework that existed,” Molko says. “And we rebelled against the framework that existed. It’s much, much more complex now. But if just by being ourselves in the 90s, we made people feel less alone – if we managed to, in any way whatsoever, increase the potential and capacity for freedom just by 1% – then we’ve achieved something.” Placebo didn’t just play music about being queer to a broad audience – they frequently hit the Top 5 of both the UK single and album charts – but made music that insisted that queerness had its delights alongside its dangers. Songs such as Nancy Boy, with its deliriously Cronenbergian music video, traced the fluid morphology of bodies. In one shot, Molko and Olsdal’s heads dissolve into each other: symbolic of how a creative partnership, or music in general, has the power to liquefy the self. “We had a great opportunity to let parts of us show that we hadn’t up to that point in our lives,” Olsdal tells me from Stockholm a few days after I speak with Molko. “We got the confidence to show the world who we were.” Molko echoes him. “We were just kids who just wanted to make music. But we couldn’t do it without going onstage in a dress, without talking about our sexuality. It was very, very important for us to not be ashamed,” he says. “And inadvertently, hopefully, we perhaps created something within people who listened to us where they felt that the necessity for shame was decreased.” Placebo’s upcoming eighth studio album, Never Let Me Go, began germinating during a world tour for the 20th anniversary of that 1996 debut. Newly a duo after parting ways with drummer Steve Forrest, both Molko and Olsdal felt trepidation; reiterating songs they had written in their 20s became stifling. “It felt like an extremely commercial exercise for me,” Molko says. “I have a very unique point of view as the writer. I’m just looking for mistakes. Having to go back and play songs which felt quite sophomoric for me at first made me want to do something that really, really broke with all of my safety nets.” Placebo was a way to claim space in the world; the band’s 90s output was life-giving at the time, but by 2016 felt lodged in a bygone era. “We’ve never really felt that we fit in. Having searched for so long, we got tired of searching. So we built our own world instead,” Olsdal says. “That’s what we’ve inhabited. That’s what we know and what we need to find strength, to go up on stage and to perform these songs night after night. But when you build your own world, sometimes you can get trapped by it.” In the midst of the tour, to shake the band loose, Molko decided to invert Placebo’s typical songwriting process. “What would we normally do? Let’s not do that,” he says. “If you decide to do everything in a way that you don’t actually know how to do, you’ll fall into a series of accidents which can stimulate you or disgust you. That surprise is what I live for.” Rather than jam with a drummer to feel out the songs from the ground up, Placebo started with what usually comes last: the album cover. “Brian came in with a photograph,” Olsdal says. “And he kept throwing me song titles and potential album titles, and we worked from there.” The cover, recently revealed on Instagram, shows a rocky beach bejewelled with colourful sea glass: bits of human trash worn smooth by the ocean. The image seems to speak to the track Try Better Next Time, an upbeat and sweetly melodic rumination on climate disaster. Molko’s lyrics paint a world of extreme inequality, water shortages, militarised security and human beings growing fins to return to the encroaching sea. “It’s not going to be the end of the world. It’s just going to be the end of the human species,” Molko says. “We call it the end of the world in our incessant hubris and narcissism. Try Better Next Time is kind of a rallying cry saying: ‘Just give it up, give it back to the animals.’ They were here first.” While writing the album, Molko returned to the sci-fi films he had loved as a child – psychedelic ruminations on technology and power from the 1970s, such as Fantastic Planet and Silent Running. “I’m very interested in creating, with each song, an alternative universe where the laws of physics don’t necessarily apply,” he says. “Each song really does exist in its little parallel universe. If we’re not tied down to the laws of physics that are generally accepted in the universe we see, then certainly emotion will follow. Certainly anything is possible in another reality. It allows me to speak freely about what bothers me. I try to exaggerate things to increase dramatic effect, to highlight how ridiculous our reality is.” The characters in each song further Placebo’s overarching paranoia and suspicion about the world as it stands (“I think my reaction to most things is just disappointment,” Molko tells me). The driving post-punk track Surrounded By Spies, written using the cut-up technique popularised by William S Burroughs, envisions a society in which every eye and camera is trained on the narrator – a commentary on CCTV surveillance and social media alike. “What are the consequences of the bargain that we’ve struck in order to have all of this communication?” Molko asks. “The system is designed to take your privacy away, contribute to the loss of your freedom, and objectify you to the point that you engage in it proactively.” On the beautifully melancholic Went Missing, he dips into his darkened sprechstimme to imagine someone who can go missing for a living – someone who survives through invisibility, a reversal of the tradeoff made by those who survive by revealing themselves constantly. There are songs of tremendous grief and desperation, such as Happy Birthday in the Sky; songs that feel haunted by past selves such as Twin Demons; songs that render the profound alienation of being seen but not known. “A lot of the writing I did was me trying to write myself out of feeling trapped in this world,” Olsdal says. “And, however scary things are, trying to engage with it somehow. As social beings, we get anxious when we’re left on our own. We miss the herd on a basic human level. It’s this dichotomy of trying to be an individual, but also having to be a part of others.” Never Let Me Go might frame the end of humanity, but it also sounds out how we hold each other through the ruin. “I think we’ve come across this theme of ‘love in the time of cholera’,” says Olsdal. Beautiful James is about loving someone outside of heteronormative scripts, about how human affection so often spills over the channels that power digs for it. “I want to live in a world where a song like Beautiful James raises no eyebrows,” Molko tells me. That hope offers a slight opening out of the apocalypse on which so much culture now fixates. I ask Molko if there’s any chance we make it. He doesn’t really think so. “If the tech billionaires get their way, we’re just going to colonise other planets and repeat our mistakes there,” he says. “The thing about running away is that you’ll always take yourself with you.” So I ask what music can do. “For me, it’s about not existing in the problem and trying to live in the solution. I wanted to express something visceral, something very human. I just hope that other people will understand it and that it will move them,” he says. “I hope that I’ve been somewhat courageous with this record so that it might inspire courage in others. It might help them stand up for what they believe in. That’s all. That’s what music did for me.” Never Let Me Go is released on 25 March 2022 on So Recordings. The singles Beautiful James and Surrounded By Spies are out nowFunny ha-ha is tricky. For every reader who cackles with laughter at an author writing “this person was making plans to micturate upon one’s pommes frites”, there’s one who will wince. Some will feel the universe joyfully lighten as they read: “There’s a personage at the parsonage.” Or: “I believe it was Roland Barthes who said I love it when a plan comes together.” I can’t pronounce this unfunny, since funny is so largely in the hi-de-hi of the beholder. I cannot, however, report that any laughter issued from my own personal hilarity hole. Dan Rhodes’s half-dozen comic novels have their fans, and he is upfront in Sour Grapes that a falling-out with his publisher (what he calls his “ongoing scrap with the biz”) prompted a satire on the industry. Some of the barbs here, about publishing’s exploitation of young workers and the inertial classism, hit home. But the actual story, concerning a literary festival in a picturesque English village, feels like something out of the 1950s. Mrs Bruschini, head of the organising committee, who “made a point of never taking the Guardian”, suggests they invite Anthony Trollope, her favourite author, and is disappointed to hear that he is deceased. Various living writers attend, eccentric and ludicrous, some under their own names, some comically retitled. The organiser, “Florence Peters”, is named after ex-Hay festival director Peter Florence. The book opens with a tall, cadaverous author terrifying the vicar’s housekeeper by eating a live slug. This is Wilberforce Selfram, who speaks like this: “One commenced one’s peregrinations from a settlement in the south-east of this fractured isle, a conurbation known commonly as London. Perhaps you have heard of it, perhaps not.” He writes pretentious novels that nobody reads. Can you guess who it is? There is some comic business with the interactions of the villagers, and rather more with the grotesques from the literary world. Selfram thinks he’s dying, but it’s only haemorrhoids. He addresses a group of primary schoolchildren and it goes surprisingly well. He advises a young Irish writer to title her new novel not Ordinary People but Attacked by a Jellyfish! even though it contains no jellyfish. (Whether Rhodes means to conflate Sally Rooney’s and Diana Evans’s titles is unclear.) Selfram steals phraseology from Scottish writer Morag McLochness, who is outraged: “Fandabidozi is the greatest word ever uttered by human being, living or deid!” If this kind of thing tickles you, Sour Grapes may amuse your bouche. Rhodes could have called his novel Grapes of Scoff. There’s also Mara, a self-declared “Journalist–Activist-Millennial”, who is white and straight but announces that she is BAME because her great-grandfather was born in Singapore and LGBTQ because she once kissed a girl at a student party. She is greatly incommoded to find the villagers perfectly welcoming. This is characteristic of a Gammonish tendency to sneer at millennials: “impossible to gender, from Bristol of course, and with a worldview that is completely incomprehensible to anybody more than three years older than they are”. All this would matter less if the delivery were smarter. “Furiously, JK Rowling stood up. ‘To the helicopter,’ she bellowed to her entourage. ‘I’ve had news of a ninth birthday party in Corbridge where they are using unlicensed Harry Potter balloons purchased from the Internet. Pins at the ready!’” Not so much sour grapes, this, as weak beer. Not all the characters are grotesques. Ayanna, who works in HR, genuinely loves books, and gives it to Selfram straight: “Write a book using normal words; you might even enjoy it.” Her burgeoning relationship with local lad Richard is quite tenderly written. Some of the bizarre episodes and moments leverage a smile, if not a guffaw: I liked the scene where Salman Rushdie’s bodyguards accidentally taser Selfram, after which Sir Salman stands over him boasting about his many awards. In the background, the “Brotherhood of Darkness (Publishing Division)” are planning to assassinate various people, including Dan Rhodes himself. There’s quite a nice twist at the end. But the focus of the book is so overwhelmingly on Selfram it unbalances the whole. The sheer intensity of the animus here is baffling. Will Self, asked how he felt to be the target of Rhodes’s novel, responded not with anger but weariness. “It’s just woefully out of date,” he said. “I’m 60 for fuck’s sake. I don’t really have any connection with the zeitgeist.” He has a point. In his preface Rhodes recollects slights he has himself endured from the literary world, including from Self – or as he calls him, “a mid-profile restaurant critic, Evening Standard columnist and occasional novelist”. Says Rhodes: “I have Robertson blood and our motto is Garg’n uair dhuis gear: Fierce When Raised. I would be letting my ancestors down if I didn’t get my revenge.” Raising ferocity is one thing. Raising a laugh is another. • Sour Grapes is published by Lightning Books (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The United States and European delegations on the UN security council have urged action over Belarus’s behaviour on its border with Poland, describing the migrant crisis as “orchestrated” and saying Minsk was endangering migrants “for political purposes”. Poland says the government of strongman Alexander Lukashenko has lured about 2,000 migrants, mainly Kurds from the Middle East, to Belarus for the purpose of sending them across the border into Poland and thus the EU in revenge for sanctions. These people are now living in a tent camp on the border in near-freezing temperatures. Poland, which has established a state of emergency in the border region enforced by hundreds of troops, refuses to allow them in. After an emergency meeting on the crisis the western delegations at the security council in New York issued a joint statement condemning “the orchestrated instrumentalisation of human beings whose lives and wellbeing have been put in danger for political purposes by Belarus”. They said Belarus was doing this with “the objective of destabilising neighbouring countries and the European Union’s external border and diverting attention away from its own increasing human rights violations”. “This tactic is unacceptable and calls for a strong international reaction and cooperation in order to hold Belarus accountable,” the western statement said without mentioning any kind of concrete measures to punish Belarus. “It demonstrates how the Lukashenko regime has become a threat to regional stability. We call on the Belarusian authorities to stop these inhumane actions and not to put people’s lives at risk,” it added. Poland, along with other EU members such as Lithuania and Estonia, claim that Lukashenko has enabled thousands of people to travel from the Middle East through Minsk and to the EU borders as revenge for the sanctions imposed against him for his harsh crackdown on dissent in 2020. Belavia, the Belarusian state airline, has strongly denied it is involved in any trafficking of vulnerable people from Middle Eastern capitals such as Damascus to the border with the EU. On Friday the airline said it would stop citizens of Iraq, Syria and Yemen boarding flights from Turkey to Belarus at the request of Turkish authorities. “In line with a decision by the ... Turkish authorities, citizens of Iraq, Syria, Yemen will not be accepted for transportation on flights from Turkey to Belarus from 12.11.2021,” Belavia said in a statement on its website. The statement at the security council made no mention of Belarus ally Russia, whose deputy UN ambassador, Dmitry Polyanskiy, rejected western allegations that it was working in conjunction with Minsk to send the migrants over the EU’s eastern border into Poland. “Absolutely not,” he said. Lukashenko is backed by Russian president Vladimir Putin in the standoff, and the Kremlin leader staged another strong show of support for his ally by sending two nuclear-capable strategic bombers on a training mission over Belarus for a second straight day on Thursday. Lukashenko has threatened to cut deliveries of gas to Europe via a major pipeline in retaliation against any new sanctions that the EU might impose in response to the border crisis. The EU has called Lukashenko’s facilitation of illegal border crossings a “hybrid attack”. Belarus denies the allegations but has said it will no longer stop refugees and migrants from trying to enter the EU. Ukraine said on Thursday it would deploy thousands of guards and security personnel to its border with Belarus. Ukraine’s interior minister, Denys Monastyrsky, said thousands of security personnel would run drills on the country’s shared border with Belarus “to counter a potential crisis with migrants”. The Belarusian defence ministry said two Russian Tu-160 strategic bombers practised bombing runs at the Ruzany firing range, located in Belarus about 60km (37 miles) east of the border with Poland. As part of the joint training, Belarusian fighter jets simulated an intercept, the ministry said. A pair of Russian Tu-22M3 long-range bombers flew a similar patrol on Wednesday, and Belarusian air defence assets practised intercepting them. The Belarusian defence ministry said that such Russian bomber flights will be conducted on a regular basis. The Russian military said the bombers spent over four-and-a-half hours in the air during the mission, intended to buttress the countries’ alliance. It said the bomber patrol “wasn’t aimed against any third countries”. Asked about flights of Russian military planes over Belarus, Polyanskiy said this was in response to what he called a massive build-up of Polish forces on the border. “We have our obligations also within the unity between Russia and Belarus. So if there is a build-up of military resources on the border with Belarus, we have to react. This is just reconnaissance flights, nothing more than this,” he said. Asked if the deployment of Russian forces on the border with Ukraine meant Russia planned to invade its neighbour, Polyanskiy said: “Never planned, never did, and never will do, unless we’re provoked, of course, by Ukraine or by somebody else.” Russia’s national flag carrier, Aeroflot, responded to reports that the EU was mulling sanctions against the airline for its alleged involvement in bringing to refugees and migrants to Belarus. Aeroflot strongly rejected the claim.Ireland’s minister for European affairs has said that a “tough guy approach” when it comes to Northern Ireland will lead to disaster, adding that threats to suspend the Northern Ireland protocol represented the first time the UK government has been out of step with the international consensus on preserving peace and stability in Northern Ireland in 25 years. Speaking to BBC Radio 4, Thomas Byrne said there was “a serious danger of complete instability in Northern Ireland” if the UK government continues its “tough guy approach” through threats to trigger article 16, which would suspend post-Brexit trade arrangements. He said: “We have a situation where we have the US putting pressure on the British government, the EU united in one voice with concern about Northern Ireland, Ireland concerned about Northern Ireland. We’ve never had a situation in the last 25 years where the British government is out of the loop on that. “We want very close relations with the British government and good cooperation, we want to be singing off the same hymn sheet.” He urged the UK government to be “constructive” in talks today with the EU about the Northern Ireland protocol, which keeps Northern Ireland inside the EU’s single market for goods, resulting in some checks for products crossing the Irish Sea from Great Britain, to put an end to escalating tensions in the Northern Ireland after two buses were set alight in protest in the past week. Byrne’s comments came as the UK’s chief negotiator to the EU, David Frost, will meet the European Commission’s vice-president, Maroš Šefčovič, on Friday for the latest round of talks after the alterations proposed by the EU in October to remove checks on 80% of goods between Northern Ireland and the UK mainland fell short of UK government requests. The UK government wants the EU to remove the role of judges in the European court of justice (ECJ) as the arbitrators of disputes. There is growing speculation that the UK could use a get-out clause from the deal in the coming weeks if this is not achieved. Frost told the House of Lords on Wednesday that triggering article 16 – which would suspend elements of the arrangements designed to maintain free-flowing borderless trade on the island of Ireland – would be the UK’s only option if the dispute was not resolved. He said there was “a real opportunity to turn away from confrontation, to move beyond our current difficulties and put in place a new, and better, equilibrium” in the talks. But he added it was “not inevitable” that article 16 would be triggered. He said: “In my view, this talks process has not reached its end. Although we have been talking nearly four weeks now, there remain possibilities that the talks have not yet seriously examined, including many approaches suggested by the UK. “There is more to do and I will certainly not give up on this process unless and until it is abundantly clear that nothing more can be done. We are certainly not there yet. If, however, we do in due course reach that point, the article 16 safeguards will be our only option.” The Irish government has held talks with Joe Biden’s administration about the protocol. On Thursday, the Irish foreign minister, Simon Coveney, said contact with the US government was designed to “encourage progress” in negotiations.The surroundings of the missing persons protest camp in Pakistan’s troubled region of Balochistan are sadly familiar to 12-year-old Ansa. For two years after her elder brother Amir was allegedly abducted by security forces, she came to the camp every day and stood alongside dozens of women whose sons, brothers, fathers and uncles had similarly disappeared without trace. They held up their photos and demanded answers and, most of all, the return of their loved ones. Ansa thought her family were among the lucky ones: Amir was returned alive in 2019 after two years in a detention centre in an unknown location. The family was told by the security agencies never to return to the protest camp again. But Ansa came back this month after security officials once again broke into their home looking for another of her brothers. Under the cover of darkness Naveed was taken and her family was plunged into a familiar hell, but mercifully this time it was briefer. “I hope I won’t be back to the camp for my brothers but I will keep visiting the missing persons camp for the release of missing persons,” she said. In Balochistan, a highly conservative region where women have restricted rights, it is women, from housewives to students, who have been leading the charge against the continued forced disappearances, human rights violations and extrajudicial killings. The region, which borders Iran and Afghanistan, is Pakistan’s poorest and least developed. It is home to a long-running and violent separatist insurgency that has been met in response with a brutal military-led crackdown that has targeted political workers, activists, insurgents and family members of those associated with the Baloch National Movement (BNM) and other nationalist groups. Thousands have been abducted from the streets or their homes in the dead of night, allegedly by plainclothes security agents, and then taken to detention centres in undisclosed locations and often tortured. Some are returned alive, but more often than not the disappeared turn up dead years later. In the past few years the killing of a student, Hayat Baloch, and a picture of his dead body lying in pool of blood in front his crying parents, the murder of Malik Naz, a woman who resisted the private militia in Balochistan, and the mysterious death of a Baloch exile, Karima Baloch, in Canada have mobilised women to protest. Mahnaz Mohammed Hussain, 72, whose three sons allegedly have been killed by security forces, said women were at the forefront of the fight for justice in Balochistan because they continued to pay the heaviest price. “Women suffer the most in conflict and war,” she said. Men get killed or abducted. But now we see our children, young and even women are getting killed, therefore we can’t sit at home and watch.” On 11 October she resorted to staging a protest in the Balochistan city of Turbat, where she joined a family who had brought out in public the bodies of two young children allegedly killed in a mortar attack by the Pakistan security forces. The Pakistan military has denied involvement in the attack. To further add insult to Hussain’s grief, when the deputy commissioner came to negotiate with the family, he was dismissive of Hussain, telling her: “We men are negotiating here. Please keep quiet for a while.” Despite promises by the government to end enforced disappearances – Pakistan’s security forces and agencies have denied claims of abducting civilians, and its media director said in a 2019 tweet: “Our hearts beat with [the] families of every missing person” – it is a problem that is not going away. According to the Voice for Baloch Missing Persons, at least 6,000 people are still missing. Since 2018 an increasing number of female students and women protesting against enforced disappearances have been beaten by the police. Long-promised legislation to make enforced disappearances illegal has still not been passed, and indeed recent amendments to the draft bill would “violate international human rights law and would allow state actors to behave with impunity”, Amnesty International said last week. The UN working group on enforced disappearances also expressed grave concerns at the proposed amendments to the bill, including clauses that harshly penalise relatives for reporting alleged cases of enforced disappearances. Mahrang Baloch, a renowned activist and a trainee medical doctor whose father was the victim of an extrajudicial killing about a decade ago, began protesting after her brother was abducted four years ago. “It was the moment I decided to protest for everyone,” she said. “And I removed my veil and showed my face to everyone.” In response, she said, the security forces had begun threatening and abducting the male family members of those leading the protest movement. “A few months ago they picked up the brother of Dr Sabiha Baloch, the first female chairperson of the Baloch Student Action Committee, a student organisation, just because she has been protesting against enforced disappearances,” said Baloch. Yet despite the societal pressure and threats from the powerful security agencies, many of the women say they will persist in their fight for justice. Sammi Baloch, 23, not related to Mahrang, along with 10 families walked more than 1,250 miles (2,000km) from Quetta to Karachi and then to Islamabad in 2012 for the release of her father and other missing persons, and continues to be at the forefront of the protests. She also met the prime minister of Pakistan in March and was assured that the issue of enforced disappearances would be resolved and no one would go missing. “It has been over a decade, I am on the road for the release of my father. I won’t stop protesting unless they bring back my father,” she said. “Rather than bringing back missing persons, the government is bent on punishing us for protesting and asking for our brothers and fathers. The prime minister must fulfil his promise.”Women who work mostly from home risk hurting their careers and getting caught in a “she-cession” as more men return to office working post-pandemic, a Bank of England policymaker has warned. Catherine Mann, a member of the Bank’s monetary policy committee, said that virtual working methods, such as video conferencing, were unable to replicate spontaneous office conversations that are important to career advancement. “Virtual platforms are way better than they were even five years ago,” Mann said, speaking at an event for women in finance hosted by the newspaper Financial News. “But the extemporaneous, spontaneity – those are hard to replicate in a virtual setting.” Women aren’t returning to work to the same extent as men, and when they are working, they are more likely to be working from home. Issues include difficulty accessing childcare, and disruption to schooling because of the pandemic has led to more women continuing to work remotely. “There is the potential for two tracks,” she said. “There’s the people who are on the virtual track and people who are on the physical track. And I do worry that we will see those two tracks develop, and we will pretty much know who’s going to be on which track, unfortunately.” Vincent Keaveny, the lord mayor of London, said that increasing numbers of City staff were returning to the office in the UK’s financial centre. “The City is coming back to life,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “It is a really important thing for younger members of the sector to get the training they need, the creativity, the collegiality that the office brings.” Keaveny, a partner at the law firm DLA Piper, said companies should be left to set their own policies on staff returning to work and that there is not a one-size-fits-all post-pandemic model. “I think every company is coming at this from different places,” he said. “I don’t think we should be telling people, telling companies, we shouldn’t be micromanaging companies on an approach to this issue. But there is a very strong message that the City is open. We’d love to see more people coming back.” The proportion of employees travelling into work has progressively increased since national restrictions were relaxed in March, rising to more than 50% in August, when a further rule change meant that those who had been double vaccinated did not have to self-isolate, according to the Office for National Statistics. Previous ONS research had found that women were more likely to work from home than men because it gave them more time to work with fewer distractions. In August, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, warned younger workers that they could put their careers at risk if they worked from home. Mann was an economics professor and chief economist at Citigroup and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development before joining the Bank of England’s rate-setting MPC in September. She is one of only two women on the nine-member committee.It is prized for its rich flavour and exclusive image by top restaurants and gourmands, but now foie gras is going vegan as the government meets chefs to discuss how to make alternatives out of nuts and mushrooms. Vegan restaurateurs have been invited to meet UK government advisers to discuss how to create plant-based “faux gras” in the event of an upcoming ban, the Guardian has learned. Sources said the government hoped to show that a gap in the market left by a restriction on the trade of the controversial product could be filled by high-end chefs who are willing to produce alternatives. MPs have vowed to ban trade in foie gras, and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) is consulting on legislation to outlaw the sale and import of the liver-based spread. Foie gras production is illegal in the UK on animal cruelty grounds, as the ducks and geese whose livers are harvested are force-fed to make it. However, top restaurants still import and sell from countries such as France. The force-feeding process is known as gavage, where grain is poured into a funnel or tube that has been thrust down the bird’s neck. After two weeks, the liver has swollen to many times its normal size. The French chef Alexis Gauthier, who runs fine-dining restaurant Gauthier Soho and plant-based restaurant 123V in Bond Street, both in London, decided to stop serving foie gras in his establishments after activists from Peta demonstrated outside and he read up on the meat and dairy trade. He now serves a faux gras at his Soho venue made of mushrooms, lentils, walnuts and cognac, and says the concoction has emulated the buttery taste sought after by foie gras fans. Since this year, all the food served at his restaurants is plant-based. The government has asked him for his recipe and invited him for talks with policy advisers to see if a gap in the market caused by a ban could be filled by his creation. An email to vegan chefs, seen by the Guardian, says: “I understand your restaurant serves an alternative to foie gras. We would appreciate the chance to arrange a virtual meeting with the chef or someone else from the team to discuss a few questions in this area. These would be questions about your views on foie gras and the challenges and opportunities associated with ‘ethical’ alternatives.” Gauthier says foie gras was once a bestselling item on his menu and that he used to sell 20kg of it a week, but claims people are now travelling from around the country to try his faux gras. He said it took patience and precision to emulate the texture, appearance and depth of the delicacy in a vegan version. Many luxury shops and restaurants are turning their back on foie gras, including Fortnum &amp; Mason, which stopped selling it earlier this year. A government spokesperson confirmed officials were seeking meetings with those involved in creating faux gras to inform their decision on how the effects of a ban could be mitigated. Alexis Gauthier’s vegan faux gras recipe Ingredients 1 shallot, peeled and diced 4 tbsp olive oil 4 cloves garlic, peeled and thinly sliced 2 tsp chopped rosemary 2 tsp chopped thyme 2 tsp chopped sage 24 button mushrooms, roughly sliced 2 tbsp cognac 2 tbsp soy sauce 400g cooked lentils 150g toasted walnuts 2 tbsp beetroot puree Black pepper, to taste Method In a heavy pan, sauté the shallot in two tablespoonfuls of the olive oil until translucent. Add the garlic, chopped herbs, and mushrooms. Add the cognac and turn up the heat. Add the soy sauce, reduce the heat, and cook over low heat for six minutes. Remove the pan from heat and let cool. In a food processor, process the mushroom mixture, the remaining olive oil, the lentils, walnuts, beetroot puree and black pepper until almost smooth. Add an optional extra splash of cognac to give it that je ne sais quoi. Place in a small glass jar and refrigerate for a few hours before serving. Serve alongside toasted slices of sourdough or other bread.Republican elected officials continue to challenge government mandates aimed at stopping the spread of Covid-19, but legal experts predict the lawsuits and bans on mandates will largely prove fruitless because the law allows for such public safety measures. But as those legal fights play out the US will probably still be riven by a dispute between mostly Democrats on one hand who argue they are trying to curb a deadly virus, and usually Republicans on the other who say the Biden administration is involved in government overreach, often using rhetoric that can veer into the conspiratorial. Ten states filed a lawsuit on Wednesday seeking to block the Biden administration’s vaccine mandate for healthcare workers because it could “exacerbate an alarming shortage of health care workers, particularly in rural communities, that has already reached a boiling point”, the filing states. All the states but one have Republican attorneys general. That petition comes days after a federal appeals court temporarily blocked a federal vaccine requirement for large businesses in response to a lawsuit from Republican officials, businesses and religious groups challenging the rules. And judges in two states issued rulings on Wednesday offering potentially different outcomes for masking mandates in schools. In Texas, a federal judge ruled that Governor Greg Abbot’s ban on school mask mandates violated the rights of students with disabilities, which clears the way for districts to issue requirements for face coverings. The Texas attorney general tweeted that he was “considering all legal avenues to challenge this decision”. In Pennsylvania, a state court ruled that the state health secretary did not have the authority to issue a school mask mandate, but the Democratic governor, Tom Wolf, appealed, which means the requirement can for now remain in place. While the judicial rulings create hurdles for Democratic elected officials’ use of government authority to try to bring the pandemic to an end, legal experts say there is precedent for such health policy measures and that they will largely remain in place. “There is no fundamental right to wear or not wear a mask in the public square,” said Derek Black, a law professor at the University of South Carolina School of Law whose focus is education law and policy, and constitutional law. “Even where some fundamental right might be impinged,” such as the right not to be vaccinated, “it doesn’t mean that it can’t be overridden if there is some compelling state interest for doing so.” The latest wave of lawsuits comes after the Biden administration last week announced rules concerning vaccinations for companies with 100 or more employees, and healthcare workers. The rule from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Osha), which the federal court blocked, would take effect on 4 January and require large companies to ensure their employees have been vaccinated or regularly administer Covid-19 tests for those who decline the vaccine and require them to wear masks at work. It would affect an estimated 84 million workers. The rule concerning healthcare workers from the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services (CMS) has the same deadline – with no option for weekly testing rather than vaccination. That would affect 76,000 providers and more than 17 million healthcare workers. The lawsuit concerning healthcare workers argues that the mandate is unreasonably broad in part because it includes staff who would probably not have contact with patients, such as construction crews. But Sidney Watson, director of the Center for Health Law Studies at Saint Louis University School of Law, argues that the administration is on solid legal ground in issuing the vaccine mandate because hospitals must comply with certain conditions in order to receive payment through the Medicare and Medicaid programs, which they are not required to participate in but which almost all hospitals do. The vaccination requirement “only applies to providers who step forward and say, ‘I want to take this federal money,’” said Watson. But the Republicans are also challenging the mandate on the basis that it could hurt rural hospitals, which are already facing a labor shortage and could lose more employees who do not want to get vaccinated. Hospitals across the country are having a difficult time finding nurses, but the problem is particularly acute in rural areas, according to reports from Vox and PBS. “We think the goal of having all employees in rural hospitals vaccinated is a good one. The problem is, the mandate and its timing may be difficult, especially if it leaves some hospitals with severe staff shortages,” said Brock Slabach, chief operations officer of the National Rural Health Association (NRHA), which is considering requesting during a public comment period that the CMS instead allow hospitals to regularly test unvaccinated workers, the same as the Osha rule for large companies. But Watson, of Saint Louis University, said she sees concern about the mandate causing large numbers of employees to quit their jobs or be fired as speculation. She points to places like New York, where the police union warned that a vaccine mandate would cause 10,000 police officers to be “pulled from [the] streets”, but the number of officers who were placed on unpaid leave was ultimately only 34. Despite his concerns about the mandate, Slabach does not expect courts to strike it down and is recommending that rural hospitals prepare to come into compliance with it. In addition to facing a labor shortage, the rural healthcare organizations must contend with a population base that is vaccinated against Covid-19 at a much lower rate than in urban areas. For example, in Pulaski county in central Missouri, only 17% of its more than 50,000 residents are fully vaccinated. As such, it’s crucial that hospitals in such areas employ staff that is fully vaccinated because they could see a surge in Covid cases, said Slabach. “When you complicate that with the fact that rural communities have populations that are more vulnerable to the disease itself, meaning they have co-morbid or chronic diseases,” then vaccination is “critically important”, Slabach added.It began with a corner kick. If you’re looking for a starting point for the US men’s national team’s failure to book a spot at the 2018 World Cup, there may be no better moment than a set-piece for Mexico on 11 November 2016. After four consecutive 2-0 World Cup qualifying wins over Mexico in Columbus, Ohio, the US suddenly found themselves with an unfamiliar 1-1 scoreline against their old rivals at the Mapfre Stadium. Then, in the 89th minute, that corner from Miguel Layún found the head of veteran defender Rafael Márquez, who perfectly redirected the ball into the back of the net. The crowd of 24,000 in Columbus were stunned as Mexico not only took a 2-1 lead, but also secured their first World Cup qualifying away win against the Americans since 1972. The loss to Mexico foreshadowed a dismal run against Concacaf opponents and the US failed to make the World Cup for the first time since 1986. Now, just one day after the five-year anniversary of that defeat, the USMNT have their chance at redemption. In a symbolic change of scenery for a new era, they’ve bucked the trend of playing Mexico in Columbus with the hopes of reenergizing their efforts in a first-ever World Cup qualifier at Cincinnati’s TQL Stadium on Friday night. Luckily for American fans, things are looking slightly rosier this time around. Although they’ve had a couple of hiccups, with three wins, two draws and a loss so far, the Americans head into the match second in Concacaf qualifying (the first three teams go through to Qatar 2022 automatically with the fourth heading into an intercontinental playoff). This isn’t the same roster that couldn’t get the job done a few years back either. From the current call-up, only two players (Christian Pulisic and DeAndre Yedlin) were part of the squad that stumbled in November 2016. And through that process and transition, they’ve also beaten Mexico twice this year in the finals of the Concacaf Nations League and Gold Cup. That said, World Cup qualification remains their most significant goal in mind, and neither team was at full strength for the previous two games which took place in what amount to glorified friendly tournaments. “[The Gold Cup and Nations League] mean absolutely nothing,” said Tyler Adams in an interview on CBS Sports’ Que Golazo podcast earlier this week. “The only good thing about those games is that we continue to progress in those points in time.” He added: “This is for a World Cup, the motivation will be completely different.” USMNT manager Gregg Berhalter also recognizes the gravity of Friday’s game. “In the context of World Cup qualifying, it’s just another game, right? But in terms of the rivalry and the history and the times when you get to play them with a pro-US crowd in a great stadium, I mean, it makes it special,” Berhalter told the Cincinnati Enquirer. But can Mexico once again steal the show on American soil? Mexico are unbeaten in their six qualifying games, with four wins and two draws, and sit top of the table, three points clear of the US. Despite all of this, regional bragging rights have remained out of reach for Mexico after losing the Gold Cup and Nations League finals to the US. During the 3-2 Nations League final loss to the United States, Mexico fell victim to two goals off corners. Months later in the Gold Cup final, it was a set-piece goal in extra time that secured a narrow 1-0 victory over Mexico. “It is true that we lost two finals, but the United States [hurt us] from set-pieces,” said Mexico coach Tata Martino after the Gold Cup defeat in August. “We had great moments in the two finals where we defined the game. When we cannot convert goals from these situations, there is always a risk.” For Mexico on Friday, capitalizing on those situations will be paramount as they aim to steal back the crown as the kings of the Concacaf region. Regardless of the two painful losses to the US in 2021, an away win in a World Cup qualifier would do plenty to help heal the wounds. As for the young US team, they have an opportunity to not only take a huge step towards a return to the World Cup, but to also truly claim their dominance in the region with a historic third consecutive victory over Mexico within just six months. Either way, keep an eye out for those set-pieces once the game kicks off.The hack The traditional Japanese (and south-east Asian) use of fermented rice water to strengthen and condition hair is doing the rounds on TikTok and Reels, thanks to the Kardashians and a lockdown boom in DIY haircare. The promise Milky rice water is supposedly rich in amino acids and vitamins good for hair. Don’t go mad: overuse could cause protein buildup and brittle hair. The test There are lots of “rice water rinse” methods on social media, but seeing the thick, floor-length hair of Red Yao women in China’s Huangluo Yao village, I’m (mostly) following their method. They wash white sticky rice vigorously in water to extract the nutrients, boil it and leave it to ferment in a wooden vat (Tupperware for me). This lowers the pH, making it more in line with our hair’s natural acidity. The Yao women leave it to ferment for two months, but I go for 48 hours as I’ve seen online. I pour the mix over my dry hair (it doesn’t smell, thankfully) and leave it on for 20 minutes before rinsing off and air drying. Washed with water and air-dried, my roots were still a touch greasy, but my ends felt silkier than an afghan hound’s. The verdict When I next make rice, I’ll try this, in the hope it will strengthen my hair. For a more conventional boost to your locks, try a protein-infused shampoo.It’s the foundational concept of US democracy: voters choose the politicians they want to represent them. Yet the reality in 2021 is much more depressing. As politicians undertake the once-a-decade process of redrawing political districts across the country, they are essentially rigging the system by deciding among themselves exactly which voters in which areas they want to represent. It’s a process called gerrymandering that allows them to virtually choose their voters and guarantee their re-election. The United States stands almost alone in allowing partisan politicians to draw political districts in this way. It’s an invisible scalpel that profoundly affects US politics but also the tenor and character of the national discourse. Republicans have control of the process in many states this year. And so far, they’re maximizing their advantage wherever they can. The new lines will likely help Republicans retake control of the US House next year. Let us show you how the Republicans are gerrymandering in four important parts of the country. Dismantling a Democratic district In North Carolina, Republicans have drawn a new congressional map that gives them a lock on at least 10 of the state’s 14 congressional seats. That’s a staggering advantage in a state that re-elected a Democratic governor in 2020 and where Joe Biden got 48.6% of the statewide vote. Remarkably enough, federal courts can’t do anything to stop this kind of extreme gerrymandering on partisan grounds, the supreme court ruled in 2019. There are few limits on the process. Each district must have roughly the same number of people. In many places they must be reasonably compact. And lawmakers can’t dilute the influence of voters based on their race. But politicians are free to group voters based on their partisan leanings. And in recent decades, they’ve done that surgically, carving up communities to essentially lock in advantages for years to come. A decade ago, Republicans launched a hugely successful effort, called Project REDMAP, to take control of state legislatures and then used their new majorities to draw maps that locked in their advantage for a decade. This year, Republicans have the power to draw the lines of 187 congressional districts while Democrats have power in 75, according to the Cook Political Report. During the 2012, 2014 and 2016 midterm elections, gerrymandering shifted 59 congressional seats, 39 for Republicans and 20 for Democrats, according to a report from the left-leaning Center for American Progress. While Democrats have gerrymandering power in far fewer places this year, they’ve also shown a willingness to use their scalpel where they have control in places such as Illinois and Oregon. Diluting the influence of Black voters Although it is illegal to carve up districts that weaken the influence of voters based on their race, sometimes lawmakers do it anyway. Weakening diverse, Democratic-leaning suburbs In Texas, Republicans have drawn lines that blunt the immense growth among the Democratic-leaning Hispanic population to shore up the GOP’s hold on as many as 25 of the state’s 38 congressional seats. Even though people of color accounted for 95% of the population growth over the last decade, there are no districts where minorities make up a majority of the population. Until 2013, states with a history of voting discrimination, including Texas, had to get their maps pre-cleared by the federal government before they went into effect to ensure they didn’t discriminate against minority voters. Now, Texas has much more leeway to pass maps that discriminate against people of color. Packing Democrats into non-competitive districts The Dallas-Fort Worth area in Texas is one of the fastest growing areas in the state – and one of the most politically competitive. Because each district must have roughly the same number of people by law, Texas Republicans had to get creative in how they regrouped voters. In some places, they took small slivers of heavily populated Democratic suburbs and attached them to rural GOP areas. In other cases, they excised Democrats from politically competitive districts and packed them into districts that already favored Democrats. Voting rights advocates face an uphill battle in challenging these maps in court. In 2019, the US supreme court said there was nothing federal courts could do to stop partisan gerrymandering. Redistricting litigation often takes years to move its way through the court, allowing lawmakers to get at least one election, and often many more, conducted under district lines that may later get struck down. In the meantime, the effects are insidious. When politicians know their seat is safe, they no longer have to worry about competition from the opposing party or concern themselves with reaching out to the other party’s voters. Instead, they become more interested in appealing to their own base and fending off challengers from within their own party. It makes politics more extreme, and contributes to extreme polarization.Faced with the state of the world and the depth of denial, faced with the data that keeps falling on us, faced with the sense that we are on a ship heading towards an abyss while the party on board gets louder and louder, I have found it necessary to develop an attitude and a mode of writing that I refer to as existential creativity. This is the creativity at the end of time. It is not given to many people to sense the end of time approaching. Maybe some Atlanteans sensed it. Maybe the sages of Pompeii, if there were any, felt it in advance. Maybe those ancient civilisations whose societies were about to be wrecked by invaders from the sea felt it. But I can’t think of any who had the data that it was coming, who had the facts pouring at them every day, and yet who carried on as if everything were normal. Albert Camus, writing during the second world war, felt the need for a new philosophy to answer the extreme truths of the times. The absurd was born from that. Existentialism was born too from a world in the throes of extreme crisis. But here we are on the edges of the biggest crisis that has ever faced us. We need a new philosophy for these times, for this near-terminal moment in the history of the human. It is out of this I want to propose an existential creativity. How do I define it? It is the creativity wherein nothing should be wasted. As a writer, it means everything I write should be directed to the immediate end of drawing attention to the dire position we are in as a species. It means that the writing must have no frills. It should speak only truth. In it, the truth must be also beauty. It calls for the highest economy. It means that everything I do must have a singular purpose. It also means that I must write now as if these are the last things I will write, that any of us will write. If you knew you were at the last days of the human story, what would you write? How would you write? What would your aesthetics be? Would you use more words than necessary? What form would poetry truly take? And what would happen to humour? Would we be able to laugh, with the sense of the last days on us? Sometimes I think we must be able to imagine the end of things, so that we can imagine how we will come through that which we imagine. Of the things that trouble me most, the human inability to imagine its end ranks very high. It means that there is something in the human makeup resistant to terminal contemplation. How else can one explain the refusal of ordinary, good-hearted citizens to face the realities of climate change? If we don’t face them, we won’t change them. And if we don’t change them, we will not put things in motion that would prevent them. And so our refusal to face them will make happen the very thing we don’t want to happen. We have to find a new art and a new psychology to penetrate the apathy and the denial that are preventing us making the changes that are inevitable if our world is to survive. We need a new art to waken people both to the enormity of what is looming and the fact that we can still do something about it. The ability to imagine what we dread most is an evolutionary tool that nature has given us to transcend what we fear. I do not believe that imagining the worst makes it happen. Imagining the worst might be one of the factors that makes us prevent it from happening. That is the function of dystopias and utopias: one to make real to us a destination we must not follow, the other to imagine for us a future that is possible. Fear of poverty has made many people rich. Fear of death has kept many people healthy and sensible in how they live. There is a time for hope and there is a time for realism. But what is needed now is beyond hope and realism. This is a time when we ought to dedicate ourselves to bringing about the greatest shift in human consciousness and in the way we live. We ought to consecrate ourselves to bringing about a conscious evolutionary leap forward. No longer can we be the human beings we have been: wasteful, thoughtless, selfish, destructive. It is now time for us to be the most creative we have ever been, the most far-sighted, the most practical, the most conscious and selfless. The stakes have never been, and will never be, higher. What is called for here is a special kind of love for the world, the love of those who discover the sublime value of life because they are about to lose it. For we are on the verge of losing this most precious and beautiful of worlds, a miracle in all the universe, a home for the evolution of souls, a little paradise here in the richness of space, where we are meant to live and grow and be happy, but which we are day by day turning into a barren stone in space. So a new existentialism is called for. Not the existentialism of Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre, negative and stoical in spirit, but a brave and visionary existentialism, where as artists we dedicate our lives to nothing short of re-dreaming society. We have to be strong dreamers. We have to ask unthinkable questions. We have to go right to the roots of what makes us such a devouring species, overly competitive, conquest-driven, hierarchical. We ought to ask questions about money, power, hunger. The scientists tell us that fundamentally there is enough for everyone. This Earth can sustain us. We can’t just ask the shallow questions any more. Our whys ought to go to the core of what we are. Then we ought to set about changing us. We ought to remake ourselves. Somehow civilisation has taken a wrong turn and we collectively need to alter our destination, our journey. We can’t drive ourselves to the brink of extinction a second time. If we survive this brink, if we pull ourselves back from this apocalypse that’s awaiting, then we have to find a global direction that is one of sustenance and justice and beauty for the whole Earth, and for all the peoples of the Earth. This is the best and most natural home we are ever going to have. And we need to become a new people to deserve it. We are going to have to be new artists to redream it. This is why I propose existential creativity, to serve the unavoidable truth of our times, and a visionary existentialism, to serve the future that we must bring about from the brink of our environmental catastrophe. We can only make a future from the depth of the truth we face now. Ben Okri is a novelist and poet. He’s the author of Every Leaf a Hallelujah and The Famished RoadMy earliest reading memory I remember Maurice Sendak’s Where the Wild Things Are being read to me when I was five, by my kindergarten teacher. There are certain words in that book that stick with you, such as “rumpus” and “mischief”. If I look back on it now I can see it was lighting up certain sensory stimuli in my brain, which means that my love for language was showing itself early. My favourite book growing up Books weren’t really my thing as a child. I didn’t read on my own until I was 17 or 18. It just wasn’t my life. The book that changed me as a teenager The first one I picked up to read on my own was Black Boy by Richard Wright. It changed me just because it felt familiar. And also the excitement of it starts at the outset. By page two or three the house is on fire. I think it’s always about which book meets you at the right time. It just clicked. And I was off to the races after that. The book that made me want to be a writer That’s tricky, because I don’t think it was a book. When I was young, I would go to the music store, and I would buy rap cassettes. And I would open them up and read the liner notes. And reading rap lyrics was the beginning of my entry into writing, because I wanted to be able to do what my favourite rappers were doing. I realised that poetry was something that could be for me, because these rappers were doing it. I still think the poetic devices they were using are completely underrated. So really it was Black Reign by Queen Latifah that began my love for writing. The book or author I came back to Toni Morrison. Her work is like a suit that one has to grow into. I first read her books when I was 19, at college, and I didn’t understand a word. But when I was 30, I read Sula, and I thought: “Oh, this is beautiful.” The book I reread I read Salvage the Bones by Jesmyn Ward about once a year. I’ve probably read it 15 times. To my palate, it’s the closest thing to a perfect novel. The book I could never read again Roxane Gay’s An Untamed State. I couldn’t stomach it twice because so much of it is about sexual violence. But the love story that’s woven into it is brilliantly rendered. I had never read a book that existed at such polar ends of the spectrum, from absolute violence to absolute euphoria – I thought it was genius. The book I discovered later in life I read Stephen King’s novella The Body [on which the film Stand By Me was based] recently and it is amazing. It’s so slight – 190 pages. I think the best of us know how to say a whole lot with a few words. And that book is pretty incredible. The book I am currently reading Colson Whitehead’s Harlem Shuffle. It’s great. I think it’s hard to argue against the view that he is the best living American male author. He’s consistent – and it feels like he’s still just having a good time. With this novel, he’s saying: “Alright, I did some serious works back to back. Now I’m going to take a turn and do something a little pulpy.” And I think we should all be so lucky to feel that free. Gosh, that’s inspiring to a young writer like myself. My comfort read Any of James Baldwin’s books. If you’re black in America, Baldwin is the guy who tells you that you’re right for feeling how you feel. So he’s super comforting for me. • Stuntboy in the Meantime by Jason Reynolds,illustrated by Raúl the Third, is published by Knights Of (£7.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.I have been a pet behaviourist for more than 25 years and have also worked for the film industry, helping animals to “perform” on camera. I have trained a 190kg boar to pretend to attack an actor, a cat to plunge shoulder-deep into water as if catching a fish and a cockatoo to winch up a bucket, take out a coin and drop it into a piggy bank. But when a TV company asked if I could teach a dog to fly a plane, I faced the toughest challenge of my career. Initially I was hesitant about the project, which involved taking 12 carefully selected rescue dogs through a training regime that would ultimately allow three of them to take the controls of a Cessna light aircraft. I wondered if the idea was in the animals’ best interests, but was won over by the programme’s aim: to prove that an abandoned dog, given enough love and attention, is capable of far more than people might expect. Four trainers were each allocated three of the candidates. My all-male crew was Alfie, an athletic lurcher cross; Blondie, a sweet-natured labrador; and a rambunctious bull terrier mix called Shadow. We started with fun tasks that tested the dogs’ memories, cognitive ability and emotional stability, training them to perform sophisticated moves in a short film, a puppet production and a music video. I’ve written a book, What Dogs Want, teaching dog owners how to understand and train their pets, and for this task I employed the same basic techniques I’d recommend to anyone. By breaking down a complex manoeuvre into simpler, trainable chunks, I was able to get my boys to achieve polished performances. I used a clicker whenever they completed a chunk, to let them know exactly when they had succeeded. The tasks gave us a good feeling for which three dogs might be most suited to flight school. By barking on cue and pushing buttons with their paws, they gave us an indication of their memory and dexterity. I was delighted when two of my charges, Alfie and Shadow, made it through, along with another trainer’s dog, Reggie. I was sorry to see Blondie go but, like all the dogs who took part, he went to an amazing new home. We had only six weeks to turn the three finalists into pilots. The Civil Aviation Authority had issued guidelines: the dogs had to be secured while in flight, and we couldn’t make any alterations to the aircraft. I had a simple rig built to mimic the plane’s seat and controls. After making sure the dogs could be seated comfortably, we used a broom handle and a cutout piece of plywood to represent the plane’s steering yoke. I concentrated on Alfie and another trainer, Charlotte, took charge of Shadow. One of the most difficult challenges, given the dogs’ enthusiasm, was encouraging them to use very subtle movements with their paws when steering. During the flight, they would be sitting in the pilot’s seat, facing forward with their trainers behind them, so we had to come up with a way to give them steering directions. I designed a second rig, which could be placed in front of the dogs and included an arrangement of lights – red to veer right, blue for left and white for straight ahead. Each light also made a distinctive sound. We operated this system from the back seat via a controller. After six weeks, I was delighted at how far the dogs had come. Their final test was to perform a figure of eight in an airborne Cessna, making banking turns while controlling their altitude. We needed a human co-pilot to take them to 3,000ft before giving control to the dogs (as diligent as our pupils had been, they weren’t able to take off and land safely). All three of them performed admirably, flying the plane for minutes at a time, but it was Shadow who ultimately got the bit between his teeth and successfully completed the final figure of eight. In the five years since making the programme, I’ve visited Alfie, who now lives in Rochdale, excelling in sports dog trials with his guardian, Cath. I also visited London and saw Shadow. He lives with Charlotte, who is making him a Hollywood star. Before the show, Shadow was only hours away from being put to sleep. It’s a situation tens of thousands of dogs find themselves in every year. They all have the potential to achieve amazing things if given the chance. • As told to Chris Broughton • This article was amended on 12 November 2021. The plane was flown to 3,000ft, not 30,000ft as stated in an earlier version. Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comAfter the 2011 earthquake in Japan, Ryūsuke Hamaguchi was commissioned to make a documentary about the impact on the north-eastern Tōhoku region. He spent hours driving every day with his co-director, and realised how cars take you places in more ways than one. “The two of us aren’t really communicative with each other in general,” he says. “But in the car, we talked more than we did before. In a car, visually you’re satisfied – you’ve got information from the scenery from the windows. But sonically you only get the engine revving and that’s pretty much it. So I think we tend to want to fill that void.” This in-transit intimacy exerts its mysterious pull in Hamaguchi’s new movie, Drive My Car, which is adapted from a short story by Haruki Murakami. It is about Kafuku, a widowed theatre director who reluctantly accepts a female chauffeur, Misaki, while he oversees a new production of Uncle Vanya. As his red Saab 900 winds its way to work, he listens to a cassette of his dead wife reciting lines of Chekhov, and begins to open up to his driver about his grief and her infidelity. Taking the scenic route over three hours, observing how Kafuku’s art is drawn into the slipstream of his life, the film is so enigmatic and absorbing that – like Misaki’s ultra-smooth driving – the gear-changes into the philosophical fast lane are hardly noticeable. Winning three awards at Cannes this year, including best screenplay, Drive My Car confirmed that Hamaguchi (to nab another Beatles title) now had a ticket to ride in the auteur big league. Murakami’s story was originally published in 2014, part of the Men Without Women collection – though Hamaguchi had no contact with the Japanese literary giant beyond permission to proceed. The story uses driving as a metaphor for how other forms of conveyance – sexual desire, role-playing and ultimately storytelling – sweep us despite ourselves towards inner truths. “The lines in a script are actually a vehicle, and they carry on regardless of what the actor thinks about them. So they’re probably closer to a train than a car,” he says through a translator in a video call from his home city of Yokohama. He continues: “But they’re driving the actors in a positive way. It’s being able to express something you can’t materialise in real life through a fiction.” One insight into Hamaguchi’s working methods is the mind-numbingly repetitive rehearsal process Kafuku subjects his cast to in the film, a version of how the real-life director also works. His idea is that drumming in the lines without emotion allows actors to fully internalise the text, the better to access authentic emotions in them later. Drive My Car’s production circumstances seemed to have embedded a similar truth-seeking drill into Hamaguchi, too. Shortly after shooting on the Tokyo-set prologue had begun in early 2020, the pandemic hit and production was shut down for eight months. They had to relocate the main part of the story from Busan in South Korea to Hiroshima, because of foreign-travel restrictions. So Hamaguchi – “grateful” for the extra time – finished off a quick-sketch anthology film Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy, that was in part a dress rehearsal for the larger work: an extended car journey opens the first section, about a model who discovers her booker is dating her ex; role-playing is a revelatory gateway in the second and third. Hamaguchi had an itinerant childhood: born in Kanagawa prefecture, just south of Tokyo, he moved around due to his civil servant father’s frequent postings. “Whenever I get asked where I’m from, I don’t really know what to say.” He was a typical video game-and manga-loving teenager before access to Tokyo’s glut of arthouse cinemas while at university broadened his tastes. He was especially drawn to John Cassavetes, whom Hamaguchi has praised for his ability to depict people at breaking point. Later, doing a film degree – studying partly under cerebral horror maestro Kiyoshi Kurosawa – Hamaguchi found kinship with older traditions. “I just couldn’t find anything interesting in contemporary Japanese cinema, apart from a very few directors,” he says, sipping tea. “But then I started watching Japanese classic movies and I found how much richer cinema was back then. A national heritage that we can be proud of as a culture.” His 2012 earthquake and tsunami documentary The Sound of Waves – and its two follow-ups – was a crucial breakthrough, he says. Being forced to forget about scripts and react simply to what he shot brought new freshness to his work. “I learned how to use the camera correctly, which is to bring out the power of reality. Who the subjects are as people, as individuals. I wanted to break down these brackets and show these people as individuals, not just random people who suffered from disaster. Now I reflect that in my [fictional] movies by trying to bring out as optimally as possible what the actors can express.” Drive My Car – a transition from skittish, ironic melodramas such as Asako I &amp; II into something with a cool, serene depth – shows this new concentration. But art only ever has truth in the passenger seat because its journey has a fixed destination, Hamaguchi reminds us. “A story has to end, right? And everyone, including the creators and the audience, knows it’s a lie. But because of that limitation, we can be honest in that fiction.” • This article was amended on 12 November 2021 to correct the spelling of Tōhoku. • Drive My Car is released in cinemas on 19 November, when the Close-Up Cinema’s Ryūsuke Hamaguchi retrospective also begins as part of its Japan 2021 season. Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy will be released on 11 February 2022.It will come as no surprise to anyone who appreciates the engineering of Japanese cars and motorcycles that Japanese watches are designed and built to equally high standards. Today’s quiet king of Japanese horology is Seiko, which boasts a heritage that goes back 140 years to Kintaro Hattori, who opened his first watch shop in 1881 and produced his first Seikosha-named clock 11 years later. Hattori was a mere 21 years old when he founded the company, remaining at its helm for a full half-century, during which time he established his own design and production facilities to make Seiko the leading watch manufacturer in Japan. Seiko translates into English as “exquisite”, a word that can fairly be applied to many of the firm’s products, aficionados of which have long known that the brand is a master of the mechanical movement and one of few makers in the world that can legitimately claim true “manufacture” status. In other words, it makes all of the components that go into its mechanisms in-house. “I was already producing goods on my own when others were starting to import directly; and I was searching for something new when others were starting to produce,” Hattori recalled in an interview many years ago with the Japanese business magazine Jitsugyo no Nihon. In that same interview, he argued: “It is better to do something continuously, perpetually and untiringly than to hustle and fail,” and from the very outset, he placed great store on ongoing innovation, as well as the accuracy, precision and peerless quality of Seiko products. As a result, Seiko has been able to lay claim to many watchmaking milestones, including the creation of the world’s first quartz-powered models, the first TV watch and Japan’s first diving watch and its first wrist chronograph, a steady stream of invention that reflects Hattori’s central philosophy: “Don’t hurry, don’t stop.” The innovative Crown Chronograph featured single-button operation without the usual sub-dials of a chronograph, since it measured elapsed times of up to 60 seconds with its central hand, leaving longer periods to be monitored using the minute hand and rotating bezel. The watch was launched to coincide with the 1964 Tokyo Summer Olympics, of which Seiko was the official timekeeper – an appointment that placed it front and centre of the international stage and which has been recognised as turning it into a truly global brand. The remarkable accuracy and precision of the 1,278 timing devices Seiko supplied for the event led to five further appointments as official Olympic timekeeper and similar, ongoing roles at countless other top sports events around the world. But while the high-tech devices that Seiko used at the Games could dice seconds into the sufficiently tiny fractions needed to officially verify, for example, that the US’s “Bullet” Bob Hayes really did equal what was then the world 100m record (10.06 seconds), the Crown Chronograph’s quintessential “tool watch” look (watches that serve as tools and made for a specific task) made it the timepiece that everyone wanted to wear on a daily basis. No wonder, then, that the Crown Chronograph’s design has now been re-interpreted in Seiko’s Presage collection, with five new models in the UK collection under the title Style60s. These combine the best of modern engineering through the latest “4R” (automatic and manual winding) movement with delectable vintage looks that have been achieved by the use of box crystals, faceted indexes, dagger hands and subtle, sepia-toned lumibrite luminous material to complement a choice of dials. In typical Seiko style, however, much of the devil is in the detail: different finishing techniques are used on the inner and outer areas of the dial to enhance legibility; the gently rounded case is slanted inward to hug the wearer’s wrist and the strap lugs are polished to a mirror finish to bring contrast, balance and a modern twist to the overall vintage design. Some watches in the Presage Style60s line-up feature a 24-hour counter that provides a second time zone reading, and an adjacent aperture that exposes the mechanism’s balance wheel, the vital component that serves as the beating heart that brings a watch to life. But whichever model of Presage Style60s you choose, it probably won’t break the bank. Prices range from just £440 to a maximum of £530 – remarkable value for watches so steeped in the history and culture of both the maker that creates them and the country in which the brand was founded 140 years ago. Discover the Style60s collectionThe Cuban playwright Yunior García has shot to fame over the past year, but not because of his art. The 39-year old has become the face of Archipelago, a largely online opposition group which is planning a string of pro-democracy marches across the island on Monday. The Communist party has banned the protests – which coincide with the reopening of the country after 20 months of coronavirus lockdowns – arguing that they are a US-backed attempt to overthrow the government. García and other organisers say the protest is simply to demand basic rights for all Cubans. Over syrupy black coffee and strong cigarettes in the living room of his Havana home, García said he hoped to channel the “peaceful rebelliousness” that he believes all Cubans have inside them. “I believe in a diverse country and I think we have to completely do away with the one-party system which limits too many individual rights,” he said. Such talk is anathema to Cuba’s rulers who are already struggling to contain a simmering social crisis which earlier this year triggered the largest anti-government protests for decades. Supercharged US sanctions, the coronavirus pandemic, a surge in social media use and a younger generation hungry for change have left the Communist party reeling.The Biden administration has continued with Trump’s “maximum pressure” policy, which since 2017 has hammered the island with more than 200 sanctions aimed at choking hard currency inflows. The result has been an economic crisis that rivals the so-called Special Period, after the collapse of the Soviet Union. “The Special Period was a piece of cake compared to this,” said Umberto Molina, 71, waiting in line outside a pharmacy. “There was medicine and you didn’t have these never-ending queues.” In July, mounting frustrations exploded on to the streets in an unprecedented rash of protests – and a hardening of positions. Cuban special forces beat demonstrators and hundreds were imprisoned. Washington responded by imposing new sanctions. “When the Cuban government feels more threatened by the US, its tolerance for internal dissidence goes down,” said William LeoGrande, professor of government at American University in Washington DC. “All governments, when they feel under attack, become less tolerant of internal opposition,” he added, pointing to the US Patriot Act following 9/11. This week, the foreign minister, Bruno Rodríguez, vowed that the protests would not go ahead. “We will not allow it,” he said. “We will use our laws, our constitution and the strictest adherence to the principles of our socialist state of law and social justice.” On Thursday, García, said that he would march in silence and holding a white rose on Sunday, but it was not clear if this amounted to a scaling back of Monday’s protests. “We are not willing to have a single drop of blood spilled, on either side of this conflict,” García said in a Facebook post. In his interview, García, 39, said he was well aware of the risks he was facing. “History is full of people who have gone to prison for struggling for their rights,” García said, offering José Martí, the 19th-century Cuban intellectual and independence fighter, as an example. Like Martí, García says he opposes “foreign interference” in Cuban affairs. But while Martí saw the US as a “monster” to be kept at bay, García takes a different tack. After he met with the head of the US embassy in Havana and a former US army captain, the Communist party released video of the encounter, and labelled García a “political operative”. García said he discussed censorship on the island and the US embargo (which he opposes), but he denied taking advice. Nobody in Archipelago, he said, takes so much as “a cent” from foreign governments.Tolerance of dissent on the island, which increased under Obama years, is nosediving. Activists say more than 600 are still in prison. A gamut of strategies have been employed to prevent Archipelago activists from organising: García’s mobile phone line has been cut, two coordinators have been fired from their state jobs, and activists’ families have been interrogated by state security. That the protests are scheduled for the very day that Cuba is supposed to go back to normal after a long lockdown, with tourists returning and schools opening, has only heightened the stakes. The government has planned a “National Defence Day” for later next week, and menacing photos have emerged of government supporters wielding batons in preparation. “There is a quite properly widespread desire … that Cuba should move steadily and quickly, and as soon as possible, towards a true democratic system, and that the rights of peaceful protest and full freedom of expression be finally and properly respected by the state,” said Hal Klepak, professor emeritus of history and strategy at the Royal Military College of Canada. “However, it is simply unrealistic and contrary to all logic, to think that the Cuban state, besieged, attacked and under quite savage economic warfare conducted by the greatest power in the history of the world … can allow such rights to flourish. “As San Ignacio de Loyola, echoing the same conclusion as Machiavelli in such circumstances, said: ‘In a besieged city, all dissent is treason.’” Such realism is little solace for young activists yearning for the democracy. Daniela Rojo, a single mother with two young children , said she was raised to “speak softly and avoid problems”. But after being jailed for 27 days following the July’s protest, she said she was determined to march on Monday for her children’s sake. “I want them to grow up in a country where they can express themselves freely,” she said.In a wide-ranging interview with Esquire this week, Benedict Cumberbatch surprisingly revealed that he wasn’t at all sure about taking the role of Doctor Strange in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. “I kind of had my doubts about it, from just going into the comics,” said the actor. “I thought: ‘This is a very dated, sexist character.’” Apparently the studio ultimately sold him on its vision of the big-screen Strange as “very much a character of his time”. And indeed, the arrogant alpha-male medic we first meet in 2016’s Doctor Strange is pretty quickly transformed into a near saintly figure whose only interest is in serving the greater good as the Sorcerer Supreme. That’s why it was such a surprise to see Strange apparently returning to his old boorish self in trailers for the forthcoming Spider-Man: No Way Home, in which the superhero can be seen apparently ushering in the mean-old Multiverse by casting a dangerous spell aimed at restoring Spider-Man’s secret identity. It seems so out-of-character that some people have even speculated this new version of Strange might have turned to the dark side. But perhaps we shouldn’t be surprised. For it’s hardly the first time Marvel has shown us the arrogant male hero brought low by the consequences of their own hubris. First there was Robert Downey Jr’s Iron Man, who in his own conceit thought he could build a hi-tech defence barrier to stop the Earth being invaded by aliens but failed to spot the potential for said supercharged artificial intelligence to gain consciousness and turn on its creator. Then there was poor old Thor, who has had to cope with the consequences of his own epic fails over and over again, from the destruction of Asgard to the deaths of pretty much his whole family. It appears Strange is now being set up as the next overreaching, over-confident male to fall from grace. (Let’s not even mention bumbling Star-Lord or loser-boy Ant-Man.) Messing up, it must be said, is very much part of the Marvel hero’s DNA. When the comic book publisher emerged as a rival to DC in the 1960s, it was because its superheroes had very real and human failings in comparison to more old-fashioned, untarnished golden-age figures such as Batman, Superman and Wonder Woman. Where the Man of Steel’s only real problem was kryptonite, Tony Stark is so prone to screwing up in the comics that he has at times descended to the status of an out-of-control drunk, a clone-creating mad scientist, even a callous proponent of superhero concentration camps. Even so, it is beginning to seem as though Marvel loves stories of toxic masculinity almost as much as the Hulk likes smashing up invading alien spaceships. Given the studio’s apparent determination to keep returning to the theme, can it really be coincidence? If superhero movies are the new westerns, then the MCU’s equivalent must surely be the 1971 Robert Altman revisionist classic McCabe &amp; Mrs Miller, in which Warren Beatty’s swaggering gambler meets his doom in the mud of the Pacific north-west after failing to spot that he long ago reached the end of a supremely lucky streak. It is a movie with no discernible hero, no one the audience is primed to root for. If this is where Marvel Studio finds itself after more than a decade of storytelling, we should perhaps give the superhero mega-saga credit for presenting a more complex picture of human behaviour than any big-screen fantasy series before it. Moreover, if Cumberbatch really did sign on to play a reconditioned, modern take on Doctor Strange, rather than a master of cavalier pomposity, he might find he’s not quite out of the woods yet. We should also not be too surprised if the studio’s spandex-sporting toxic males continue to drive the narrative into darker and darker territory – especially as the forthcoming No Way Home and Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness are already looking distinctly moody. It seems that, much like our own real-world leaders, they just cannot help themselves.Weapon of war, language-game, act of restorative justice, conversation – erasure poetry can play all these parts and more. A branch of found poetry, erasure poetry starts from an existent document, obliterating parts of it to leave a new, slimmer text. While this type of verse is seeing a surge in popularity due to its “instagrammable” nature, cut-up and collage techniques have been around since the mid-20th century. And parody, the mockery of another poem by borrowing words and ideas and giving them a comic twist, must have existed long before poems were even written down. There’s no one way to create an erasure poem. The only “rule” is that words must be taken away from a pre-existing text, rather than written as new. American poet Erin Dorney defined six different kinds of erasure poetry in a 2018 blogpost. “Crossouts”, where sections of newspaper articles or documents to make a poem out of the remaining text, are probably the best-known type, popularised by Austin Kleon’s Newspaper Blackout Poems. Other authors have been more creative in how they block out text, using things such as sand and flowers to obliterate the chosen passages. An Instagram poem Dorney quotes, by Jaime Mortara, blacks out all the surrounding text, ending up with “my brain / is / a / stunning / joke”. Many erasure poems offer such cryptic snatches of wisdom, wry quips given significance by their spotlighting. At its best, erasure poetry goes far beyond the playful. In her poem cycle, Zong!, M NourbeSe Philip uses period court reports to expose the case of the 18th-century slave ship that jettisoned 150 live enslaved Africans in order to collect insurance. Philip, as she says, “murders the text”. Her poems overturn conventional syntax, and tear words into pieces to create emblematic and indeed audible expressions of anguish and abuse. It’s as if the demolition of a statue had become an art form that could reveal every micro-cruelty committed in the name of the person commemorated. Cruelty and ignorance are targets too for Raymond Antrobus, poet-advocate for the D/deaf community. Antrobus made a powerful statement against the ignorance he perceived in Ted Hughes’s poem Deaf School when he included it, fully redacted, in his (Ted Hughes award-winning) collection The Perseverance. Kate Baer, author of the New York Times bestseller What Kind of Woman, takes an almost conversational approach to erasure in her new collection, I Hope This Finds You Well. Baer’s strategy was to “write back” to the trolls and bigots on her blog, using the erasure technique to turn dead wood into spiky poems. Previously, she had always deleted abusive comments. But when one day she read a message from a woman who disagreed with her about police accountability, she says “the words stuck out to me in a new form”. “On a whim I took a screen shot of her message, blotted out some lines with the pen tool, and hit post,” she explains. The context of the resulting poem, Re: Holding Police Accountable, was George Floyd’s murder. The original message read: “I wish you would stick to poetry instead of constantly being political, just one reader preference / Have you ever thought what would happen if the police disappeared? / Is what you say going to change anything? (No) / when you stay in your lane, better connection happens / I know staying silent isn’t cool but just a thought.” “I wish you would // disappear / is what you say / when you stay / silent” is Baer’s riposte. Not all the messages are hostile, and Baer replies kindly when the writer is sympathetic. When a fan complains about the difficulty of most other poetry, her response is: “I wanted art / poetry was / hidden / in / so much / in so many ways.” And poetic artistry remains important to her. She speaks for her community as well as herself when she says: “My hope is that by sharing these pieces we continue to hold on to the truths that sustain us, and when we do encounter the inevitable noise – we tune our ears to hear the song”. Erasure poetry, Baer’s included, is rarely just a “song”. The poet Jennifer S Cheng, writing in Jacket2, said that “perhaps erasure poetry is always inherently a political act, perhaps it is always inherently a violent act”. The former is surely right: language is political, and writing with a doubled context doubles that resonance. Erasure can be an ugly weapon. It can distort and destroy another writer’s work. There are certainly ethical issues to consider when text by another author is repurposed. But the “violence” may also take positive forms by showing how easily ideal can slide into injustice, as when Tracy K Smith, in her poem Declaration, scaldingly revises the US Declaration of Independence. While some kinds of erasure poetry are enabled by Instagram, a medium not usually associated with the art of close reading, erasure can be a delicate, non-lethal probe rather than a weapon. Especially when challenging dust-thick prejudice and received opinion, it has the potential to be transformative.Technology is playing a huge role in helping organisations from all sectors become more sustainable, from monitoring carbon footprints – and helping to ensure greater transparency across supply chains – to managing and supporting electromobility (e-mobility). Many businesses are also introducing wide-ranging sustainability goals, driven both externally by customers but also internally by employees. SAP Solutions now works with approximately 16,000 public sector institutions in 151 countries, with a suite of products designed to help them move to a low-carbon economy and deliver on their climate goals. “The world is changing,” says Stefan Luckert, who heads Services Sustainability Solutions at SAP. “We want to offer holistic solutions that support businesses wherever they are along their journey to sustainable business.” With a rising demand for digital services, and a need for government employees to work from home, the public sector is rapidly moving to the cloud. This is creating a new breed of business solutions that thrive on data, while feedback from citizens, employees and suppliers, can be incorporated to offer organisations a new way to improve services and accountability. To make sense of this new data and comply with new sustainability regulations, organisations are replacing old, manual ways of working with new processes that are automated, standardised and integrated. Technology is also meeting a growing demand for greater transparency, with budget holders realising that showing how money is being spent can build a greater trust with service users. According to a recent SAP report, in collaboration with Oxford Economics, 52% of public sector agencies are investing in robotic process automation for procurement, reflecting that what an organisation buys, and how they procure it, have a huge effect on their sustainability and how they are perceived. Advanced procurement solutions can pull together organisational and external data, enabling buying teams to gather more information about suppliers and set up metrics to measure performance. By covering aspects such as waste and recyclability, these can ensure products fit in with sustainability goals. Greater visibility across supply chains also improves understanding of the real-time effects purchasing a certain product or service can have. By making due diligence a core part of the procurement process, solutions such as SAP Ariba Supplier Risk help buying teams make better informed decisions, which consider possible environmental and social ramifications. As John Wookey, president of SAP’s Intelligent Spend Management and Business Network, says: “Increasingly, companies rely on procurement to help drive their businesses forward, foster resilience and make their investments count. “Procurement leaders know the only way to get visibility and insight into every spend decision is to leverage the power of the cloud and unify spend management processes on a single platform.” SAP Ariba is also helping to connect buyers with social enterprises and develop the idea of social procurement. By including minority-owned, diverse suppliers and social enterprises in a supply chain, organisations can have a positive effect on communities, often helping to level the playing field for disadvantaged people. Adding these kinds of values to procurement, while maintaining a commitment to human and workplace rights, is proving a successful way of achieving improved business results, and of reducing risk. SAP’s Climate 21 programme supports its customers in achieving their climate-related objectives, and is headed up by SAP Product Carbon Footprint Analytics. Assessing CO2 emissions across a whole supply chain – including “scope 3” emissions which lie outside an organisation’s direct operations – is challenging. Footprint analytics track the emissions of a product across the entire value chain, from production, raw materials and energy use to transport, and can also use data from third-party solutions to analyse and understand the emissions breakdowns. In a novel approach, organisations can identify the carbon impact at the beginning of the product life-cycle instead of reactively after a product has been produced. Other programmes designed to help organisations digitise their sustainability-related work feature in SAP’s sustainability service package. These include the SAP Product Footprint Management, which can help minimise an organisation’s footprint by measuring performance against a range of environmental categories including carbon, water, energy and land use. The application combines existing data with environmental factors to accurately calculate the footprint of operations, helping to support disclosure and optimise internal processes. Also featured in the package is SAP’s Environmental Health and Safety Management. This software is designed to identify and respond to environmental health and safety risks before they affect employees and service users. Another solution helps to manage packaging waste, and ensure that where possible it is returned into circulation. Travel is also undergoing a huge transformation, and e-mobility – including public transport – offers the opportunity to move away from fossil fuels towards a network based on renewable energy. The future of e-mobility will be based on a large number of connected electric vehicles (EVs), and smart charging stations, and SAP E-Mobility can help organisations to build and manage a networked EV charging infrastructure at scale. It also means that organisations can become charge point operators and interact with business partners and stakeholders to support collaborative models. With the availability of so much new data, SAP is also helping organisations to deliver on their reporting requirements with reporting tools such as the SAP Sustainability Control Tower that can help incorporate these insights into different frameworks and standards, and help customers improve their sustainable performance. SAP solutions help clients optimise processes, deliver better public value, and give them the agility to change quicklyThere’s no way this many teenagers have this little spirit. We Are Not Finished is a manifesto of these young people’s values and their demands for the future, but the verve and fight of the 13-strong cast, aged 11-17, seems to be muted by a theatrical frame that doesn’t do them justice. Or maybe this is the futility teenagers feel in 2021, contemplating a burning world severed by divisions. Brought together by theatre/dance company Fevered Sleep, its directors David Harradine and Sam Butler worked with a group of untrained, opinionated young Londoners to devise the performance. On the back wall is a photo of a teeth-baring wolf squaring up to a bear; the stage is a white ramp like an endangered glacier. Under cold flickering lights and variously silence, tense soundscore or apocalyptic rumbles, the young people deliver a series of statements. They want to vote, to be seen, to have agency, to feel free – evergreen teenage demands. They’re against discrimination and climate change; they’re for better pay for nurses and leaders who don’t lie. You can’t argue with that, but the mood of po-faced anger sees the spark of activism snuffed out. If all teens feel this defeated, well that’s terrifying. Harking back to childhood comforts – “I used to think you would save me,” one says – that hurts. The young performers acquit themselves well, but what this show needed from its directors was a stronger arc, a harnessing and releasing of the energy gathered on the stage. There are lines that do lunge at the audience of adults. “Why do you pretend not to see what’s happening? Why has there not been a revolution? Why have you lost hope?!” And perhaps the measured tone is intentional, against stereotypes of unruly youthful hysteria. But the text lacks the detail to bring their voices alive. At least, that is, until the scene where they imagine their happy place, complete with coloured eyeliner, cats and dogs, a patch of flowers on an east London walk. With this looser, improvisatory feel, we finally get closer to the performers’ real selves. One boy poetically finds “freckles of hope and love” in the bleak landscape and then you think there might be a future for us after all. At the Place, London, until 13 NovemberTax authorities in Queensland, Australia, have used data to identify citizens likely to default on their tax payments. In Norway, data analysis has helped local government engineers to calculate the weight of trucks that can be supported by an 80-year-old bridge. And in the UK’s NHS, managers are looking to build data analysis into all areas of administration and healthcare. These are the latest examples of how data-driven government is transforming the world’s public services, boosting their effectiveness and improving their engagement with citizens. Public authorities face growing complexity as populations rise and their needs spiral. In the aftermath of the pandemic, attention is turning to the effectiveness of public sector bodies and how they can be run better to produce superior outcomes for users. As Satpal Biant, head of public sector at SAP UK and Ireland, says: “By deploying data-driven strategies that use real-time information and recommendations, public institutions will be able to deliver services faster and more accurately while inspiring greater public confidence. “A data-driven approach will help public services gain a clearer view of the root cause of problems, identify solutions and deploy them quickly. In short, it will allow public services to develop more meaningful and impactful public policy while increasing public engagement and support.” Many sectors of the economy have been revolutionised by data, from media and entertainment to retail and manufacturing, but for a variety of reasons, public services have lagged behind. The key to creating data-driven services lies in reinventing an organisation’s approach to data. Public sector bodies must treat data as a vital asset, similar in importance to their capital assets, such as buildings and infrastructure. Then they must confront the challenge of accessing data locked up in separate departments. Staff are often unable to access the data they need from these silos because of concerns about data privacy rules and internal barriers to data sharing. Biant says: “The good news is that cloud-based data services offer a solution to making data interoperable. The cloud provides a platform for uniting different types of data from a variety of departments and sources, allowing them to be stored centrally and read by anyone in the organisation with access. “Cloud platforms free a public institution from having to deploy vast computational power in-house, allowing a remote data centre operated by the cloud provider to take the strain. The provider will have various back-up plans in place so should the system go down, the data is easily recovered. If you want interoperable data, the cloud offers a pathway to achieving it.” Cloud migration will be transformational for an organisation such as the NHS. Having access to data sets that are interoperable – easily shared across different departments – is vital in improving patient outcomes. Last year’s public accounts committee report Digital Transformation in the NHS concluded that a lack of interoperability and poor information sharing were holding back NHS digital transformation. Biant adds: “With critical information stored across unconnected servers, clinical systems and databases, tracking the patient journey across the NHS is incredibly complex and ultimately patient care suffers. Encouraging greater interoperability should be a huge priority for the health service in 2021.” Hospitals and different departments will then be able to share health records and patient information while having national data on conditions such as Covid-19 and Alzheimer’s disease. This will make analysis, observation and recommendations much more effective. Indiana state in the US, for example, showed the importance of accessing joined-up data as it sought to address the opioid crisis, after deaths from drug overdoses and suicides linked to the use of opioid drugs spiralled. To address the crisis, it made an executive order to instil data sharing across agencies and to shift the culture away from data hoarding by different departments. Using advanced data analysis and visualisation tools, it gained new insights into opioid abuse. Using a single data platform, the state’s officers broke down the silos between different agencies that had prevented them from solving these problems. They set about integrating other data sets and found a connection between pharmacy theft data and opioid abuse hotspots. This led to more questioning of the data and identifying more key information such as the location of deaths and treatment centres. In Norway, too, data analysis is proving its worth. Built 80 years ago, the Stavå Bridge between Oslo and Trondheim now carries loads greater than originally intended. The Norwegian public roads administration has constructed a “digital twin” of the bridge that uses real-time data of passing traffic to model the load weight. Built to support loads of 20 tonnes, the digital twin has shown the bridge can safely handle more than 60 tonnes. The case of tax collection in Queensland is a good example of how data analysis can both improve the effectiveness of systems and at the same time create a stronger engagement with taxpayers themselves. The Australian state’s tax authorities sought to find out which taxpayers were likely to incur debt. Using a machine learning tool – a high-level computing process that quickly finds patterns in large sets of data – they were able to analyse 187m tax records to predict non-payment of taxes. The machine learning tool also identified the likely events and causes for non-payment. Analysing the data has enabled the tax authorities to put in place personalised payment plans and offer help to potential defaulters. This has increased the tax take, while also boosting engagement between citizens and the authorities. Once public services solve the challenges of making data interoperable, they will be well on the road to vastly improving the services they offer. SAP solutions help clients optimise processes, deliver better public value, and give them the agility to change quicklyDigital technology is starting to have a transformational effect on public services. From cloud-based payroll systems for managing wages and holidays to computer programs taking over repetitive admin tasks, public sector staff and managers are finding that automation is making their lives easier. Service users too are benefiting as automation improves efficiency, cuts down on errors and speeds up the delivery of services. With the pandemic having forced a shift to digital working, the time is ripe for public services to get a technology makeover. Ageing systems need updating, while many services could benefit from migrating to cloud platforms. With the prospect of hybrid working becoming the norm as staff work partly in the office and partly from home, public bodies are now looking at how they can get the most from digitising their services. One of the big challenges of the post-pandemic world is hiring and retaining employees in an economy riven by staff shortages, where many people are re-evaluating their careers. Up to one in five public service workers are considering quitting and changing jobs, according to a new report by the TUC. As Satpal Biant, head of public sector at SAP UK and Ireland, says: “The pandemic has meant a massive strain on public sector staff. If public bodies want to engage and retain staff in the future, they need to focus on providing the best employee experience possible. Yet many public sector workers face antiquated processes just to complete everyday activities like expenses. Outdated paper systems that require in-person approvals take time and effort that employees just don’t have. Recognising this time drain is the first step. Implementing the right technology is the next step.” Holding on to staff means making the workplace of today as attractive to employees as possible. Biant says that rather than engaging in the daunting task of implementing whole-scale changes to a public service’s entire system of administration, much can be achieved via small-scale projects. Small changes that digitise individual processes can have a big impact on efficiency and employee satisfaction. Even simple moves, such as deploying expense-management software – which streamlines the process of applying for expenses – can ease the burden on employees, giving them back time and money while also being more cost-efficient for the organisation. The UK public sector employs more than 5 million people, approximately a sixth of the nation’s entire workforce. But the sector has gained a reputation for red tape, repetitive administrative tasks and a lack of innovation. The post-pandemic world offers a chance to reboot public services and make them work more effectively, while freeing up staff to focus on inspiring work rather than getting lost in a sea of bureaucracy. Firing up the latest technology can help public sector organisations as they set about hiring younger workers as their workforce ages and retires. The majority of civil servants are aged 50-59, while the average age of staff at the Department for Work and Pensions is 55. Public services risk missing out on the digital knowhow of younger staff and creating a generation gap where staff lack the skills needed for the future. And as more civil servants retire, they take their knowledge with them. Making the public sector more attractive to new cohorts of workers will be vital to tackling the challenges of the future. But for this to happen, public services will need a technology update. Many UK public sector organisations, including the NHS, are using digital platforms which may be more than 10 years old to manage staff records and payroll, and that’s before you consider the money wasted with legacy tech. This is an opportune moment to migrate services to the cloud. Managing services such as payroll and staff records in the cloud is more effective than running them in-house. Cloud platforms provide the computer power, data storage and data management tools needed to keep services running efficiently. They simplify the challenges of digitisation, freeing organisations from having to store and retrieve data from their own in-house data centres. A move to the cloud is also the gateway to automation, as it centralises data about work processes in one repository. This allows machine-learning algorithms to analyse those work processes and suggest ways of automating them, thus allowing repetitive administrative tasks to be handled by robots or AI systems, liberating staff to get involved in more worthwhile activities. Meanwhile, cloud-based tools can help narrow the gap between what public sector leaders believe employees and citizens feel about their services and what they actually think. A range of “experience management” apps can help managers test out products and services and get feedback from staff and users to perfect the systems. Such tools can combine operational data about costs and productivity with data about how people feel about the services. Technology offers the prospect of freeing employees from drudgery while improving outcomes for users. As the pandemic recedes, this is an ideal time for public services to use the latest technology to re-engage and enthuse their employees. SAP solutions help clients optimise processes, deliver better public value, and give them the agility to change quicklyA mobile app that notifies managers at the Post Office of customer issues across its 11,500 UK stores; an intelligent platform that means firefighters can plan and respond to calls faster in San Diego; and the official contact tracing app in Germany, the Corona-Warn-App, launched in just 50 days and downloaded more than 34.4m times. Across the world, cloud technology is being used in innovative ways to improve, scale and reimagine public sector services. With the world changing at such a fast pace, the pressure to evolve public services to meet society’s new needs is increasing. While historically, leaders have prioritised enhancing the front-end interface to the benefit of users, they’re now starting to realise the benefits of transforming back office applications and end-to-end processes. “Time after time we’ve seen services simplified, unnecessary costs removed and capacity created for staff,” says Satpal Biant, head of public sector at SAP UK and Ireland. “Frontline workers are freed up to carry out crucial roles without being waylaid by cumbersome and time-intensive administrative systems.” He adds: “Transformation is a fact of life in the public sector. As the needs and concerns of citizens change, so too must the services and processes of the governments that serve them.” Officially, the public sector has been encouraged to embrace cloud-based technology for some time. In 2013, the UK government’s Cloud First policy required public sector organisations to evaluate cloud solutions before considering other options. Since the policy’s launch, central government has spent £11bn on cloud services, with a further £2.2bn coming from the wider public sector. Digital transformation isn’t without its challenges. Leaders have to weigh up the risk of migration – and potentially taking an essential service offline – with the benefits that cloud technology will bring. But increasingly, it’s becoming apparent that continuing as normal isn’t going to be sustainable. Ageing infrastructure is struggling to keep up with demand; departments are operating in silos without sharing data and insights across services (which are increasingly interconnected for the public); employees don’t have the skills they need; and the costs of maintaining the status quo are continuing to rise. According to the Cabinet Office, propping up legacy technology costs £2.3bn a year, about half of the government’s total IT spend. For many, the pandemic has provided an opportunity to rip up the rule book, particularly when it comes to the working conditions of employees. A recent survey by the FDA union found that 73% of public servants have seen their workload increase over the past 18 months, and 97% would like the option to work remotely going forward. Introducing hybrid working policies, whereby teams have the freedom to move between the office and home, will require public sector organisations to have the technology in place to enable that to happen. With cloud-based applications, employees can access the data, platforms and insights they need to do productive work, wherever they are. These tools are reliable and flexible, so performance can scale up and down in real time, depending on demand and the volume of data-intensive enquiries. The cloud is also more secure against data loss and theft than data stored on-site, thanks to investment in more robust security by large providers. There are cost benefits too – owning and maintaining applications is expensive but those associated hardware costs and the need for IT support resources are avoided when using the cloud. Organisations will have the flexibility to respond to changes more quickly and make better use of the data collected to track costs and other key metrics. Embracing this technology could be a real turning point in terms of boosting morale and efficiency, Biant says. “Most public sector workers enter the civil service to do important, life-changing work. Too often they spend more time struggling with outdated technology, grappling with physical paperwork or working on manual, repetitive administrative tasks. At a time when public sector organisations are under pressure to streamline costs and resources, while citizen demands are continuing to increase, having the digital tools to enable greater efficiencies and to declutter services could be truly transformative.” There are already examples to support this, across a number of back office business functions. In 2019, HMRC had 78 chatbots and other robotic processes in place, which were able to handle more than 15.7m transactions, leaving employees free to focus on higher-value work. During the pandemic, the Royal Volunteer Service created an automated expense claim service to ensure its 600,000 new volunteers were reimbursed quickly. And in Luxembourg, the European Parliament’s Directorate-General for Finance moved from an outdated, disparate and largely paper-based budget and inventory management system to an integrated cloud-based interface that connected 40 applications. The team has been able to reduce costs, provide a more efficient, streamlined service, and vastly improve the experience of the parliament’s 7,500 employees, who can now work remotely. With the right cloud-based system, applications and infrastructure in place, public sector organisations can focus on the delivery of outcomes and ensure good value for money, Biant adds. “[Cloud] can increase transparency, provide an oversight for accountability, enable continuous improvement of services provided, increase quality, reduce costs and help with quicker responses to policy changes and unplanned events.” SAP solutions help clients optimise processes, deliver better public value, and give them the agility to change quicklyIt was one day during the Covid-19 lockdown last year that Namrata Sundaresan’s phone began ringing non-stop. Sundaresan, the co-founder of Käse, the only artisan cheesemaker in the southern Indian city of Chennai, was bemused by the avalanche of requests for one thing: pecorino cheese. “I had 20 people call me and ask for pecorino,” she said. “I was really surprised because pecorino is not something that a lot of people in India know about.” It turned out a video featuring the Italian pasta dish cacio e pepe was going viral on social media and WhatsApp. Suddenly people across the country wanted to get their hands on some Italian-style hard cheese. “This would have been unthinkable two years ago,” said Sundaresan. India is not known as a cheese-making or cheese-eating nation, with the exception of paneer, the simple cottage cheese that is a staple of Indian cooking. For decades the market was dominated entirely by processed cheese slices and affluent Indians and expats who needed a fromage fix had to rely on expensive and low-quality imported cheese. But recently the Indian market – and palate – has shifted. Across the country, artisan cheesemakers have begun to emerge. Now it is possible to get fresh, Indian-made mozzarella, stracciatella, burrata, gruyère, stilton, halloumi, reblochon, comté, cheddar, feta and parmesan in cities and towns across India. In urban middle-class households, demand for gourmet cheese platters has, in the words of one Delhi supplier, “gone ballistic” this year. Several companies said they had recently sold out of their festive cheese platters over Diwali. Platters with a “masala twist”, featuring cheeses infused with chilli, truffle and garlic flavours, are particularly popular. “Our business has quadrupled in the past two years,” said Amit Mital, 58, an engineer turned cheesemaker who founded the Delhi-based cheese company Kumaoni Blessings. He now hand-makes more than 10 cheeses, including a hard cheese aged for a year, a “smelly reblochon that is really popular” and two cheeses of his own invention. Kumaoni Blessings was one of the cheese companies that flourished during the Covid lockdown, as orders went through the roof. “People have become conscious of what they eat; they are looking for fresh local foods and they don’t want to consume products which are heavily processed,” he said. “People’s eyes have been opened to cheese.” When Sundaresan and her business partner began making cheese in late 2015, they had no experience except a brief lesson in feta- and mozzarella-making during a stay on a farm. But training a team of young women with disabilities in Chennai, their Käse business grew, and now they are hand-making two and a half tonnes of cheese a month, using no preservatives. Sundaresan also travelled to the UK, Spain and Vermont in the US, where she honed her craft under a master of natural cheesemaking. “The whole shift in consumer attitude towards cheese in India has been drastic,” said Sundaresan, who fields daily calls from people in need of mascarpone to make tiramisu, alongside mozzarella, feta, halloumi and a sweet apricot and honey ricotta, their most popular products. This year the company is making an unconventional expansion by collaborating with nomadic goat herders in Gujarat who will sell Käse their fresh goat milk to be locally made into goat milk cheddar and goat milk gouda. They are also working with camel herders in Rajasthan whose camel milk will be made into manchego and alpine-style cheese. This week, for the first time, an Indian cheese won a silver award at the World Cheese Awards in Spain for a Norwegian-style whey cheese that was the invention of Mausam Jotwani Narang, the founder of Eleftheria Cheese in Mumbai. Narang got into cheesemaking as a hobby and now her company is one of the main artisan producers in Mumbai. “I grew up on processed cheese slices,” she said. “So the world of cheese was quite eye-opening for me when I first tried it out.” Narang described her award-winning Brunost whey cheese as “almost like caramel fudge”, bearing some resemblance to the Indian sweet peda. “For me it was a combination of something that’s indigenous to us and something that’s global.” While she was adamant that Indian cheese would “soon be on the world cheese map”, she also acknowledged that artisan cheese remained a highly aspirational food in India, with prices far beyond what an average or even middle-class Indian could afford. Artisan cheesemaking is not without its challenges in India. While it operated under the radar for the past few years, cheesemakers were freely labelling their cheeses with European names. But several said they had been served legal notices by the Italian embassy over the use of the name “parmesan” and other protected designations, while the La Gruyère estate in Switzerland has recently sent letters to all cheesemakers in India telling them they are not allowed to use the name. Many have since opted to call their cheese “alpine style” to avoid legal difficulties. Few have access to dark, deep cellars to age their cheese and in Chennai, a cheese that would take a year to age in the UK takes six months in the south Indian heat. The country’s lack of reliable cold chain also makes transporting fresh cheese difficult, driving up prices. And while India is the world’s largest producer of dairy, cheesemakers struggle to find the right quality of milk, from grass-fed cows that have not been given any hormones. Darima Farms, an artisan cheesemaker in the Kumaon Himalayas in Uttarakhand, gave cows to villagers who look after them in their homes. The farm now buys back the milk from more than 700 households, totalling about 1,000 litres a day, to make more than two tonnes of cheese a month. It took two years of experimenting to perfect the recipes but now its team is made up of young women from the local village who are making traditional mountain cheeses such as gruyère and montasio as well as three of their own invention, including one variety called the “chilli bomb”. The co-founder, Arvind Chawla said that “in terms of authenticity, they are as good as European cheeses”. “I think Indians finally understand cheese,” said Chawla. “Maybe not as well as the English or the French or the Italians or the Swiss, but they are getting there. I believe this market will boom in the next 10 years.” • This article was corrected on 25 November 2021 to remove the statement that Arvind Chawla travelled to Italy to learn from a cheese master.Good morning. Donald Trump has succeeded in an 11th-hour attempt to temporarily stay the release of sensitive White House records on the US Capitol attack. Washington DC’s federal appeals court on Thursday granted Trump’s request to temporarily stop the National Archives from handing over the records to the bipartisan House select committee that is investigating the 6 January insurrection. After the US district judge Tanya Chutkan’s ruling that the former president could not claim executive privilege over the documents, Trump was granted a temporary injunction. What is Trump doing? Delaying. The Democrat-led committee may have to finish its investigation before next year’s midterms, in which Republicans are tipped to take control of the US House. When is the hearing? The court will hear oral arguments on 30 November. Who are the judges? The DC circuit court chooses three judges at random to consider the appeal: it will be Patricia Millett, Robert Wilkins and Ketanji Brown Jackson. US fails to sign up to Cop26’s boldest pledges The US has failed to commit to some of Cop26’s toughest climate pledges, with its signature noticeably absent on promises to phase out coalmining, to end the use of internal combustion engines and to compensate poorer countries. This is despite the Biden administration proclaiming the US’s status as a climate leader and underlining its willingness to undo the damage caused by the previous administration. It comes as Democrats express confidence that their pared-down $1.75tn spending bill, which contains landmark climate measures, will clear Congress next week. The weakness of the proposed targets agreed at the climate summit means leaders will have to renegotiate next year, the three architects of the Paris agreement said. Current national plans would lead to 2.4C of heating, according to analysis by Climate Action Tracker – a far cry from 1.5C. How many committed to phasing out coalmining? More than 40 countries signed up to the pledge, excluding the US, China and India. The latter two combined burn about two-thirds of the world’s coal, and the US still generates about a fifth of its electricity from it. Meanwhile, delegates from countries where the climate emergency is already “an everyday reality” have spoken about how they are affected by anxiety over the looming disaster. These maps show how Republicans are blatantly rigging elections Before next year’s midterms, politicians are undertaking the once-a-decade process of editing the nation’s political maps: the “invisible scalpel” known as gerrymandering that shapes the terrain and tenor of US politics. The US is almost unique in allowing partisan lawmakers to redraw maps for their own advantage. This year Republicans can redraw the lines of 187 congressional districts, while Democrats can do so in 75. Here are four maps showing the key ways that Republicans will seek to increase their chances of winning back the US House next November: Dismantling a Democratic district. Diluting the influence of Black voters. Weakening diverse suburbs. Regrouping Democrats voters into non-competitive districts. In other news … The judge presiding over Kyle Rittenhouse’s homicide trial has been thrust into the spotlight after he admonished prosecutors and his phone was heard ringing with a song played at Donald Trump’s rallies. Wisconsin’s longest-serving circuit judge, Bruce Schroeder, also queried the veracity of iPad footage ahead of the defense resting its case. Netflix has cut a Latina housekeeper character from its upcoming series Uncoupled, starring Neil Patrick Harris, after a veteran actor described the characterization as “hurtful and derogatory”. Ada Maris wrote an open letter expressing offense at the stereotypes reinforced by the role. The US and European delegations on the UN security council have called for action against Belarus, condemning Minsk for endangering migrants “for political purposes”. Poland says Belarus has lured 2,000 migrants in order to send them over its border in revenge for EU sanctions. The American journalist Danny Fenster has been jailed for 11 years in Myanmar after being convicted on a range of charges previously described by the US government as “profoundly unjust”. Stat of the day: AstraZeneca has sold more than $2.2bn of Covid vaccine this year AstraZeneca is set to move to “modest profitability” after selling more than $2.2bn of its Covid-19 vaccine in the first nine months of this year. The drugmaker has committed to providing the shot on a not-for-profit basis during the pandemic so far, and sales in the year’s final three months “are expected to be a blend of the original pandemic agreements and new orders”, it said. Don’t miss this: Placebo talk gender fluidity, queerness and climate apocalypse Twenty-five years on from their debut album, Placebo are back. On the band’s eighth studio album, singer Brian Molko – who “cultivated a gendered and sexual expansiveness” decades before the term “non-binary” became commonly used – turns his attention to climate disaster and surveillance culture. Bleak as that may sound, co-writer and multi-instrumentalist Stefan Olsdal reflects on Never Let Me Go’s exploration of the theme of “love in the time of cholera”. Or, as Sasha Geffen puts it, “how we hold each other through the ruin”. Last Thing: Merkel’s star doppelganger steps down alongside chancellor Germany’s leading Angela Merkel impersonator, Ursula Wanecki, is pretty much the chancellor’s spitting image. But after 16 years as Merkel’s double, Wanecki says she will hang up the blazers when the 67-year-old retires next month. The lookalike doesn’t expect people will stop shouting “hallo Angie” at her “for some time to come” though. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendMohammed Nasheed made global headlines in 2009 by convening the world’s first underwater cabinet meeting. As president of the Maldives, a nation of 1,138 low-lying islands south-west of India, Nasheed donned scuba gear and descended beneath the waves with 13 government ministers. The officials used waterproof pencils to sign a document urging the world to slash carbon dioxide emissions so the Maldives would not disappear beneath rising seas. “If the Maldives cannot be saved today, we do not feel that there is much of a chance for the rest of the world,” Nasheed told reporters. Today, Nasheed is the speaker of parliament in the Maldives and the global south’s ambassador to the Cop26 climate conference. He continues to warn that anything more than 1.5C of global warming “is a death sentence” for his country and other low-lying regions around the world. To illustrate what the last 12 years of rising temperatures have brought, he recalls the lagoon where he held that famous underwater cabinet meeting. “If you go to the same spot [today], you will see the reef is far more dead, bleached, than it was,” Nasheed said in Glasgow this week. Dead reefs lead to coastal erosion, which wipes out homes and schools and contaminates freshwater sources; the Maldives now spends 30% of its government budget adapting to climate change, including vast sums to desalinate water, he added. These are some of the human realities behind “loss and damage,” a phrase suddenly in vogue at this week’s Cop26 UN climate conference. It refers to irreversible harms that result from the higher global temperatures caused by burning fossil fuels and related human activities. The dead reefs of the Maldives, for example, will never come back to life as long as oceans are so hot – they will remain bleached for decades to come, even if countries manage to limit temperature rise to 1.5C. It’s scandalous it has taken so long for global climate negotiations to acknowledge the reality of “loss and damage”. Worse yet, even now, Cop26 proceedings are not calling on the main authors of the climate emergency – ExxonMobil, Chevron, Shell, BP, and other fossil fuel companies – to pay for the immense human suffering and economic harm they have caused. “The principle is easy enough: these companies have to admit they are responsible for loss and damage, and they should pay for it,” said Saleemul Huq, the director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development in Bangladesh. The formal absence of calls for compensation from fossil fuel companies is not surprising at Cop26; a first draft of the conference’s agreement did not even include the words “fossil fuels” (though a later draft does reference the need to phase out coal and subsidies for fossil fuels). Instead, Cop26’s discussion assumes governments of wealthy countries will cover the costs. Here, too, the reasoning is straightforward: rich countries have emitted the vast majority of the gases overheating the planet, so they should pay for the resulting harm. Paying for loss and damage, however, is not a proposition most rich country governments have embraced. Scotland is a shining exception: Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, announced on Thursday that Scotland will provide £3m for loss and damage, an example she urged other nations to follow. Meanwhile, rich countries are still lagging on a related obligation they have accepted: providing poorer countries $100bn a year to shift to clean energy and adapt to worsening impacts. But adaptation is distinct from loss and damage. “Adaptation is what people do to protect themselves,” for example, desalinating water, said Simon Anderson of the International Institute for Environment and Development. “Loss and damage is what happens to people, with or without adaptation.” As the Climate Vulnerable Forum’s ambassador to Cop26, Nasheed says loss and damage could determine the conference’s success or failure. “I call on the companies to pay for the damage that’s been done, and for governments to make them pay,” he said of the fossil fuel industry. “Unless they do that, it will be tough to get the confidence of vulnerable countries that these talks are meaningful.” In a just world, the executives of fossil fuel companies would have to change places with people in the Maldives and experience how it feels to lose the reefs that protect their homes, schools, fresh water, and what Nasheed called “2,000 years of culture”. Short of that, doesn’t simple morality demand that the companies pay for the massive loss and damage they have wrought? This story is published as part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of news outlets strengthening coverage of the climate story. Mark Hertsgaard is Covering Climate Now’s executive directorIt was 11.30pm, and hour two of struggling with American Airlines’ third-party app, when I started to give up hope. It hadn’t been this bad on the way over. Before flying from New York to London, I had downloaded the Covid security app, uploaded my vaccine and passenger locator forms, and waited for authorisation to fly. It was onerous but straightforward and the following day, at JFK, I sailed past lines of people still waving their paperwork. “Should’ve downloaded the app,” I thought smugly. That was on Friday, three days before the US reopened its borders to British passport-holders. The following morning, after a two-thirds empty flight, as per most international travel during Covid, I landed at Heathrow. It was empty, but apart from that still very much Heathrow. There was something reassuring about the Covid test authorities sending me to the wrong test centre at Terminal 5, and when queried, informing me – with the sadness of those conveying an immutable reality – “Our systems need updating.” Ah, good to be home. Americans have been able to enter the UK since July, but it has been almost two years since British and European travellers have been permitted reciprocal entry into the US. It is, along with so many other consequences of the pandemic, an extraordinary breach in life as we knew it that over time has faded to normal. Newborn babies unseen; birthdays and holidays celebrated remotely; grandparents barely able to recognise children who, toddlers before the pandemic, are now twice the size and practically running their own businesses. When the White House confirmed last month that the rules would change, and Brits and Europeans would be allowed in, it was the best news many of us had had in a long time. On Monday morning, British Airways and Virgin Atlantic arranged synchronised departures from Heathrow – a sort of lumbering civilian version of the Red Arrows – and we would, once again, be off. Or rather, those of us who could figure out the pre-flight paperwork would be off. The first sign of trouble for my return flight to JFK was when an email arrived from the airline’s customer service department offering passengers flying on AA flight 101 on Monday morning a $600 voucher to change their flights. Prior to the pandemic, about 3.8 million British people visited the United States annually and now the travel ban was over, they all seemed to be booked on my 9.30am flight. Words long unheard surfaced from the past, to send chills down the spine of every traveller: “This is a very full flight, please check large carry-on bags as there is limited space in the overhead luggage bins.” But I had downloaded the app! The app would save me. OK, the American Airlines check-in page was totally confusing, but I’m competent, I could definitely do this. I opened VeriFly, the pre-check app, and spent 45 minutes trying to find my flight, before erasing and redownloading the app. I found the flight. I clicked on the dropdown menu to upload my negative Covid test. Hmmm. The date of my test, taken two days earlier, wasn’t offered as an option. Panicking, I double checked the US state department website, to ensure I hadn’t misunderstood the requirements. I was comfortably inside the three-day deadline. Oh, well. I’ll just put the wrong date on it, I thought. They probably won’t check – United States border control is, after all, famously relaxed – and what could possibly go wrong? The app crashed; then it crashed again. Like something from a seance, there was an almost physical sense of the hundreds of people all invisibly swearing while trying to check in. If you are flying from Britain to the US, a boarding pass won’t be generated until evidence of your vaccination and pre-flight Covid test have been authorised. For 20 minutes, I sat refreshing my phone. “Pending,” it said. At 4am, I woke up and checked the app. “Error,” read the notice. The date of my Covid test did not match the date I had clicked on the app. Oh, now suddenly everyone’s systems are working. I felt like John Cleese in the manic final moments of Clockwise. I considered whether the phrase, “it’s not my fault,” might work at the airport. I wondered if there was some special lane for people whose kids were in tenuous care in their absence and had to get back to retrieve them. Finally, I clicked on the dropdown menu, found new test dates, resubmitted the info and went to sleep. Two hours later, I had a green tick. The scene at Heathrow was chaotic. British people wandered about clutching fistfuls of printouts, in search of someone to take them. “I pre-screened on the app,” I told a check-in clerk, preening, and he gave me a look of pure sympathy. “We don’t have the staff for an extra desk for pre-checks,” he said and indicated the conga-line of paper-waving Brits. “I’m afraid you’ll have to wait.” And there it was, pre-Covid life, fully up and running and ready to receive us. • Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnist‘I’m not going to let anyone use you … I’m going to help you and everything’s going to be all right.” There are three types of people in this world. Those who, upon hearing such a pronouncement, cling to it and its utterer like a drowning man to driftwood. Then there are those who would run – fast and far and never looking back. And then, of course, there are those who would say such a thing. In Apple TV+’s The Shrink Next Door, Marty (Will Ferrell) is the first kind – a 40-year-old bundle of borderless neuroses, a manchild in over his head at work and everywhere else. His sister Phyllis (Kathryn Hahn, continuing to prove the notion that everything should have more Kathryn Hahn in it) is the second kind. Tough and sceptical, the only fool she suffers in her life is Marty, and none too gladly. It is she who puts Marty the way of Dr Ike (Paul Rudd), a therapist and the utterer in question. Over the next 30 years, he inveigles his way into Marty’s life, his finances and his home (or at least his summer home in the Hamptons), to the painful incredulity of Phyllis who – as anyone who has witnessed a friend or family member being colonised by a narcissist will know – is powerless to do anything about it, even before she is ostracised from their cult of two. This eight-part drama series is based on a true story, first told in a podcast of the same name by Joe Nocera, and has a lot stacked in its favour. Casting the innately charming, funny Rudd against type is what the world – and surely Rudd – has been waiting for. Pairing him with his frequent partner-in-comedy Ferrell to give their usual dynamic a toxic twist has plenty of potential. And the unpicking of why victims like Marty and perpetrators like Ike behave as they do is endlessly intriguing. Alas, not much of this is exploited in The Shrink Next Door. Ike takes advantage of Marty from virtually the moment they meet and before either have been established as characters, which makes it hard to credit that one could be so unsubtle or the other so gullible. And because Marty acquiesces so quickly, the story rapidly becomes repetitive. Ike’s abuses of his patient – or friend, as Marty would call himself – vary only in degree, not kind. By the end of their first session Marty is on the hook and paying for the doctor’s purchases at the frame store they stroll to. The grift and the gouging get bigger as time goes on and Ike discovers the depths of his friend/client/mark’s pockets. Soon he has a role as consultant at the fabrics factory Marty has inherited from his father and – as we know from the opening scene of episode one – will become installed at his Hamptons house. But everything else remains largely static, especially as Ike isolates Marty from Phyllis and anyone else who might let daylight in on the lucrative relationship he has managed to create. Ike’s wife voices occasional doubts but is never a force to be reckoned with. There appears to be no real malevolence at Ike’s core, just pure unexplained narcissism, and Ferrell is too plodding a dramatic actor to bring much nuance to Marty’s vulnerability. Still, the sheer size and nerve of the three-decade scam will keep you going to the end. And if a few potential victims see their psychology mirrored in Marty and learn to save themselves from the Ikes of this world, that will be very much to the good.Monday morning in the small Essex town of Coggeshall, and in an unassuming building that used to be a laundry, a man named Barnaby is trying to sound like a horse. Trying and succeeding, uncannily. Not neighing or whinnying, just making the sound of the hooves on the ground. In a big screen on the wall of a windowless room is an armoured knight astride a white warhorse. It’s Richard III, as it happens, accompanied by a gaggle of guards, also armoured and mounted. It’s a scene from The Lost King, Stephen Frears’s upcoming film about the woman who, after 30 years of looking, discovered Richard’s remains under a Leicester car park. Barnaby – Barnaby Smyth – squats in front of the screen, staring intently at it. In front of him on the floor is a square of compacted earth with a microphone pointed at it, like a heron waiting to strike. Smyth has got some vegetation handy, a few vines and autumnal leaves, but he has pushed it to the side; he doesn’t need it for this scene, just the hard ground. In each hand he has spindles from the centre of rolls of old 35mm movie film, wrapped in gaffer tape. When, on the screen, King Richard turns his white courser and moves off, Barnaby hits the earth with his spindles exactly in sync with the hooves, first at an accelerating walk, then a little stumble into a canter before settling into a rhythmic gallop. Ignoring Barnaby and watching the screen, you would swear you were hearing a heavy horse galloping off across Bosworth Field, in 1485. It’s perfect; the only disappointment is that Smyth is not using coconuts to make it. “Coconuts can be a bit hollow-sounding,” he says. “These are just more …” and he hits the ground with them again. More like the sound of a galloping horse, clearly. Welcome to the weird and rather wonderful world of foley. Named after Jack Donovan Foley, who pioneered many of the techniques in the 1920s, foley is the addition of everyday sound effects to film or television in post-production – incidental sounds such as the squeak of a chair, the chink of bottles in a fridge door, the swish of clothes or a swinging handbag. And footsteps, lots of footsteps, both human and non-human. “It steers the narrative, where to look, how to feel,” Smyth says. “Foley adds that focus to draw the attention of the audience.” Feet First Sound is a foley studio, and Barnaby Smyth is a foley artist and supervisor. Keith Partridge – headphoned and sitting at a big mixing desk at the back of the room – is a foley engineer. Basically, Smyth makes noises and Partridge records them and fiddles with them to make them better. The room is an odd mix: part hi-tech modern recording studio, part junk shop. There are trays and trolleys of bottles and glasses for chinking and rattling, books and pens (although if Smyth wants to make the noise of a really nice fountain pen, he’ll often use a bicycle tyre pressure gauge, which sounds heavier and classier and actually more pen-like). And there are shoes, shelf upon shelf, hundreds of them. This smart pair of brogues Smyth wore to add to Gary Oldman’s steps as Churchill in Darkest Hour. They recorded in Churchill’s War Rooms in Westminster, for added authenticity, as well as here in the studio. And these dowdy, black, size 10 heels are the ones he wore to dub the hurrying typists in the same film, as well as scurrying servants in Downton Abbey. A big pair of army boots? Nazis, naturally – in the BBC drama World on Fire, also the movies Suite Française and The Aftermath; they do a lot of Nazis. If this room is a junk shop, then the one next door is full-on car boot sale – a huge space, jam-packed full of pretty much everything. There are banks of drawers labelled “medical”, “belts”, “sports”, “police”, “bones”, “makeup”, “gloves”. He shows me how he makes the sound of a pigeons flying away by flapping a pair of leather gloves together. He did it for a recent episode of Baptiste. There are crates filled with different kinds of ground to walk on: leaves, bark, forest soil, mossy soil. Smyth shows me how to make the noise of boot on snow by twisting a pillowcase full of cornflour. You want scrunchier, more compact snow? Add dishwasher salt. On the wall are real weapons: decommissioned rifles and machine guns, swords, axes (“We’re all set for the zombie apocalypse,” he says, cheerfully). On the floor are piles of old tech: telephones, keyboards, the ZX Spectrum used in Charlie Brooker’s Black Mirror: Bandersnatch. It’s Marie Kondo’s worst nightmare: nothing gets thrown away. Even the cardboard packaging that the mixing desk came in was kept. With a rubber mat on top, it made the sound of the gym floor in the boxing film Journeyman. For the punches, Smyth held a microphone in his mouth and hit himself in the stomach. Period drama is peak foley. “It’s great in terms of sound: there’s so much to get our teeth into in those creaky environments.” They do sometimes get to come out of the studio, to record in real stately homes. Fantasy is fun, too. They’ve just finished doing a series called The Wheel of Time, an adaptation of Robert Jordan’s epic novels, which Amazon is hoping will be the next Game of Thrones. Lots of armour, blood and guts. Do they do much with watermelons? “There is this presumption that we spend all day smashing up watermelons,” Smyth says. But yes, they have been known to. There was a film called The Upside of Anger that had a shocking exploding-head scene and they smashed up a watermelon for that. “All the gloopy bits are brilliant for the sound of bits of brain hitting the floor and the wall. If you really need to up the ante you can get a pomegranate, slice it in half and gorge out the innards; it sounds like flesh, gooey with a bit of sinew in there. And celery is like bone crunching.” They make happier noises of the flesh, too. Smyth kisses the back of his own hand. “You get into the mood, I’m kissing whoever is on screen, I’ve got to think about the angle and whether I’m kissing the neck or whatever.” And it sometimes goes beyond kissing. They did a series called The Great, with Elle Fanning as Empress Catherine II and Nicholas Hoult as the Emperor Peter III, who were at it a lot. Smyth slaps his own upper arms rhythmically to give a flavour. “It’s just a job, I’m doing a sex scene. You break it down – I’m going to do the skin, I’m going to do the sheets – it’s an unremarkable thing.” Right, quite enough of that. Time to get back to work, and to Bosworth in 1485. There’s still plenty of foley to add to the scene. After doing Richard’s horse, Smyth and Partridge need to go back through the scene several times to add the sounds of armour and reins, plus those of the other knights on the screen, their horses and standards. For the armour, Smyth wears a gauntlet (eBay, £18) which he rubs against his chain mail (an old butcher’s apron), while his other hand shakes Partridge’s favourite prop of all, a folding metal steamer basket. Again, he does this perfectly in time with Richard’s riding movements. Now there are more hooves to add. It can’t be that hard; I need to have a go. I’ll do the hooves of one of the other horses, while Smyth does some armour jangling. I’m hitting the earth with the gaffer-taped discs, trying to keep in time with the horse on the screen. I’m thinking it sounds pretty good, perhaps a tiny bit uneven, but maybe I’ll get to go to the premiere, or get a credit at least … “Not for that horse you don’t,” Partridge says from his desk, “that drunk horse.” Smyth jumps aboard the mockery wagon. “A crazed horse, with BSE, just before it’s shot …” Yeah, all right, I was only trying to help. I’m not sure horses even get BSE. But it’s possible my horse won’t make the final cut. Smyth and Partridge don’t get to go to a lot of premieres, anyway. They just send off what they’ve done and the director and the sound director pick and choose what they want of it. As for the viewing public, they are mostly unaware that foley even exists; that there are people like Barnaby Smyth and Keith Partridge out there, smashing up watermelons. That’s OK with Smyth. “Not to be noticed is really the biggest compliment we can have.”Take things offline Teen relationships often start online, so how do you progress to a real-world date? The first step is to make your chat more meaningful, says Charlene Douglas, an intimacy coach and sexual health educator. “Online, young people can banter for hours, so try to move the conversation on. Rather than just talking about celebs, or who said what at school, bring those situations back to what you have in common.” Then introduce voice messaging and video calls, “to see if you really like the vibe of a person and to check they’re human”, says Hardeep Dhadda, presenter of the relationships podcast Thank You, Next. Her co-presenter, Raj Pander, suggests watching something at the same time on Netflix. Then: “Once you know you like and trust this person enough to go on a real-life date – ask them.” Put safety first Be sure they are who they say they are (Pander suggests checking tagged pics on Instagram), and meet in a public place, telling someone when and where you’re meeting. Pander says: “Not everyone is a serial killer, but it’s good practice to act as if they could be.” Manage your emotions Butterflies in your stomach? Heart racing? “It’s normal to feel that way,” says Chloe Goddard McLoughlin, a psychotherapist and relationship counsellor. “Just tell the other person that you’re nervous, because I guarantee they will be as well.” Pander, who is 37 and a self-confessed shy dater, says: “I plan a phone call with a friend before so they can prep me. We always have a contingency plan if anything gets weird, so if I text them they’ll call me so I can pretend there’s an emergency and leave.” Be chatty “Try to keep it light and talk about things you’re passionate about, as when you do that, your whole energy lights up,” says Douglas. Dhadda agrees: “If you like something – animals, sustainable fashion or Billie Eilish – let your date know. How can someone get to know you if you’re holding back or pretending to be someone else?” But there are no-nos: “If someone brought up sex on a first date, I’d be put off.” Know how to end a date “Be polite,” says Dhadda. “Consider their feelings, as they may have had the best time ever.” Pander agrees: “Tell them you had fun – even if you didn’t – look at the time and say you’d better be off.” If they message asking to meet again, be honest but respectful. Douglas recommends replying: “You’re a great person but I just don’t think we’re suited.” Don’t sweat your first kiss “It’s part of our cultural mythology that the first kiss is the best, but for most people it’s pretty average, so don’t sweat it,” says Goddard McLoughlin. Remember, a kiss should only happen when you’re both comfortable and have given consent. “It may take the sexiness away, but saying ‘can I kiss you?’ means you have permission and haven’t misread signals,” says Douglas. Think about when to make things official When do you change your status or update your profile pic to a cute couple selfie? For Pander, once you’re sure you like and trust the person, you can ask what they think about making things official. But she warns: “Do you really need them in your profile pics or online status? You’re your own person: don’t let your relationship take over your identity.” Work out if you’re ready to have sex “First, know the facts about sex, intimacy and pleasure,” says Douglas. “Speak to a trusted older family member, whether that’s a sister or an aunt. Don’t feel pressured into anything you don’t feel comfortable with. Douglas says of her work at a girls’ school: “A lot of the girls felt they should lose their virginity on their 16th birthday. Sometimes they regretted it because it wasn’t pleasurable or they felt used. Just because the law says you’re ‘of age’ doesn’t mean you have to do anything.” Learn how to boost your confidence Just over half of 11- to 16-year-olds worry often about how they look, but try shifting your focus. “Imagine the most confident version of yourself,” says Natasha Devon, who gives talks at schools and universities on mental health and body image. “Think about how you stand, move and feel when you’re relaxed and self-assured, and emulate that. When we look at someone, we see them as a whole package.” Stay aware of consent “People think if they’ve said yes once, they can’t change their mind,” says Goddard McLoughlin. “But you have the right to say no at any point.” Douglas adds: “If you’ve said yes to a kiss, you have the right to say, midway through, ‘I want to stop.’ Similarly, if you feel ready for sex but when it comes down to it you don’t want to do it, that needs to be respected.” If you’re on the receiving end of a no, don’t feel like a horrible person, says Douglas. “Remind yourself it’s a positive thing your partner is able to share this.” Think before you sext A recent Ofsted report found that 80% of girls feel under pressure to send sexual images. Douglas says: “Once you send a picture, you can’t control where it goes, who sees it, or whether it’s shared. If it’s shared on the internet, it can stay there for ever.” Understand how to handle rejection If you’ve been rejected, Douglas says, “allow yourself to feel that pain. Be around people who are positive and who love you, and do one good thing for yourself every day.” Goddard McLoughlin suggests shifting your perspective: “Often it’s about the other person, not you.” Avoid being spooked by ghosting For Pander, ghosting is evidence that someone isn’t worth your precious energy. If someone suddenly cuts you off, it means they “weren’t brave enough to have an honest conversation with you. You deserve better.” Despite the crushing pain, reframe it as a lesson, says Douglas. “It teaches you the kind of person you want to be with, how you want to be treated and how you want to feel in a relationship. In future you won’t even remember the person’s name. I say that from experience.” Don’t use porn to educate yourself Recent research found that 45% of young people who watched porn did so, in part, to “learn” about sex, but Douglas says: “Run a mile when it comes to being educated from porn, because it isn’t an honest representation.” If you feel clueless in the bedroom, she recommends educational websites around intimacy, like climax.com or OMGYes. If you must watch porn, use the ethical kind, says Douglas: “The site makelovenotporn.tv is diverse, real and respectful. You’ll see consent, and there are elements about the importance of touch, foreplay and eye contact.” You will also see different races and sexualities, and real bodies. … and don’t let Covid get you down There’s nothing like a pandemic to make dating even more stressful. But according to Dr Christian Jessen, life must go on: “If a young person asked me if they should go on a first date, I would say yes. Teenagers need to carry on having as normal a life as possible.” To mask or not to mask? Jessen says: “Follow the guidelines of wherever you are.” Maybe pop it in a message to your date beforehand, so there’s no surprises. Want to ask about someone’s vaccination status? Jessen says go for it: “It encourages more adult conversations down the line about things like STIs.” Don’t get too fixated on pandemic fears, he adds. “It’s hard to separate dating anxiety from Covid anxiety, but don’t hide behind Covid as an excuse not to date. If you’re young, generally fit and healthy, meeting one person doesn’t put you at high risk – and meeting them outdoors even less so.” And remember, dating should be fun … It’s about meeting different people, connecting with them and figuring out what makes you tick. “There will be firsts, there will be laughs and there might be a few tears, but try to shake off any pressure and have fun,” says Pander. “I laugh at my teen dating experiences now – and I’m sure you will, too.” Styling by Peter Bevan Models wear: blue hoodie, Martine Rose; colourblock shirt and shorts, Ahluwalia; locket necklace and bracelet, Monica Vinader; rings, pawnlondon.com; full tracksuit, Wales Bonner by Matches Fashion; tracksuit and track jacket, House of SunnyEnrico Rossi was among the protesters in Bardonecchia when the Italian government decided in February to maintain a Covid shutdown on ski resorts just hours before the slopes were due to reopen. Rossi described the loss of the ski season as a tragedy for the small town and others in the Susa Valley, Piedmont, especially after the 2020 season had also been cut short. But as the resort prepares to reopen in early December, he is cautiously optimistic. “Three times during last year’s season we were ready to start – we prepared the slopes, hired staff – only for it all to get cancelled,” said Rossi, who is vice-president of Bardonecchia’s tourism consortium. “It was very disappointing. But the prospects for this year are looking good. Bookings are coming in, mainly from Italy, and the pandemic situation is different; let’s hope nothing changes.” Some Italian ski slopes have already opened, albeit with the requirement to present the Covid-19 health pass when using ski lifts, reduced capacity in cabins and social-distancing measures at ticket offices. Face masks must be worn on ski lifts and in “common areas” as part of the protocols agreed by the Italian ski industry. “Customers aren’t complaining – the desire to ski is much greater than the annoyance of having to abide by the rules,” said Herbert Tovagliari, the president and CEO of Cervinia Spa, a travel and tourism company in the Aosta valley. Tovagliari said Cervinia, a popular resort close to the Swiss border, has had a high number of weekend visitors since reopening on 16 October, while hotels are seeing strong demand for the coming months. “We’re seeing decisively high numbers for the start of the season, which gives us hope,” he added. The ski season is a huge financial resource for Italy and many villages across the mountainous northern and central regions depend on it for survival. The economic cost to the sector and affiliated businesses of the shutdown last year was estimated by Coldiretti, the farmers’ association, at €10bn (£8.6bn). “In a standard year we would make €28m. In 2020 we made €2.5m, and that was only from tourism during the summer period,” said Tovagliari. Rubbing salt into the wound, snowfall across Italy’s ski resorts last year was bountiful. “The snow was brilliant. We had a beautiful winter, but few people could enjoy it,” said Rossi. Cervinia, at an altitude of 2,050 metres, is so far operating on a mix of natural and artificial snow, while resorts in Bardonecchia are stocking up on the artificial variety just in case. Ski resorts in Piedmont’s Lanzo valley, which sit at an altitude of between 1,300 metres and 1,900 metres, are yet to see any snow. Livio Barello, president of the consortium of tourism operators in the area, hopes that will change as resorts across the valley prepare to open in early December, especially as there has been a boom in bookings over the Christmas period. “We’ll needs years to recuperate the economic losses from the last couple of seasons, but the signs are very positive,” said Barello. Barello works at Rifugio Lunella, a mountain hut in Viù, a town of about 1,000 inhabitants. Businesses benefited from a Piedmont region-wide holiday voucher scheme that offered visitors three nights for the price of one, an initiative that brought in a significant number of people in the summer and has supported some of the bookings this winter. “Everything revolves around tourism, it’s the soul of the economy,” said Barello. When the ski season was cancelled last year, Gianni Poncet, the mayor of Sestriere, feared the village of just over 900 inhabitants in the Susa valley would turn into a ghost town. The resort has 217 miles (350km) of slopes, and before the pandemic the population would swell to 20,000 a day during the ski period. Today, Poncet is feeling much more upbeat. “The atmosphere is much better this year, thank God,” he said. “We’re working hard to make sure everything goes well and have a plan to reopen safely. The Covid rules are still there, but these must be respected so that the season can properly start.”England have been rocked by Covid again before Saturday’s autumn clash against Australia, with Ellis Genge ruled out after testing positive and the rest of the squad waiting on further results. Genge’s positive PCR test was confirmed on Friday morning and his absence comes after his fellow loosehead Joe Marler tested positive early in the week, leaving the 21-year-old Bevan Rodd coming into the side for a Test debut, having been called into camp on Wednesday. The situation for Eddie Jones’s side could get worse if any more players test positive. England were in a similar situation before last Saturday’s victory over Tonga, only for the game to go ahead once the squad got the all-clear hours before kick-off, with Jonny May afterwards admitting he feared it would be cancelled. In that instance, Owen Farrell’s Covid case proved a false positive, whereas the Rugby Football Union has accepted that Marler and Genge – the latter must also miss next Saturday’s match against South Africa – have contracted the virus. If the outbreak spreads further it would be significantly more disruptive and the fact that it has hit the front-row ranks makes Jones’s headache all the more acute. Trevor Davison, who has one cap, is set to provide loosehead cover from the bench, but World Rugby regulations dictate that all three front-row positions are covered by replacements. England have not sent for cover and it is understood any late call-ups would be required to take a PCR test or two lateral flow tests. “We just treat it as normal now,” said Jones. “Every day is an adventure and we’re on bit of a rollercoaster at the moment. Covid keeps coming. We just accept it and get on with it. “Everyone has mixed emotions. I was watching the players come through this morning. Some are disappointed for Ellis, others are angry and others just want to get on with it. We had a short team meeting this morning. We got everyone back on the same page and just got on with it. It’s a chance to show what strength we have as a team. Now we support these two young guys coming through and everyone will just have to step up a little bit.” England have already tightened their Covid protocols, with all squad members remaining in camp for the whole week. The players were set to briefly be allowed home after this match but that is no longer expected to be the case. Nonetheless, with the players and staff meeting the 85% vaccination threshold, the protocols have been relaxed in comparison to during the Six Nations. The RFU has not been able to identify the source of the outbreak but Jones believes it is “just a fact of life”, given Covid-19 remains prevalent in the community. “It’s not going to go away, it will keep coming and we just have to deal with it,” he added. “Every time we have a case we deal with it better and deal with it emotionally and operationally better. It is just a fact of life at the moment. You just have to watch [the news] in the morning and see the number of cases in the UK. We are doing everything we can to safeguard the team against it and try and use common sense. We’re keeping strict regulations about what we do and we’re pleased with the discipline of the players so it’s just one unfortunate consequence of the pandemic.” Farrell, meanwhile, insisted England would not be distracted by the outbreak as they seek to claim an eighth straight win against the Wallabies. “It is very disappointing as an individual, having to isolate and be on your own,” he said. “You can go through different emotions. It’s more frustrating if you’re the one that’s had the positive test. We have to be able to deal with it, we have to adapt, and so far the lads have been brilliant at that. We are looking forward to showing that it’s not touching us in terms of our mentality.”To Bari Weiss and the founders of the new University of Austin, I write to you today to offer my heartfelt congratulations on inaugurating a courageous new institution of higher learning, the University of Austin in Texas (UATX). As someone who has spent his career in the gilded halls of the academe (or, in my case, the ugly two-tone hallways of peeling paint found in my public institution), I have witnessed exactly the kind of destructive groupthink that your new president, Pano Kanelos, bravely writes about in his essay announcing this new and much-needed venture. How refreshing it is to read President Kanelos describe how universities today are too often “not open and pluralistic” and how they “chill speech and ostracize those with unpopular viewpoints”. Many of us know exactly what he is describing, and for these reasons I cannot tell you how excited I am to welcome the University of Austin’s new Palestine studies department. While it’s true that you have yet to announce a Palestine studies department, you surely are aware how ostracizing and damaging the mention of Palestinian rights or their struggle for liberation can be on American campuses. A few years ago, for example, one of the world’s most recognized philosophers, Judith Butler, came to my campus in Brooklyn with a highly respected Palestinian activist, Omar Barghouti, as part of a national speaking tour. They came to discuss their support for the boycott, divestment and sanctions (BDS) campaign. BDS, as you know, is a global, non-violent initiative aimed at recognizing and restoring Palestinians rights. Not only was my college then subject to extraordinary outside pressure to call off the event, but members of New York’s city council even threatened to withhold funding to the campus if the event proceeded. Sanity was restored only when that legendary fighter for the Palestinian revolution – of course, I’m talking about Mayor Michael Bloomberg – said: “If you want to go to a university where the government decides what kind of subjects are fit for discussion, I suggest you apply to a school in North Korea.” (In the same news conference, he also stated his opposition to BDS.) This is but one example, as all of you – proud protectors of freedom of speech and of academic freedom – obviously know. There are, sadly, so many more. Surely, you remember how Professor Norman Finkelstein, a fierce critic of Israeli repression against Palestinians and the son of Holocaust survivors who were imprisoned in Auschwitz and the Warsaw ghetto, was denied tenure at DePaul University after the Israel-aligned Harvard professor Alan Dershowitz aggressively lobbied the university to deny the younger professor his job. The world-renowned Noam Chomsky called Finkelstein “an outstanding scholar”, saying: “It’s amazing that he hasn’t had full professorship a long time ago.” Meanwhile, Finkelstein hasn’t had permanent university employment since. Or there is the case of Prof Steven Salaita. Days before he was to assume a tenured professorship at the University of Illinois, his offer of employment was rescinded due to objections raised over his tweets criticizing Israel after its bombardment of Gaza in the summer of 2014. He has since written eloquently about becoming a school bus driver after losing his tenured professor position. I won’t bore you with all the details, but there are, well, oh so many other examples. The Associated Press, for instance, recently fired a young journalist, not for her work with the AP, but because of the principled tweets she wrote when she was a student at Stanford. Members of Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) on different campuses across the country, including my own, have related how they have been subject to much higher levels of scrutiny by their campus administrations compared with other campus groups. At Fordham University in New York City, administrators even forbade students to form a Student for Justice in Palestine club, because, they claimed, it would be “polarizing”. In fact, from 2014 to 2020, the organization Palestine Legal has documented 1,707 incidents of suppression of speech concerning Palestine in the USA, with the vast majority of them targeting students and scholars. These cases are clear violations not only of first amendment rights of expression but also of academic freedom. But this is where my optimism kicks in. Thankfully, the University of Austin will provide the needed space and leadership to quash this kind of anti-democratic suppression of speech. I don’t have to tell you that we even have a shorthand expression for this issue when such censorship among open-minded, liberal types occurs. We call it PEP: progressive except for Palestine. With such strong commitment to its principles of free inquiry, the University of Austin will finally put an end to such unjust exceptionalism. In fact, I must say that I’m most especially pleased that one of the founders of your enterprise, Bari Weiss, is so devoted to open inquiry and free speech, especially since she has a well-known history of trying to squelch – dare I say “cancel” – Palestinians. This history began when she was an undergraduate at Columbia University. There, she led a campaign that accused a group of professors of bias against Jewish students, and even assisted in a documentary on that theme. Columbia (my alma mater, in full disclosure) conducted a lengthy and costly investigation on these charges and found the allegations baseless. In fact, the investigation did eventually discover incivility on campus, but with “pro-Israel students disrupting lectures on Middle Eastern Studies and some faculty members feeling that they were being spied on”, as the New York Times put it, which raises all kinds of questions about who exactly is “cancelling” whom. Oh, cancel culture. What does this term even mean? As you certainly see, the manner in which “cancel culture” is invoked is often misleading, if not downright dishonest. The way it’s used is more akin to when your flight is cancelled than when the lease on your apartment is cancelled. The first is annoying, no doubt. But you still usually get to where you’re going in the end. To be honest, sometimes, you even get an upgrade on the way because your belligerent ass raises such a stink. That’s how it is for some people. Just claiming to have been “cancelled” facilitates the upgrade. Has JK Rowling or Dave Chapelle or Kevin Hart lost anything substantial after calls for their “cancellation”? They’re all larger than life. More discussed than ever. But losing your lease? That’s the real “cancel culture”. That’s when the people who don’t even know your name now believe your ideas or principles threaten their very existence. It’s when so-called ordinary people are compelled to sacrifice your livelihood to keep their status quo afloat. And that’s precisely what has happened to Norman Finkelstein or Steven Salaita or any of the legions of supporters of Palestinian rights whose positions and livelihoods have been threatened simply because they believe Palestinians should be free. The University of Austin will, finally (and thankfully!) stand as a beacon of light in this darkness that is America’s anti-Palestinian political orthodoxy. To that, I just want to say a big “Phew!” It’s been a long time coming, and I’m so excited to see this institution begin and grow. Please know that I am here to help make this idea work and thrive. I have so many ideas about who you could hire for your Palestine studies department and about the courses we could offer. Just text me, OK? For freedom’s sake. I’m basically around all day tomorrow. Let’s set up a Zoom. Moustafa Bayoumi is the author of the award-winning books How Does It Feel To Be a Problem?: Being Young and Arab in America and This Muslim American Life: Dispatches from the War on Terror. He is Professor of English at Brooklyn College, City University of New YorkIt’s deja vu, yet again. The pandemic first hit Europe in March 2020, and Americans were in denial, thinking it wouldn’t happen here. Then, later in the year, the Alpha variant wave took hold in the United Kingdom and the United States was unprepared. This recurred with Delta in the summer of 2021. Now, in the fall of 2021, Europe is the outlier continent on the rise with Covid, with approximately 350 cases per 100,000 people and many countries are soaring to new records. This not only involves eastern and central Europe, where there are some countries with low vaccination rates (such as Georgia, only 24% fully vaccinated) and caseloads as high as 160/100,000 (Slovenia), but also western Europe, such as Austria, Belgium, Ireland and several others. Indeed, in Germany, leading virologist Christian Drosten recently warned their death toll could be doubled if more aggressive mitigation and vaccination strategies were not quickly adopted. Why is this happening again in Europe after the Delta wave passed through and high rates of vaccination were achieved? There are a few important reasons. First, there are a large proportion of unvaccinated individuals in each country, and only countries such as Spain at 80% and Portugal at 88% that fully vaccinated their total populations have set a high bar and have thus far withstood the continental trend of rise in cases. Noteworthy is Belgium with 74% fully vaccinated and one of the hardest-hit countries in the world, now at 79/100,000, currently 10th highest caseload globally. That alone tells us 74% isn’t enough, and that prior Covid (without vaccination, what some refer to as “natural immunity”) is unreliable for representing a solid immunity wall against the Delta variant. In fact, it has been projected for Delta that any country needs to achieve 90-95% of its total population fully vaccinated (or with recent Covid) in order to have population-level immunity that covers, providing relative protection, for the others. Key among the unvaccinated are teenagers and children. For European countries, the UK was slower in starting their vaccination program for teens and that has been suggested as one of the reasons their cases started rising again. There is compelling data from both the UK and United States that children and teens have been a key driver of spread in recent months. It is noteworthy that we are not dealing with just cases or a “casedemic”. For example, Greece’s cases have now quickly soared to 650/100,000 people and so has their death rate increased. While many countries have “uncoupled” their rise in cases from hospitalizations and deaths, that is incomplete at best, and many infected individuals are getting seriously ill, no less the risk of long Covid which remains under-recognized as to its importance and potential of durable disabling effects. Second, there is evidence of waning of immunity on top of the hyper-contagious Delta strain. Even though much of Europe got a later start in vaccination, a recent study showed that with the Astra Zeneca vaccine the decline in anti-spike antibody occurred quite early and there was a clear relationship between antibody levels and breakthrough infections. Decline below the anti-spike antibody threshold of 500 U/ml was reached at 96 days for AstraZeneca’s vaccine compared with 257 days for Pfizer’s. The impact of waning, and the opportunity to restore very high (~95%) effectiveness of mRNA vaccines (specifically Pfizer/BioNtech) with booster (third) shots has been unequivocally proven from the Israeli data. Yet the adoption of boosters, even in the highest-risk groups such as age 60 plus, has been very slow. Third, there has been relaxation or abandonment of mitigation measures. Countries such as Denmark and Norway completely reopened and have seen resurgence of cases since that occurred. Throughout the world, the profound pandemic fatigue has led to the irresistible notion that the pandemic end is nigh, that masks, distancing, and other measures have run their course, essentially that enough is enough. It is hard to imagine fighting a foe as formidable as Delta that a vaccine-only strategy can be effective. We’ve seen a dramatic improvement in Japan, with full return to baseline after their worst outbreak, by the combination of high level of vaccination and the continued use of masks and mitigation measures. That brings us to the United States, sitting in the zone of denial for the fourth time during the pandemic, thinking that in some way we will be “immune” to what is happening in Europe. That somehow the magical combination of mRNA vaccines with only 58% of the population fully vaccinated, a relatively low proportion of booster shot uptake, a start to vaccinating teens and children, and a lot of prior Covid, and little in the way of mitigation, will spare us. That’s no magic. Add to that the complete lack of availability of cheap, rapid home tests to screen for infectiousness. Unlike Europe, the US was not capable of uncoupling cases from hospitalizations and deaths during its initial Delta wave – fully 75% of hospitalizations and 66% of deaths occurred compared to its third wave peak before vaccinations were available. We are already seeing signs that the US is destined to succumb to more Covid spread, with more than three weeks sitting at a plateau of ~75,000 new cases per day, now there’s been a 10% rise in the past week. We are miles from any semblance of Covid containment, facing winter and the increased reliance of being indoors with inadequate ventilation and air filtration, along with the imminent holiday gatherings. Now is the time for the US to heed the European signal for the first time, to pull out all the stops. Promote primary vaccination and boosters like there’s no tomorrow. Aggressively counter the pervasive misinformation and disinformation. Accelerate and expand the vaccine mandates that unfortunately became necessary and have been proven effective, and mass distribute medical quality masks and rapid home testing kits at no cost. Soon enough potent pills (Molnupiravar and Paxlovid) that take down the Sars-CoV-2 virus will get authorized and should also be made widely available to help prevent hospitalizations and deaths. Otherwise, we will probably face a fifth wave. Now is not the time for happy talk, but to instead show we can persevere, run this marathon, make it to the finish line. We can acknowledge and accept endemicity – that a low level of Covid will remain in the background, but that is not &gt;75,000 new cases a day. Instead of succumbing to yet another major rise in cases and their sequelae, this is a chance for America to finally rise to the occasion, showing an ability to lead and execute. Eric Topol is the founder and director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, professor of molecular medicine, and executive vice-president of Scripps Research“10-9-8-7-6 …” yell the audience as Steps’ teasing five-minute countdown nears its climax. Videos of the band in Star Wars-type costumes are projected on to a giant box which lifts to reveal Steps themselves, in purple capes and thigh boots. Opening new song What the Future Holds and superb oldie One for Sorrow set the tone for a two-hour stream of giddy-tempo, sugar-coated, Abba-sounding bangers. Approaching their 25th anniversary and having been kept from touring by Covid, the five-piece are back with an extravaganza: choreographed dancing, trademark hand movements, a marching band and wonderfully preposterous outfits. Heartbreak in This City is illustrated – obviously – by a giant heart. The stage revolves for Take Me for a Ride. Something in Your Eyes brings – but of course – dancers wearing crash helmets with tassels. “Are you ready to party?” asks Lisa Scott-Lee as the mega-setlist stretches from hoedown debut 5, 6, 7, 8 to six songs from lockdown albums What the Future Holds Pts 1 &amp; 2 via banger covers of Kylie Minogue’s Better the Devil You Know and the Bee Gees’ Tragedy. The brothers Gibb-penned Chain Reaction – a 1985 hit for Diana Ross – sees the group “playing” a drum kit with luminous lightsabers. The pace only relents for Heartbeat, where they sit on stools and come over all emotional. For It’s the Way You Make Me Feel, four of them – including widely grinning Ian “H” Watkins – parade around in Elizabethan ballgowns. New father Lee Latchford-Evans’s comments about parenthood and Watkins’ affirmation of Steps’ “support for the LGBTQ community” recognise the audience demographic. There are huge cheers when he thanks the fans for their support since he came out in 2007 and says that boys should be able to wear dresses if they want. Although Steps acrimoniously split in the 2000s, their affectionate glances and cheeky banter suggest that, in their mid-40s, they’re enjoying themselves as much as the crowd. “All we ask is that you have fun with us,” declares Latchford-Evans. Who could possibly refuse? At AO Arena, Manchester, 12 November. Then touring.Towards the end of Rebecca Watson’s debut novel, Little Scratch, the unnamed heroine lies next to her sleeping boyfriend and finds herself “alone with my head”. Watson’s great achievement is that the preceding 200 pages capture that exact experience, giving us an unfiltered day in the life of her protagonist’s mind in first-person, present-tense prose scattered across the page. It asks us to keep up with a flood of feelings and concurrent thought processes, text messages and motor skills in a triumph of typesetting. It is a dazzling read, but how might this work on stage? You could imagine Eve Ponsonby, who stands before us, delivering a breakneck, hour-long monologue. But Katie Mitchell’s production in this theatre’s studio space adds three actors alongside her to deliver Miriam Battye’s faithful adaptation, although “arrangement” perhaps does better justice to this contrapuntal treatment of the text, which has a musical precision. Words are sent rippling up and down the line of actors, overlapping, chiming or bringing chilled silence. The stage is dressed as if for a radio recording. Wearing dark clothes, the quartet create sound effects with brushes, crisp packets and pints of water, often for comical accompaniment to the woman’s hungover Friday. But the story works on several levels and, within a minute, can draw both wry humour and gnawing horror from office life, and find weary familiarity and startling surprise in everyday routines. Among the administrative tasks, cost centre codes and cups of tea are conscious constants: the memory of her rape, the urge to self-harm, and the comfort of – and desire for – her boyfriend, “my him”. She rehearses telling him about her trauma but fears it would engulf their relationship. Her creativity, too, has been silenced as she cannot continue writing her novel, bringing underlying sadness to the bursts of witty wordplay in her thoughts. The presence of four performers risks diluting the stark aloneness and alienation you sense from the novel, and there is something a little too neat about how easily you fall into the quartet’s rhythms whereas the book’s word arrangements bring disorientation with each turn of the page. But these four actors, staring dead ahead in a line, deftly conjure the commute, queues and cubicles of daily life and, alongside the quoted statistics of workplace rape and harrassment, suggest the inner torment of multiple lives around the protagonist. Their eyes are fixed on us, and we feel the gaze of men on the woman, in a similar manner to Mitchell’s Ophelias Zimmer. The play does not assign different emotions to the actors – this isn’t some riff on Pixar’s Inside Out – though Ragevan Vasan is superbly stressy and Morónkẹ́ Akinọlá particularly strong at comedy. Eleanor Henderson catches just the right tone in brief phone messages as the protagonist’s mother, as well as a dissatisfied restaurant reviewer on Tripadvisor. Ponsonby is superbly nuanced, whether in fragility or fury. The quartet join in a humorous chorus of disapproval to discover “prawn chowder!” on the office menu, and later their voices swell to create a panic attack bolstered by Melanie Wilson’s sound score. Played without an interval, these 100 minutes don’t quite match the propulsion of the novel, but the staging finds its own careful balance of airy exuberance and intense anger, and it carries the same lingering power. At Hampstead theatre, London, until 11 December“That tree is dead. That tree is dead – we are too late for them,” Greg Thomson, the forester for Los Padres national forest says, as he traipses through a dense patch of conifers clustered on a peak overlooking Ventura county. Pine needles and yellowed grass crunch beneath his boots as he points to giant spiny tree skeletons with thick trunks. These trees, he says, were victims of the drought, beetle infestations and a changing climate on an overgrown landscape that has not seen a good fire in too long – and it’s his job to do something about that. “We don’t have a lot of forest out here and I don’t want to lose it all on my watch,” he says. “Our number one goal in Los Padres is to keep the forest here.” That’s why the US forest service has approved a controversial plan to cull smaller trees from the area and carve a cleared line spanning more than 700 acres across the mountaintop. The “shaded fuel break”, a reduced mosaic of vegetation, will, according to officials, give firefighters a designated clearing to slow or stop flames at the ridge and remove the “fuel” that drives the most dangerous blazes. Forest officials say it’s a strategy that will enable them to protect forest health, safeguard the habitats of threatened animals and slow the onslaught of wildfires. But the Pine Mountain project has sharply divided officials, environmental activists, and locals. A coalition of advocacy organizations, including the Los Padres Forest Watch, the Centers for Biological Diversity, and the Wishtoyo Chumash Foundation, have rallied support from local city councils, county supervisors and local businesses against the proposal, citing concerns over its approval process and the potential to harm ecosystems. There’s strong scientific consensus that, in crowded forests, treatments that remove overgrown vegetation are essential – the federal government, which manages roughly 57% of California’s forests, has also faced criticism that agencies are abysmally behind on using the treatments. Controlled fires make space for trees to thrive, and they can’t be lit until the excess vegetation – referred to as “fuel” by officials and researchers – is cleared. When dense underbrush dies or dries, it feeds high-intensity wildfires that are difficult to contain and more likely to leave behind charred moonscapes that take a heavy toll on habitats and ecosystems. If the underbrush is not cleared, it can easily cause prescribed burns to rage out of control, much like the infernos they are supposed to stop. Only a tiny fraction of the roughly 33m acres of California’s forests are treated each year, and scientists are clear that more thinning and prescribed burning is needed. With hot, dry days stretching fire weather longer each year, the window for conducting treatments is getting smaller. Some projects have faced long delays, tied up in legal battles with a vocal contingent of environmental advocates. This fiscal year the forest service completed only half the fuel treatments it had planned in California and according to scientists, that’s a big problem. “There is no controversy among scientists on this at all. In the Sierra Nevada, fuel treatments, thinning and prescribed fire are absolutely essential,” says John Battles, a forest ecologist and professor at University of California Berkeley. But the landscapes across these ridges of Los Padres are decidedly different from the forests in northern California and the Sierra Nevada. What works in the northern forests may not be what’s needed in the south, where fires are often driven by dry winds. “There the science on the efficacy of treatments is much more ambiguous”, Battles adds. “It is a legitimate concern of how much value is there.” Rising roughly 7,000ft above the sprawling hillsides north of the town of Ojai, there’s a rich tapestry of colorful tufts coating the slopes. Sage, chamise, and scrub oak sprawl across the horizon – the vibrant yellows and greens of the coastal chaparral on full display. Nearly half the proposed fire break project will cut into these systems, which may not fare as well from the intervention. Despite the opposition, the forest service has pushed forward with the Pine Mountain project. Thomson is quick to note that the largest trees will remain unless they pose a threat to roads or campsites. Those with a circumference between 18 and 24 inches are the main targets, and will be strategically culled. The proposed fire break is far from the nearest town – which has sparked questions about its relevance. But Thomson says it is intended to stop or slow flames from reaching the sensitive habitats of threatened animals, including the spotted owl and California condor. Situated between wilderness areas but with rare road access, the fire break will also enable the agency to manage and protect the land far beyond the project perimeter. However, ecological sacrifices will be made. Native plants will be pulled from the ground. Trees that provide habitat for various plant and animal species will be taken off the land. “There’s a tradeoff with everything”, says Nicole Molinari, an ecologist with the US forest service. “When I think about these forest health projects, there may be some short term impacts for a huge, long term gain,” she adds. “If these forests are lost to beetle mortality or drought or high severity fire, they could be gone forever.” The forest service is prepared to cut through hundreds of acres of chaparral – and the rich and diverse ecosystems this shrubland supports – to protect the trees above. “Bushes are second-class citizens compared to trees,” says ecologist Brad Shaffer, director of the UCLA La Kretz Center for California Conservation Science, noting that fire effects on this system are understudied, compared with the northern forests. Shaffer, who is studying how ecosystems recoveredafter the Woolsey fire, which torched the chaparral-covered mountains in Los Angeles and Ventura counties in 2018, said it largely comes down to public perception. “Everybody says I want to go for a walk in the woods, not a walk in the bushes,” he says, which might be undercutting the need for a unique approach to preserving and protecting very different landscapes. “Managing fire in dry, western conifer forest is just a very different issue than managing it in very fire-prone chaparral and oak woodland.” Chaparral burns differently and recovers differently after a fire, which is why it is defined by a different “fire regime” – a way of classifying landscapes and how often they were set ablaze historically. Fires that torch the coastal shrublands are naturally low in frequency but high in severity. “Chaparral has a high-intensity, crown fire regime, meaning when a fire burns, it burns everything, frequently leaving behind an ashen landscape,” according to a report from the the California Chaparral Institute, a non-profit organization formed to protect the diverse native vegetation system. The group is one of those opposed to the USFS treatment plan. While northern California forests have suffered from suppression policies that delivered too few fires, landscapes in the south have been harmed by the reverse – the high fire frequency left environmental degradation in its wake. Since fires in this region are more often wind-driven than fuel-driven, thinning does less to slow them down. Research by forest service officials confirms as much. “It is not easy to align fuel treatment goals in this vegetation with restoration goals – in fact, you really can’t do it,” said USFS ecologist Hugh Safford during a presentation given at the California chaparral symposium in 2018. “It doesn’t mean we shouldn’t be doing it,” he said, noting that sometimes the only way to protect natural habitats at risk from frequent fire is through the tactical use of these treatments. “From the ecological viewpoint”, he says, the strategy “needs to be understood as a local resource sacrifice made in order to gain a benefit at the landscape scale”. Close to half of the project’s perimeter – 314 acres – is covered in chaparral, and environmental advocates opposing the plan say it will do more to harm than help. “They have a blanket, one-size-fits-all approach to how to deal with wildfire, and that’s problematic from an ecological perspective,” says Bryant Baker, the conservation director with Los Padres Forest Watch. He advocates for a more hands-off approach, even if that means letting the landscapes as they are now go. “Forests are not museums,” he says. “They are not places where nothing changes over time. They are very dynamic. Trees live and they die and dead trees offer up a completely new habitat.” Standing dead trees, called snags, are quickly put to use by insects, woodpeckers, chipmunks, and other small creatures, he says. Baker and other critics are concerned that human intervention will lead to even more losses. Walking through the project perimeter, Bryant falls to his knees, unearthing yellowed cheatgrass, an invasive species spotting the ground. It’s far more flammable than native species, increasing the risks of flashy, fast-moving flames. “The non-native grass is already here and all it needs is more disturbance to spread across this ridge line,” he says. The forest service claims these issues were considered, but the proposal was approved under “categorical exclusion”, a USFS designation that enables federal managers to move forward without the need for a detailed environmental analysis. Critics of the plan believe a deeper assessment is required. Thousands of public comments were submitted in opposition to the project before it was approved at the end of September. The California Department of Fish and Wildlife expressed concerns, citing the “high biological diversity” in the project area. The Coastal Band of the Chumash Nation has also criticized the plan, citing the potential for cultural degradation. “These are public lands, these are sacred lands to us, they should be working with us,” says Mariza Sullivan, tribal chair of the Coastal Band of the Chumash Nation. “There is a legacy of institutional paternalism that leaves all of us with a desert instead of a garden.” The USFS says that it consulted with the US fish and wildlife service to address possible biological and ecological impacts and with federally recognized tribes on the cultural impacts to these sacred sites. Thomson says the agency is open to hearing more feedback but insists the public’s fears have been placated. There are also concerns that, under the guise of restoration, the USFS is green-lighting a logging project and opening the cherished area to industry interests. “The cost is on the taxpayer to do this work,” says the USFS ecologist Molinari. “If we can offset some of that cost by having a group who can actually benefit from the material come and remove it from the landscape – that’s a win-win.” Thomson thinks the directive is clear. The USFS is supposed to manage the land, he says, as a valuable asset for the American people. He cares most about those trees at the top and is determined to save them. Comparing the roughly 750 acres to the burn scar of the Dixie fire that blackened close to a million acres this year, he sees this as a small sacrifice with the potential to stop a severe fire from reaching these trees. Stepping close to the edge of the steep slope, Thomson picks up a pinecone from the forest floor. “If we can protect some of the stands on the ridge top and maintain that seed source, nature has a chance to come back,” he says, tossing the pinecone from the ledge. As it bounces quietly out of view he smiles: it’s distributing its seeds down below. “But if we lose all those trees and the seed source – we are out of luck.”With the exception of a new must-have brand of oat milk and an aesthetically pleasing tin of chopped tomatoes, the supermarket experience is not an especially chic one – unless Anya Hindmarch is along for the ride. Having sent shoppers wild in the aisles of Sainsbury’s with the I Am Not a Plastic Bag bag that opened a debate on single-use plastic in 2007, the accessory designer is returning to the checkouts this winter with a bag she hopes will revolutionise the way we carry our shopping. Intended to put paid to the idea of the shopping bag as an unloved item that is mislaid, disposed of, or left in the boot of the car, Hindmarch’s new bag is a luxury item with a supermarket price tag of £10. Billed as “the next generation reusable shopping bag”, it is a response to government data showing nearly half a billion single-use plastic bags were sold from 2020-2021 – five years after the government levy on carrier bags was introduced. The launch on 2 December comes after findings that the supermarket “bag for life” is not the environmental solution it was intended. This year, a number of food retailers pulled the 10p bags from their stores after learning that most ended up in the bin, with the average household getting through 50 a year. Hindmarch’s solution is an oversized tote bag with a smiley face logo and racer-style straps. It is burgundy to reflect Sainsbury’s signature colour, and will be available in racing green when it goes on sale in Waitrose in January. The designer, who said the project was about “eco not ego”, is in talks to launch the bag at other supermarket chains too. Certainly, it would look more at home on the shelves of one of Hindmarch’s boutiques, where the going rate for a handbag is £900, than among the Graze boxes and marked-down mangos. But it is the substance and not the style of this accessory that Hindmarch hopes will set it apart from other bags under your sink. The bag is made from recycled plastic and is fully recyclable, with minimum effort required – a built-in pocket acts as a pre-addressed envelope, allowing the bag to be placed in any letterbox when the user is ready to part with it. It is designed to withstand 10 years of hard labour. “You can get your week’s shopping in it and schlep and lug but you can also put it down in a puddle while you wait for a bus,” says the designer. As the landfill situation worsens in the UK, critics of the fashion industry will question the need for another mass-market fashion item. But Hindmarch, a savvy businesswoman and UK trade ambassador, as well as an environmentalist, believes incremental improvements are crucial. “We’re never going to get away from needing bags because we need to move things from one place to another,” she says. Instead, she hopes that the universal bag will encourage shoppers to think of long-term solutions. “The less we sell, the better. I want people to buy one, use it for 10 years and more, and then recycle it.” Zoe Avison, of the environmental thinktank Green Alliance, welcomes the arrival of a bag likely to appeal to consumers. “If it encourages shoppers to ditch their throwaway habits it will have a positive impact,” she says. But she puts the onus on the supermarkets to create lasting and meaningful change. “If cheap bags for life are still available at the till, this bag is unlikely to be transformative” she says. “The UK should look to Ireland, where bag use has dropped 90% after a minimum charge of 70 cents was introduced.”I am sure some of you will have experienced a chill of recognition when you first heard about the events in Houston, Texas last Friday, where nine people were killed, and many more were injured in a crowd surge at Travis Scott’s Astroworld festival. Granted, it’s unlikely you’ll have experienced anything remotely on the scale of that tragedy: those strange, horrifying scenes captured on video, recounted in Twitter threads or grimly confirmed in police news conferences. Still, if you’re a regular concert attendee, you may well have been reminded by little moments in your gig-going past that felt fraught with peril: dangerous bottlenecks at major music festivals, collapsing circle pits at metal gigs, that general sense of a collective tightening as seemingly the entire venue inches forward for a better glimpse at the band. Perhaps it is remarkable then that there haven’t been many more Astroworlds. Mass casualty events at concerts are thankfully rare enough that when they do happen they tend to enter the annals of notoriety: think The Who in Cincinnati in 1979, Pearl Jam at Roskilde in 2000, Germany’s Love Parade in 2010. That the vast majority of concerts proceed without anything like that level of tragedy is down to a chain of collective vigilance between event organisers, health and safety officers, security personnel, right down to the people picking up their fallen brethren when a moshpit suddenly goes south. Clearly something went very wrong somewhere in that chain of collective responsibility at Astroworld. Determining what went wrong will take time, something that our breathless, extremely online culture doesn’t seem to have, and so we have already experienced a week of fevered speculation and finger pointing. Scott, and his particular brand of high-octane performance, is under scrutiny, as is a live hip-hop scene that has in recent years begun to incorporate the intensity of metal and hardcore. There are major questions too for promoter LiveNation over its planning for the event, and the emergency services who responded to it, to answer. It feels particularly striking that this disaster has come hot on the heels of a global pandemic that already made mass gatherings seem a risky proposition. It is quite understandable that some people might be questioning whether they are even worth going to. For everyone involved in their creation, then, this has to be a moment to take stock. Safety codes need to be reinforced, venues made more secure, performers and their support staff need to know how to respond when things do go wrong. And the rest of us, well, we need to keep looking out for the person next to us. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Cop26 will close without even one major economy aligned with keeping global heating to 1.5C, according to the world’s most respected climate analysis coalition. A study of 36 countries by Climate Action Tracker shows progress has been made at Glasgow, though not nearly enough to keep the world from dangerous levels of heating. Major emitters such as Europe, the US and China have increased their ambition compared with two years ago, but their emissions-cutting pledges remain insufficient to reach the Paris agreement’s target. Other nations, including Brazil, Australia, Saudi Arabia and Russia, remain so far off course that they are pushing the planet towards 4C above pre-industrial levels. The total effect of countries’ 2030 pledges and long-term targets will put the world on track for global heating of 2.1C by 2100. This represents a step forward, albeit with caveats. When Climate Action Tracker began analysing the effects of targets and pledges in 2009, it estimated the world was on course for 3.5C of heating. By the time the Paris agreement was adopted in 2016, this had fallen to 2.8C. After Donald Trump took power and began reversing US climate policies, the global outlook worsened to 3.2C. Advances at Glasgow, however, have taken it down to its lowest point, albeit still dangerously outside the Paris agreement targets, with time running out, and heavily dependent on long-term political promises that may or may not be fulfilled. A stricter assessment, which looks only at the impacts of near-term 2030 targets, projects the world to be on course for a disastrous 2.4C of heating – a figure that made headlines earlier this week. The impact of Glasgow will not be determined by these projections. If negotiators can agree on a final statement, it should oblige nations to take more ambitious actions. The only metric that matters is whether emissions start to fall in the next couple of years. Methodology Source: Climate Action Tracker and the World Bank. All EU countries are assessed collectively. India’s rating reflects India’s first NDC: if submitted, the announced NDC update would be rated “insufficient”. Brazil’s rating reflects Brazil’s first NDC: its updated NDC submitted on 31 October is not yet included in the CAT analysis. The map in this article was amended on 25 November 2021 to properly distinguish Western Sahara from Morocco.On my way to Hidden River Cafe, which I’d booked for my birthday breakfast, I was reminded that when a Cumbrian warns you that somewhere’s “a bit off the beaten track and in the middle of nowhere”, you should take them seriously. They really mean it. And Hidden River Cafe is indeed hiding, albeit in my favourite part of Cumbria – the forgotten, untouched bit that visitors tend to ignore in their excitement to see the Lake District. This overlooks the glorious patch of almost untouched nothingness to the north-east of the Lakes that starts a few miles outside Carlisle, where you can skim along the southern side of the Scottish border, down miles of the narrowest, puddliest country lanes, passing through villages with names such as Catlowdy, Penton, Haggbeck and Bewcastle; names that, when I was a child, would trip off my grandmother’s tongue in broad Cumberland as we set off to visit cousins who lived all around this area. “Your great-aunt Joyce frae’ Catlowdy isn’t in ower’ grand fettle the noo,” she’d say. “She’s ga’arn into sek little room.” I’ll translate: “Joyce isn’t feeling very well and she’s losing weight, too.” The place had its own language, and though this was at least 40 years ago, as Charles and I drove towards Longtown, it felt almost unchanged. The satnav quibbled many times en route, and after a second three-point turn by a long-abandoned graveyard, you feel sceptical that there really is Persian hummus with chimichurri sauce and tempura Tenderstem broccoli with a hoisin dip close by. On arriving at the pretty cabin cafe, however, set in miles of rolling green nothingness and ordering the monkfish scampi with warm new potato salad, you might also notice that 5G is not an option here, and that the gorgeous cabins, should you happen to be staying overnight, do not have Wi-Fi, because the Hidden River Cafe is all about “your family really enjoying being off the grid”. That’s something to tell your teenagers while they try to strangle you, or maybe placate them with the vegetarian-friendly portobello mushroom burger with grilled halloumi. The place is the rather ingenious work of dairy farmer Rob Carr and his wife Rachel, alongside local chef Thomas Towle. Rob designed the five beautiful cabins made out of whole trees that are stacked skilfully on top of each other along the bank of the River Lyne – a river so well-hidden, I managed to live nearby for 18 years and never once heard it mentioned. After the cabins, plus a barn where they hold weddings, came the cafe, which is itself inside another cabin. No wonder my Cumbrian friends were so excited, recommending that I get up here sharpish for bowls of mussels with cider and pancetta, and for wagyu steaks with good, punchy rosemary fries. Hidden River Cafe’s menu is ever-changing, hearty, imaginative and surprisingly global: its current offering includes Moroccan lamb on herby coriander couscous, grilled chicken souvlaki and soft-shell crab with pickled samphire. That said, every time I’ve checked recently, the approach to feeding guests seems to have pivoted slightly, with a pizza menu and sometimes curries featuring, too. My brother swears by the fabulous Sunday lunch, with featherblade of Cumbrian beef and yorkies as big as your face, and I’ve heard reports of rib-sticking afternoon teas of ham hock terrine with piccalilli and french toast, raspberry ripple muffins and, of course, homemade scones. But, as I said, I went for my birthday breakfast, and although it may seem odd to write about the joys of an enormous vegetarian fry-up, there is an unparalleled splendour in tackling, as your first meal of the day, a plate of good hash browns, fried eggs, baked beans and decent vegetarian sausages with a round of white, buttered, toasted, Mother’s Pride-style bread. Eat big first thing, set your intentions – that’s what I say. Charles, displaying his southern, metropolitan tendencies, wanted poached eggs and mashed avocado on sourdough. We were the first customers, arriving brightly at 10.02am into a deserted cabin, so we ate to the sound of torrential rain battering the roof and pelting the fields around us. Perfect. “So where are we, exactly?” asked Charles, who had driven here, but was still none the wiser. “We’re sort of near the Scottish border,” I told him, “but very definitely in England. Sort of near Hadrian’s Wall, but not really near anywhere else apart from Longtown, not far from the main road to Langholm, but if you carry on east, we’d be in Once Brewed.” “This means nothing to me,” he said, sounding like Midge Ure. I finished the extra toast with butter and strawberry jam, knowing that, while places such as this exist, it will be a long time before I, like great-aunt Joyce, go into “sek little room”. • Hidden River Cafe Longtown, Carlisle, Cumbria, 01228 791318. Open all week, 9am-8.30pm (6pm Sun). About £30 a head, plus drinks and service. • Episode four of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 16 November. Listen here or wherever you get your podcasts.Cosmogramma by Courttia Newland (Canongate, £12.99) Newland’s second venture into science fictional territories is a rich, diverse collection of short stories. The first, Percipi, an account of war between humans and their robot servants, may appear a poor choice of opener, written in expository, admonitory style. But the stories that follow range in style, tone and subject matter, from horror stories of alien invasion, social breakdowns and the fine line between madness and reality, to more upbeat fantasies of a secret race of people living beneath the sea and a connection between space travel and time travel that might allow someone to redeem crimes of the past. The final story, set on a rewilded, post-human Earth, sends the reader back to the first, casting it in a different light. For all their individual differences, these fine stories are in conversation with each other, as well as the reader. The Love Makers by Aifric Campbell (Goldsmiths, £19.99) Campbell’s fourth novel is a suspenseful, plausible near-future road trip that is published alongside 14 essays by experts in fields ranging from robotics and artificial intelligence to law and ethics. In the fiction Scarlett and Gurl, the titular characters are a wealthy tech entrepreneur on her way home for Christmas and the stranded dancer to whom she gives a lift. Scarlett, involved in the development of new uses for AI, resists its inclusion in her own life, insisting on hiring a succession of human nannies instead of the iMom her peers rely on. Gurl shares her boyfriend with a sex robot she looks upon as her best friend. These types of future tech may not be so far away; AI and robotics are already part of our lives. The essay by Kate Devlin begins “The first thing to know about sex robots is that there are no sex robots,” but it goes on to consider the role of the virtual assistant, and reveals that a Japanese company which makes “a voice-driven AI with an associated projected holographic anime character” has thousands of male customers who would like to marry their virtual assistants. This book, created with the aim of raising awareness of potential social impacts of developing trends in technology, provides much to think about. It deserves attention. The Second Shooter by Nick Mamatas (Solaris, £8.99) Freelance writer Mike Karras specialises in conspiracy theories and he’s driving across America to interview surviving witnesses of mass murders. Plagued by a talk-radio host who believes Karras is part of a larger conspiracy to make private gun ownership illegal, the hapless reporter finds himself running for his life. At first an entertaining thriller, amusing and disturbing by turns in its depiction of contemporary American obsessions and populated with interestingly exotic eccentrics, the book takes a turn for the worse when a mishmash of quasi-magical mysticism is revealed as “the truth” behind it all. Dead Relatives by Lucie McKnight Hardy (Dead Ink, £9.99) Following on from her impressive debut novel Water Shall Refuse Them (2019), this short-story collection confirms the author’s reputation in the field of literary horror. The title story is a miniature gothic novel with a sensibility reminiscent of Carson McCullers or Flannery O’Connor, yet set in rural Wales in the early 1960s. Iris, the young narrator, has never gone beyond the grounds of her home, existing half in a realm of fantasy and ritual featuring her dead relatives, and half in the house run by her monstrous mother and Cook as a home for unwed mothers. Most of the shorter stories might be described as domestic horror, often featuring women driven to an act of madness by grief, bullying or male indifference. Painful, sometimes searingly memorable, they make for uncomfortable reading. Under the Whispering Door by TJ Klune (Tor, £16.99) No one mourned when successful, hard-nosed lawyer Wallace Price unexpectedly died. He was dedicated to his work, with no room left for friends or family. Due to a glitch in the usually smooth passage of spirits into the afterlife, Wallace attends his own funeral, and learns that nobody liked him. This is almost as hard to accept as the fact that death is final, and all his skill in argument won’t get his life back. He’s told he will be allowed some adjustment time before passing through the titular door: he can stay as a ghost in Charon’s Crossing, the teashop run by Hugo, the Ferryman, and his assistant Mei, a recently qualified Reaper. Only they, and the other resident ghosts, can see Wallace, whose hardened heart softens in their company. This is a whimsical, warm-hearted fantasy that suggests it is never too late to make a positive change in life – or afterwards.Gaming culture has lived online since the internet became a thing, so it is no surprise that TikTok is now a primordial soup of video game memes. The time-honoured “greatest games of all time” magazine feature lives on as clip compilations soundtracked by thrice-remixed SoundCloud rap. Streamers post highlights from their live play, from unlikely kills to spectacular rage-quit explosions. Kids post skits that make fun of their parents’ dismissive attitude to games. Cosplayers dress up as game characters and jump on the latest dance craze. Trends explode for a week then disappear, like that month in 2020 when teenagers were posting clips of themselves studying to Mario Kart music. Gaming is totally native to the under-21s who power most of TikTok’s content, so music, sound effects and in-jokes from video games permeate pretty much everything. Beware, though, because TikTok’s audience is so extremely young, if you’ve been playing games for longer than about 10 years, browsing will make you feel like Methuselah. I saw one compilation of “old video games that are still fun today” composed entirely of things that came out when I was in my 20s. There are some exceptionally bad opinions expressed in this ever-evolving morass of short videos, and a distressing number of entries in the disappointingly sexist “girlfriend tries to distract boyfriend from playing his video games” genre, but there’s good stuff too: Shelbyrenaeyt, a 24-year-old Fortnite streamer, posts painfully amusing (or just straight-up painful) clips of all the pubescent boys she encounters in-game trying and failing to trash-talk her. There are also plenty of impossibly wealthy kids and pro-gamers showing off their ostentatious gaming set-ups, featuring a million LEDs and spinning fans. One account, Ingrem GamingTech, is a darkly fascinating series of clips from what looks like a primary-coloured frat house where people design zero-gravity gaming stations. Cozy Games subverts all this with her pastel coloured, calming, beautifully thought-through games room, where she mostly plays gentle, atmospheric stuff (like Lake, a game in which you deliver the post in a picturesque town). Seemingly any game can briefly thrive on TikTok. Although most of what you’ll see revolves around the mainstays of teen gaming culture – shooters such as Overwatch and Fortnite, Grand Theft Auto Online, Fifa, Roblox – more esoteric games also surface. For a short time, there were hundreds of remix videos of an anime music game called Muse Dash, and space skullduggery assassination game Among Us owes a lot of its meteoric success to the millions of clips, skits and bizarre reimaginings that appeared on TikTok. Watching the most popular content on the gaming hashtag, I found myself caught in a tedious sequence of GTA clips, videos of ostentatious PC builds and mean-spirited piss-takes. But once you make it out of the basic list compilations and eyeroll adolescent “humour”, TikTok is a tribute to the immense energy and imagination of young video game fans. A favourite genre: the #videogamesinreallife trend, which involves people walking around the real world with the halting motion of an 00s game character, pastiching the stilted animations and canned dialogue from the games they grew up with. (Depressingly for anyone over 30, those games are things like Minecraft or the 10-year-old fantasy RPG Skyrim, but still.) It’s also a window into the process of making games, as young indie developers post clips and commentary on what they’re making. It’s heartening to see the relative diversity of TikTok’s gaming scene, too, compared with the almost exclusively white male online gaming community that I came of age in. If there were any doubt that games really are played by everyone now, this is the proof.A vivid reflection on the “post-human landscape”, Islands of Abandonment finds its author embarking on a series of bold expeditions to examine the marks left on our land after humans have retreated. Shortlisted for this year’s Baillie Gifford prize for nonfiction (the winner is announced on 16 November), the book describes the isolated and often eerily dystopian fortress islands, irradiated exclusion zones, abandoned towns and shuttered industrial sites that have been recolonised by the natural world. Flyn, who hails from the Scottish Highlands, reads the audiobook herself. There is no fury or gnashing of teeth here; instead, her calmly hypnotic tones chime with the richly descriptive and atmospheric nature of her prose. She visits Chernobyl, where she meets the residents who have finally returned to their homes, and spends a night on an uninhabited Scottish island where feral cattle, the descendants of cows left by fleeing farmers in the 1970s, roam free. Elsewhere, she travels to Estonia and the land that was once the site of Soviet-era collective farms, and to Plymouth in Montserrat, a town entombed under 40 feet of mud and lava save for the tops of the buildings. This is far from a grand tour of the world’s beauty spots; some of Flyn’s destinations are the most damaged on Earth. Yet, having acknowledged the devastation humans have wrought, she finds cause for optimism in the most desolate terrain where vegetation has flourished and the animal kingdom has adapted. Flyn reveals how “when a place has been altered beyond recognition and all hope seems lost, it might still hold the potential for life of another kind”. • Islands of Abandonment: Life in the Post-Human Landscape is available on William Collins, 9hr, 6min. The best of the rest The Storyteller: Tales of Life and Music Dave Grohl, Simon &amp; Schuster Audio UK, 10hr 35min The rock elder statesman brings wit and warmth to his reading of his memoir, in which he traces his beginnings from the Virginian suburbs, to playing drums in Nirvana and filling stadiums in his band, Foo Fighters. Matrix Lauren Groff, Penguin Audio, 8hr 52min Bridgerton’s Adjoa Andoh reads this bold imagining of the life of the medieval nun and poet Marie de France, half-sister of Queen Eleanor of Aquitaine.Outside on the Pennyhill Park terrace on a mellow lunchtime, two days after captaining his country for the first time, Courtney Lawes is pondering the three words that best describe his character. “One would definitely be chilled. Another one would be competitive … I’m very competitive.” And the third? “What’s a word for fun-loving? Optimistic? Yeah, I’d say I’m quite optimistic.” He is certainly grateful for the relative peace. With four kids under eight at home, he is struggling to recall when he and his wife, Jess, last sat down for any length of time. Since leading England to victory over Tonga last Saturday, though, he has also been feeling a quiet surge of pride. “It’s such an honour to captain your country. My parents take things in their stride, like me, but Mum has been in touch saying how many family messages she’s had. I think everyone was pretty happy.” And why not? With Owen Farrell ruled out, England’s 11th hour Captain Marvel played as if supercharged by his new responsibilities. His covering dive to prevent Telusa Veainu scoring in the right corner, in particular, was so impressive the former red rose lock Ben Kay called it “one of the greatest try-saving tackles Twickenham has ever seen”. If Sam Underhill’s intervention in 2018 to stop Wales’s Scott Williams and Josh Lewsey’s last-gasp hit on South Africa’s Jean De Villiers in 2006 were similarly memorable, neither was the work of a 6ft 7in 32-year-old playing his 88th England Test. “To be honest I didn’t really think about it. I just got on my bike and Freddie Steward slowed him down enough for me to get there. It was more instinct than anything else.” Modest is another word the flanker should consider. Even with Farrell back to face Australia, it really is time that Lawes was more widely celebrated. As an athlete, remarkably, he still feels he is improving and off the pitch he has never been shy to be his own man. “You should accept everyone, right?” he murmurs, discussing whether some more tattoos might have helped Will Carling’s image back in his England captaincy days. “As long as you’re a good person I think you should be accepted for who you are.” There is much, much more to big Courtney than a few heavily inked limbs, a penchant for crunching tackles and a love of reggae and R&amp;B. Before going on this summer’s British &amp; Irish Lions tour – where he started every Test – he was involved with the Centre for Social Justice thinktank and spoke in favour – “in whatever form it comes” – of a stable family unit and extending the school day to give pupils more time for physical exercise. Not everyone on social media approved but he remains unfazed. “If people ask me a question I’m going to give an honest answer. I’m not really bothered about who that offends because that’s my opinion. If other people don’t share it, no problem at all.” Straight talking comes naturally. It was not unknown for his mother, Valerie, a prison officer, to return home from a tough shift with a few bruises. His father, Linford, emigrated to Britain from Jamaica as a youngster and once worked as a nightclub bouncer. Fight the Lawes and, as the Clash always warned, the Lawes will win. “For a lot of my childhood Mum was working. Dad would bounce at night and look after me during the day. I’m very similar to my dad and that’s probably a big reason why. He did a good job bringing me up and I’m very thankful for the way it shaped me.” Growing up in Northampton also taught him about class. Where he came from, despite Franklin’s Gardens being nearby, rugby was often seen as someone else’s game. “At one point it was difficult to get into rugby if you didn’t go to a nicer school. I would never have played if I hadn’t gone to Northampton school for boys. Rugby wasn’t the best in terms of people from working-class and middle-class backgrounds having access to it.” Which is why Lawes becoming England’s captain, even for a week, should be celebrated. The current men’s squad is more diverse than it has ever been and the 117kg forward believes any naysayers should update their prejudices. “If people haven’t been to a game they shouldn’t pretend to know what it’s like. At least go and see it before you criticise. As long as rugby keeps its integrity and core values that give working-class people something good they can buy into – culture, respect and hard work – it can really help people.” How much longer, though, can Lawes realistically stay at his sporting peak? He made his Test debut against Australia 12 years ago this month and now lives in the Northamptonshire countryside 10 minutes away from his friend Dylan Hartley – “the skipper I enjoyed playing under most” – whose England career ended at 32. Lawes, who turns 33 in February, knows he cannot go on for ever. “When you’re younger you can train like a nutter the whole week and be fine at the weekend. When you get older you can’t quite do that.” There is also no avoiding rugby’s potential longer-term medical risks. “It’s tough, man. What’s your body’s going to be like when you’re 40? I’ve played for years and I’ve been hit on the head a few times. Of course you think about it. At the end of the day, though, I don’t have to play rugby. If I think it’s too dangerous I can not play. It’s your choice. Rugby’s a great game and that needs to be appreciated. The safer we can make it the better … but it’s a physical, brutal game.” The good news, for now, is that he still feels able to make a serious top-level impact. “Even though I’m probably the oldest here I’m not tailing off. I’ve always worked hard and been very willing to put my body on the line. It means people can rely on you to front up when the big games turn up. “Where can this England team go? I think we’re on the cusp of finding something new. A team that’s not just here because it’s a great honour or for the money but because it’s a good place to be. That’s the kind of environment you need if you want to win anything, especially a World Cup.” Three words to describe big Courtney? Not. Finished. Yet.It is Armistice Day and as it nears 10.55am at Vale Park, manager Darrell Clarke and his staff filter out, past the Roy Sproson statue and towards a corner of the stadium to pay their respects. The owners, Carol and Kevin Shanahan, lay a wreath and players in tracksuits stand beside kitchen staff, a couple of dozen supporters, and contractors. Passersby peer over the wall on Hamil Road. The Golden Valiants, a group of over-50s who meet every Thursday, including 92-year-old Vera Hill, lead a chorus of We’ll Meet Again. “It’s not one minute and then the game starts – it is two minutes of silence,” Carol says, to a warm smattering of laughter. Matchday is 36 hours away. “Come on, lads: training ground, we need you ready for Saturday,” she says, and the players disperse towards the home changing room, revamped as part of £200,000 summer facelift, first for a squad photo – Clarke has won League Two manager of the month two months running – then for a team meeting. “Have you met Eminem?” Clarke says of the defender Dan Jones who has bleach-blond hair. A few hundred yards down the road is the Red Lion, a pub once run by the parents of the pop star and ardent Vale fan Robbie Williams. “I met his dad at an awards night not so long ago,” Clarke says. “He’s not rung me up giving me any tactical advice just yet so I must be doing an all right job.” The assistant manager, Andy Crosby, runs through a presentation collated by analyst “MJ”, Mike Johnson, that, among other things, details how their next opponents, Bradford City, rank third in the league for goals from set pieces and 21st for possession. Johnson will also WhatsApp players footage of their opposite numbers. On the dressing-room floor a green pitch helps Clarke make his point and halfway through one clip he jumps up to show his midfielders how to exploit space. “Let’s get cracking,” he says. What you see is what you get with Clarke. He was reduced to tears after his Bristol Rovers side were relegated to non-league in 2014, which led him to peel “Clarke Out” posters off the walls at training, but led them back at the first attempt. He then stayed loyal when Leeds came calling. Quickly apparent are the minutiae of his work. Sandwiched between two full-size pitches is a mini red “tactics pitch” on which they walk through set pieces before doing the real thing. “Everything we’re doing, neat and tidy,” he says during a passing drill, before checking in on his top scorer, Jamie Proctor, who is working with the strength and conditioning coach Aaron Watkin after hernia surgery. Watkin, laptop in hand, is monitoring real-time data of every player, assessing their distances, speeds and workload. Dennis Politic is among those who head for a local swimming pool to aid recovery before Crosby expertly demonstrates an exercise to help beat the press. “Do you want to see it on my left foot as well?” he says to the players’ amusement. It is high intensity but Vale are reaping the rewards. They have won 10 of their past 12 matches and have scored 17 goals in their past four. “We won 5-1 against Accrington on Saturday and just gone 6pm I went downstairs to the coaches’ office to say, ‘Well done, congratulations’ and they were in a full-on meeting for Tuesday [a 5-0 win v Liverpool Under-21s],” Carol says. “Every detail was being discussed. Darrell just went: ‘Chip paper, Carol, chip paper.’” The odd fan watches training from various vantage points and also in view is Synectics Solutions, the IT company owned by the Shanahans. The first-team coach, Dean Whitehead, leads a shooting drill and Crosby takes the defenders, while Clarke oversees everything. He is supercharged. “Pressure is a privilege. Being sat at home watching Netflix or doing a 9-5, that’s not me. I’m not knocking those people because, trust me, if I was on a long losing run I wish I was those people – but I do like pressure … It is a drug. I want that next buzz, that next promotion.” At the end of the session, Whitehead skies a penalty. Clearing the metal gates, Clarke says, warrants a fine, as does players freely using the “P-word”. A whiteboard in the coaches’ office lists fines for losing at “circle”, a game of piggy in the middle they play on Fridays. “Gaffer £10, Crozzer £20, Deano £10. Dan Jones £10. James Gibbons £10.” There is still time for the goalkeeper Lucas Covolan and his deputy, Aidan Stone, to practise their goal-kicks. “Not too many balls,” Clarke says, wary of the load on their legs. Vale are second, thriving in Clarke’s first full season, but there is a bigger picture at play for the Shanahans, who have had a profound effect since taking ownership in May 2019. Vale recently linked up with Aim-For to offer free mental health support to staff and fans. At a Q&amp;A, Clarke told a struggling fan he was welcome to join him for a coffee “any time you want”. It is a subject close to the heart of the director of football, David Flitcroft, whose father, John, killed himself. “A lot of people do it to tick boxes,” he says. “We’re doing it because we care.” It is difficult to envisage many clubs where the owner will go for “a five-mile walk and talk” around town with the manager or exchange book and podcast recommendations. “We’ve got a little book group, so we’ve all read Belonging and Fear Less, which is about being based in fear,” Carol says. Flitcroft is just back from a wander round Burslem with Carol before a 2pm board meeting. “We had a bus drive past us and the driver, obviously a Vale fan, was peeping his horn like nobody’s business,” she says. It is easy to see why Vale won the EFL community club of the year award. Shortly after the silence, office staff gathered outside the main reception for a funeral cortege to pass via the ground. In pre-season, they held a barbecue for the squad and their families in the stadium car park and every home game a player’s family is invited into the boardroom. Their Golden Valiants programme offers free social activities. “They have this knitting club they call knit and natter, which I call stitch and bitch,” Carol says, laughing. Clarke arrived at 7am and a marathon day culminates with a trip to Salford City to watch the Under-18s in the FA Youth Cup, a 7pm kick-off that went to extra time. It is mid-afternoon and as Clarke heads downstairs to go over his lineup and set pieces with his staff, he walks past the Valiant Suite, where the academy players are having their pre-match meal. “All the best tonight lads,” he says, leaning through the double doors. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Channel 4 has struck a new deal to keep The Great British Bake Off, the broadcaster’s biggest hit, for three more years. The show, which brings in audiences of up to 9 million, is crucial to Channel 4’s offering to advertisers and forms the backbone of its commercial strategy. While the value of the new deal with the Bake Off maker, Love Productions, has not been disclosed, Channel 4 paid £75m for its first three-year deal when it poached the show from the BBC in 2016. “We are thrilled that Channel 4 will continue to serve up Bake Off’s unique combination of warmth, humour and soggy bottoms for years to come,” said Ian Katz, Channel 4’s chief content officer. “Bake Off is all about optimism, celebrating eccentricity and bringing the nation together, precisely what a publicly owned Channel 4 is here to do.” The UK government is running a consultation on the possible privatisation of Channel 4, which is state-owned but funded primarily through advertising revenue. The deal to keep Bake Off also encompasses the growing number of spin-offs, which include Junior Bake Off and Bake Off: An Extra Slice, as well as The Great Pottery Throw Down, which is made by the same production company. “We are delighted to have extended Bake Off’s stay on Channel 4 for another three years,” said Richard McKerrow, the chief executive of Love Productions, which is owned by Sky Studios. “Love Productions’ long-term commitment with Channel 4 illustrates a deep, warm, mutual respect and partnership which enables us to bring Bake Off to the widest audience possible.” While Love Productions has steadfastly kept Bake Off on free-to-air television in the UK despite rumours of interest from Netflix in the past, it has a deal with the Silicon Valley company to air the show in the US.In 1645, a bloody war raged between Dutch settlers and the Portuguese empire over the sugar plantations of north-east Brazil. Trapped on either side of the conflict were the Potiguara, a powerful indigenous nation whose leaders penned a series of letters in the Tupi language, enticing their relatives to defect across enemy lines. Now, a painstaking new translation of the correspondence has been hailed as a “huge achievement” in casting new light on these unique sources written by a native people. The forthcoming publication is the fruit of 30 years of work by Eduardo de Almeida Navarro, a specialist in classical indigenous languages at the University of São Paulo. “It’s hugely exciting to be able to make this contribution to the history of my country,” said Navarro. The letters were first uncovered in the Dutch archives in 1885, but the texts were blotted and jumbled. Many words were not in existing glossaries of Tupi, which gives us words like piranha and jaguar. In 1906, one frustrated translator called the letters “genuine enigmas”. Navarro spent decades compiling a comprehensive ancient Tupi dictionary, drawing on the accounts of French traders and English buccaneers. This helped him fully translate the letters, revealing the desperate efforts of the Potiguara chiefs to save their people from destruction. “Why,” wrote Felipe Camarão, a Potiguara captain fighting for Portugal, “do I make war against people of our own blood? … Come to me and I will forgive you. I will make you one with your ancient culture again. Those that stay there will be destroyed.” Camarão’s pleas were dismissed: his messenger was executed by Pedro Poti, a rival chief who had spent five years in the Netherlands and converted to Calvinism. The Dutch were eventually expelled from Brazil. Camarão was knighted; Poti was tortured and died on a ship bound for Portugal. Many Potiguara were massacred, although some held out in the forest. Navarro’s work has been applauded among the 20,000 Potiguara still living in the north-eastern Brazilian state of Paraíba. “For us, it’s a huge achievement,” said Pedro Ka’Aguasu Potiguara, a teacher from Ibicoara. “The letters are full of details and information, and very important for our people. They show that, 400 years ago, we were one of the only indigenous peoples that could write.” Portuguese priests banned the Potiguara from speaking Tupi in the mid-1700s, part of centuries of European “looting, domination and genocide”, he lamented. But since 2001, with Navarro’s help, his people have been recovering their lost language. “Before we only spoke a few words. Now, we’ve started teaching Tupi to our kids, through music, singing and writing, up to middle school. They learn really quickly,” said Ka’Aguasu Potiguara, who wants the missives to be brought to Brazil so his people can learn from them in person. Poti and those who sided with the Dutch are often viewed in Brazil as “traitors”, while Camarão is officially recognised as a hero, said Mark Meuwese, a historian at the University of Winnipeg. The new translation could challenge this two-dimensional portrayal, he suggested. “Each wanted the best for the Potiguara,” argued Nathália Galdino, a Potiguara student nurse and political activist from Alto do Tambá. “In Felipe Camarão’s letters I can feel his pain, at being divided as a people. “But those ancestors tried to find a way forward, so that we present-day Potiguara could be alive today, fighting for our culture and raising our children in our own territory,” she added. “Even if they were on opposite sides, all had the dream of rebuilding their land and continuing their traditions,” agreed Ka’Aguasu Potiguara. “Each of them was a hero.”Geoffrey Cox often has more important things to do than vote in the House of Commons, but one debate he did attend was back in 2018, when MPs discussed forcing Britain’s overseas territories to open up their corporate registries – the databases that reveal the actual people behind the shell companies. The proposal was controversial. Setting up an offshore entity is not itself illegal, but the secrecy offered is attractive to tax evaders, fraudsters and money launderers. On one hand, if passed, it could expose the secrets of the thousands of companies, and thus dissuade any sinners from routing their business through Britain’s offshore archipelago in future. On the other hand, if would involve London imposing its will on people to whom it had made a promise of self-government, and thus be an act of neocolonial arrogance. Cox knew which side he was on. “We are breaking that promise to them, and it is beneath the dignity of this parliament to do away with that promise and that pledge of good faith,” he said. In the end the amendment passed, but this argument – that Britain needs to respect the autonomy of its overseas territories and thus tolerate whatever egregious skulduggery they enable – keeps resurfacing. If this week’s scandal – in which Cox was revealed to have earned £150,000 defending the British Virgin Islands’ government in an investigation into allegations of systemic corruption, cronyism, jury intimidation and misuse of public funds – has shown anything, however, it is how utterly bogus that position is. According to the argument, the islands are autonomous jurisdictions, and thus too foreign for Cox or any other MP to legislate for them. Simultaneously, however, when it comes to legal proceedings, it is easy for a British-qualified lawyer like Cox to act in the islands’ courts as if they were part of the UK. Like some weird quantum particle, our overseas territories are British and not British at the same time, depending on what your intentions are. They’re autonomous when it serves the interests of their clients and those clients’ servants (for instance, when providing anonymity or tax-free companies); but not when it doesn’t (for instance, when bringing in British police officers to investigate what those shell companies get up to). Over the last few decades these shell companies have provided a convenient way for wealthy people to minimise their taxes and for kleptocrats to hide their theft, and there is no reason why the rest of us should put up with it. This disastrous situation occurred accidentally, as colonies freed themselves from London’s control in the years after the second world war: they gained increasingly more self-government, over more areas of their internal affairs, until they became independent. The process is not yet over: across much of the Caribbean, the Queen remains the head of state, and the privy council is the final court of appeal, (Barbados will finally become a republic later this month). The problems have arisen, however, where the process has stalled, as it has in the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Anguilla, the Turks and Caicos Islands, Gibraltar and elsewhere, which have stopped halfway out the door. They’re autonomous and not autonomous at the same time, to the great benefit of wealthy people and corporations, as well as their enablers. Those benefits come at the expense of people elsewhere, including right here in the UK. In the 1990s, British bookmakers were tightly regulated and highly taxed because it was recognised that gambling was an addictive activity with a real potential to cause social harm. It was Gibraltar that gave the bookies a means of destroying the system and supercharging their profits. By basing themselves in our loyal little naval base at the mouth of the Med they were able to take bets in pounds, on British sporting events, from British punters – and yet avoid British laws and taxes. In a desperate bid to regain tax revenue, the government gutted gambling regulation, giving us the explosion in betting and addiction that we’re living with now. The Cayman Islands are only still British because Jamaica didn’t want them. The governor, who was left to rule a place whose primary industry was turtle fishing, encouraged offshore activity in the 1960s in a bid to create some kind of an economy, and now they’re one of the largest international financial centres in the world. The islands collect no tax for the UK, not being part of the UK, yet British lawyers and accountants can work freely there for British companies, and money moves back and forth to the City of London more freely still. Cox has worked there, too. In 2014, he successfully defended the islands’ former premier against corruption charges, including the suggestion that the politician’s withdrawal of $50,000 on a government credit card in casinos in the Bahamas and the US was illegal (he denied the accusations). We have become accustomed to this situation, whereby money and its servants can travel freely between the widely scattered bits of the Queen’s domain, yet the law cannot follow them. To understand its absurdity, however, you only have to imagine the outcry if the situation were reversed: if British MPs could legislate for our overseas territories and police officers could operate in them without hindrance, but lawyers could not argue in their courts and money could not freely move to pay legal fees. The situation we have now is every bit as peculiar as that. We don’t complain only because we’re used to it. The situation is not inevitable (France has a few remaining colonies too, but they’re administered as parts of France, returning representatives to the parliament in Paris), and only persists because it is so profitable to so many well-networked people. The rest of us, however – the citizens of the countries that lose tax revenue, or whose rulers loot their treasuries, or whose drug cartels launder their money – have lost far more than those people gain. We do not have to put up with it. There have been some improvements over the years. That 2018 amendment passed, and will supposedly be implemented one of these years; UK police officers already have access to the jurisdictions’ corporate registries in a way that they once did not. However, the essential dynamic is unchanged. The last pink bits of the old British empire have been transformed into a machine that benefits the rich and powerful at the expense of the rest of us. It is time for Britain’s remaining colonies to make their minds up. If they wish to be independent, they can become so with our blessing and our assistance, but they need to get on with it. If they wish to be British, however, they need to shoulder the responsibilities that come with that, not just the rights. Oliver Bullough is the author of Moneyland: Why Thieves and Crooks Now Rule the World and How to Take It BackEuropean trade officials have been accused of “taking a chainsaw” to a draft EU law to protect the world’s forests, as a leaked document revealed an attempt to water down the plans. The European Commission is due to unveil a proposal on Wednesday to prevent EU sales of beef, soya, cocoa and other products linked to deforestation. A leaked memo seen by the Guardian reveals that commission trade officials have raised “serious concerns” about the regulation drafted by their environment department colleagues. Last week the European commissioner for trade, Valdis Dombrovskis, told delegates at Cop26 that trade policy “must do more to help us achieve our global climate targets”, referencing the upcoming anti-deforestation law. The EU joined the US, China and other major forested countries including Brazil and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a voluntary declaration in Glasgow to halt and reverse the felling of forests. To help make this promise a reality, the EU is proposing to prevent beef, palm oil and other commodities driving deforestation from being sold in its market. In a departure from past EU laws, the commission proposed to regulate products linked to all deforestation, legal or illegal, according to an earlier leaked draft. Previous laws have sought to clamp down on illegal deforestation only. Trade officials have attempted to throw out that provision, arguing that it would be “a direct challenge to notions of sovereignty over land use decisions, whether in the EU or in third countries”. The memo says targeting all deforestation “will be particularly difficult to accept” in forested countries, including Brazil whose president, Jair Bolsonaro, disputes the notion that forests are a global public good. Refocusing the law on illegal deforestation would bring the EU into line with the US and UK, who are considering narrower laws, the officials add. The trade officials also say the costs of complying with the EU law would hurt subsistence-level farmers, and warn of retaliation by foreign governments through the World Trade Organization. In another move to limit the regulation, they argue that the law should be limited to deforestation rather than forest degradation, citing the absence of international definitions on the latter which they say would make the law hard to enforce. “Combined with the absence of international standards, [including forest degradation] poses serious policy and legal concerns and we consider it a risky avenue to try to justify this on the basis of public morals,” the memo states. That move will disappoint environmental campaigners, who this week wrote to the commission urging broad protection of all threatened ecosystems. “Not only is forest degradation a precursor for deforestation, it also fuels climate change and biodiversity loss, as degraded ecosystems lose their capacity to provide essential services to nature and people, such as carbon storage,” said the letter by a coalition of more than 55 non-governmental organisations. Environmentalists point to the work being done by the EU’s scientific arm, the Joint Research Centre, to define international standards of forest degradation, arguing that it would be possible to come up with a working definition of forest degradation. Sini Eräjää, of Greenpeace, one of the signatory organisations, called on the commission to ensure that all deforestation, legal or not, was covered by the law. “We are very aware of the fact that ecosystems that enjoy legal protection today could lose that tomorrow when there is a turn in local politics in the regions where the forests are … Whether legal or not, obviously, biodiversity and climate don’t care,” she said. “While trade commissioner Dombrovskis promises climate action and forest protection at Cop26 in Glasgow, his team in Brussels is taking a chainsaw to the new EU rules supposed to tackle deforestation.”GCSE and A-level students in England will be asked to sit repeated mock exams throughout the academic year in case national exams are cancelled for the third time due to the pandemic. This plan B by the exam regulator Ofqual was criticised by teaching unions and school leaders for being released late in the school year, and for creating a heavier workload for teachers and students. We would like to hear teachers’ views on the plans. How will this affect yours and your students’ workloads? We would also like to hear parents’ thoughts. Do you have any concerns? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Exhibition of the week Ancient Greeks: Science and Wisdom Greek scientists theorised the existence of atoms and believed in a cosmic harmony that glows in the symmetries of their art and architecture. Meet the first great thinkers. • Science Museum, London, 17 November to 5 June Also showing What do you see, you people, gazing at me? Natalie Ball, Tau Lewis and Agata Słowak are among the young figurative artists in this show about bodies, politics and art. • Sadie Coles HQ, London, 16 November to 29 January Thomas Joshua Cooper Eerie photographs of the frozen limits of the Atlantic Ocean by this artist and explorer. • Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, until 23 January Dante: The Invention of Celebrity There’s still time to celebrate the great poet’s 700th anniversary year with this show exploring his fame. • Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, until 9 January Matt Black Photographs of the decaying landscapes of the American Dream. • Magnum Gallery, London, until 17 December Image of the week It’s not only Banksy who can destroy his artworks for fun. Here’s Christopher Walken taking some matt emulsion to one. The stencilled rat was painted over for a scene in the last episode of Stephen Merchant’s TV comedy The Outlaws, in which Walken plays a man doing community service. A spokesman for The Outlaws said: “We can confirm that the artwork at the end of The Outlaws was an original Banksy, and that Christopher Walken painted over that artwork during the filming of this scene, ultimately destroying it.” What we learned The British Museum fitted 3,500 years of Peruvian culture into its new show … … which our critic gave a five-star review The Courtauld is reopening in London, with rooms full of masterpieces The National Gallery published research into its own links with the slave trade Anni and Josef Albers’ legacy has taken on concrete form in Senegal Uganda-born sculptor Leilah Babirye is inspired by the illegal LGBTQ+ scene she left in her native country Grayson Perry answered readers’ questions on cats, the meaning of life and more David Morrissey and Bridgerton’s Phoebe Dynevor star in a new film about ceramicist Clarice Cliff Valerie Strong, wife of Australian artist John Olsen, was an accomplished painter too Street artist Ben Wilson is the Picasso of discarded chewing-gum art Photographer Reed Estabrook captured the quintessentially American art of the roadside monument NFTs are shaking up the art world … while TikTok is a boon for enthusiastic artists and art lovers … … and architecture and design fans British designer Terence Conran lived life in style Tokyo’s metabolist Capsule Tower faces an uncertain future Black British art is bigger than ever A San Francisco gallery is exhibiting international artists’ responses to the climate crisis Penguin’s modern classics were as impressive on the outside as in Tate Britain is celebrating Hogarth and his European contemporaries Jeremy Deller’s latest installation holds a candle to the Murdoch family … … though one Melbourne art critic rather missed the point Hong Kong has a new (Chinese state-approved) modern art museum One London market is an exemplar of urban design and renewal The Taylor Wessing photographic portrait prize announced its 2021 winners Brian May has published a book about Victorian stereoscopic photography … … while Midge Ure’s best photograph captured Paula Yates in mid-flight A collection of bad record cover art is on show in Huddersfield Edinburgh is hosting an exhibition of tapestry portraits of asylum seekers Street photographer Mike Smith preserved the Boston of the 70s Paris Photo 21 offers surreal sights Guardian Photographer Sarah Lee went roaming in the gloaming US illustrator Jerry Pinkney has died aged 81 Art historian Pamela Kember has died aged 66 Masterpiece of the week Wedgwood factory portrait medallion of Galileo, c1775-80 Josiah Wedgwood pioneered the factory and mass-produced classical ceramics for 18th-century middle-class homes. He also campaigned against slavery and was friends with scientists such as Erasmus Darwin, grandfather of Charles. This is a homage to the first modern scientist, Galileo Galilei, who used a telescope to find firm evidence for the theory of Copernicus that Earth orbits the sun. Galileo was a hero in Britain from the time of John Milton, who met him and put him in Paradise Lost. Then again as Brecht has him say in The Life of Galileo, “pity the land that needs heroes”. • British Museum, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comAs Cop26 draws to a close, the climate summit’s big-name sponsors have been left scratching their heads as to how the plucky Scottish fizzy drink Irn-Bru managed to steal the limelight in the marketing ambush of the year. The status of the bright orange drink as the summit’s surprise curiosity made global headlines earlier this week when the US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez posted an Instagram video of herself praising the beverage after having her first taste. AOC, as she is known, was urged to try the drink by the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, who handed her distinguished foreign guest a can on her arrival in Glasgow and then posted a selfie of the moment on Twitter. The subsequent social media explosion and acres of online and print column inches have given the brand a golden marketing moment that millions of pounds of advertising couldn’t hope to emulate. “It is priceless getting this sort of media attention,” says Colin Kennedy, the chief executive of content creation agency Redwood. “Brands very rarely manage to create these sorts of headlines. Sturgeon and AOC have emerged as two ambassadors for Irn-Bru in what looks like a completely authentic, unstaged moment.” While official sponsors from Sky to Sainsbury’s paid millions to burnish their green credentials by being featured at the event, and populated panels with executives, Irn-Bru leveraged its status as a national champion to sew up the on-site fizzy drink market. Its parent company, AG Barr, had an existing deal in place that shut out rivals such as Coke and Pepsi, to make Irn-Bru – often referred to as Scotland’s other national drink (after whisky) – the only fizzy drink available at the SEC and SSE Hydro convention centres in Glasgow used during Cop26. The deal with Glasgow Life, which operates the venues, made AG Barr the exclusive soft drink and water supplier. “That was the clever bit of marketing: availability at the venue,” says Kennedy. “But Irn-Bru is also a kind of proxy for the national drink of Scotland, and it comes with the support of people like Sturgeon.” While almost impossible to estimate, the value of the media coverage would run into the millions for Irn-Bru. A single ad slot on the front page of a UK national newspaper can run to about £15,000, and up to £300,000 for a “wrap” of the Sun, according to media buyers. Buying the digital ad space to reach the millions of readers of the coverage, as well as viewers of AOC’s video, would have run to hundreds of thousands of pounds media spend. However, the coverage has been through editorial content, considered to be much more engaging and therefore more valuable than running ads. Experts say the free coverage is worth several million pounds at least in equivalent media value if such a publicity stunt had been achieved by a PR agency. Aside from Donald Trump, who banned it from his luxury golf resort in Turnberry in 2018, Irn-Bru has a legion of high-profile supporters. Andy Murray eschewed other beverage options to toast his 2012 US Open victory with it, the late Sir Sean Connery reportedly chose a crate of Irn-Bru to represent Scotland at an exhibit at the Museum of Scotland, and in June the Queen and the Duke of Cambridge, Prince William, paid a visit to a new processing factory. Launched in 1901, supposedly as an alternative to beer for steelworkers building Glasgow station, it was originally called Iron Brew but changed to Irn-Bru in 1946 – a decision forced on AG Barr, because the drink isn’t actually brewed. The beverage, which has its own tartan, joins the likes of Coca-Cola and KFC in having a secret recipe – in Irn-Bru’s case, 32 ingredients known by as few as three people. Despite being a brand giant in Scotland, supposedly the only country in the world where Coke is available – though not the most popular fizzy drink – its carefully cultivated image as a brand challenger makes it palatable for political figures to promote. “Would they have been seen grabbing Coca-Cola or a 7UP and posting like that, no chance,” says Mark Borkowski, a PR expert. “They see the quirkiness of Irn-Bru as an emblem of Scotland: it’s OK to like it. And like Marmite, it is an acquired taste – those sorts of products always get strong reactions.” Irn-Bru’s Instagram account runs with the line “Let’s Just Agree It Tastes Like Magic”. Despite the priceless publicity, AG Barr’s share price has remained fairly flat during the Glasgow gathering. The group – which owns or licenses 16 brands including Rubicon, Snapple and Bundaberg – is listed on the London Stock Exchange, but its largest shareholder is still Robin Barr, the former chairman and great-grandson of the founder. The company made £227m in revenues in the year to 24 January 2021, but is not a particularly global business, saying that it “sells mainly to customers in the UK with some international sales”. “It’s been phenomenal to give people from across the globe a unique taste of Irn-Bru during Cop26,” a spokesperson for the company said. However, it is mindful that while the free publicity makes for a marketing dream it musn’t be seen to be “overshadowing or trivialising the importance of the conference for its own gain”. While the publicity has not moved the share price, the orange stuff seems to have won some new fans among a select group of green grandees.Nobody agrees on what French female chic actually is, but everyone agrees that it’s a bit annoying. To some it’s all about the perfect understated navy blazer and a sexy fringe that falls over your eyes just so. To others it’s a fitted skirt suit and a chignon and a cloud of Chanel No 5. It’s a pencil skirt or worn-in white jeans, kitten heels or biker boots, depending on who you ask. Pretty much the only part that everyone can see eye-to-eye on is that the French-women-do-it-better vibe gets on one’s nerves. This is because the elusive French style of dressing isn’t about clothes at all. It’s about confidence, and that makes the rest of us feel insecure and defensive. “French style has got to do with a certain form of arrogance, which I love,” singer and actor Lou Doillon told Vogue. “French girls have a tremendous respect for themselves. Even if a magazine cover is saying, ‘This is what you should be wearing’, they have their own thing going.” Lindsey Tramuta, an American writer who has lived in Paris for 15 years, once wrote: “A Parisian woman does not see fashion as the ultimate expression of herself, but as complementary to her mind, her talents, her opinions, and therefore it doesn’t need to be outlandish. What is compelling is how pieces are worn and the ways they’re lived in.” Carine Roitfeld, former editor of French Vogue, has said style is “how you open your bag, how you cross your legs – just little things that make a difference.” How you open your bag? What does she mean? I don’t know, but I’m pretty sure the way I open my bag – yanking it wide and scrabbling for my keys with all the grace of a fox ripping into a leftover bucket of KFC – isn’t what she’s talking about. Confidence is going out in shoes that you walk in comfortably and gracefully, whether they are Stan Smiths or Christian Louboutins. It is wearing blue when pink is in fashion, because you like it and it suits you. It is bringing a level of attention to detail to the business of dressing yourself for the day, just as you would if you were wrapping a birthday present or cooking a Sunday roast. Because such things are only little things, but in the end the little things in life are the big things in life. Confidence is also the element that unifies Emily in the soon-to-return TV comedy-drama series Emily in Paris with her boss Sylvie, and her friend Camille. It is what makes the pantomime Paris of Emily – pain au chocolat in one hand, Chanel 2.55 in the other – adorable as well as exasperating. It is Camille’s woke-up-like-this perfect hair. It is the reason you know that Sylvie, with her simple black dresses, would smell amazing. And while French style is often written off as a cliche, it is the modern way to dress – the opposite of fast fashion. It is choosing a party dress that flatters and enhances you and keeping it in your wardrobe knowing you can kick back with a drink after work because you only need 10 minutes to get ready for any party, rather than panicking about what to wear and taking refuge in something new and shiny. It is enjoying style but not being dictated to by trends. French style is remembering Carine’s wise words before I start rooting in my bag and realising that my phone is in my back pocket anyway. What’s annoying about French style is that they were right all along.In August, Maersk, the world’s largest shipping company, announced that it would add eight new container ships to its fleet that would be unlike any merchant vessels operating on the high seas today. Instead of running on “bunker” fuel – the gunky, tar-like substance left behind after oil is refined – Maersk plans to power these ships on carbon-neutral methanol, a colorless liquid made from biomass such as agricultural waste or by combining renewably generated hydrogen with carbon dioxide. Globally, very little of this “green” methanol is produced today and compared with the oil industry waste product most ships run on, the cost is high. Maersk hasn’t yet announced a fuel supply for its new fleet but the company hopes that standing up the world’s first green methanol-powered fleet will spur the energy sector to significantly ramp up production of clean fuels. “Rather than talking about how this can’t be done, let’s just get started and let’s start scaling,” said Morten Bo-Christiansen, the head of decarbonization at Maersk. It’s a small step toward the enormous goal of decarbonizing shipping, an industry that accounts for roughly 3% of global greenhouse gas emissions and is far off track from meeting the goals of the Paris climate agreement. Until now, shipping companies, which operate in remote international waters far from the public eye, have managed to avoid meaningful climate regulation. But the industry is facing a reckoning. The US, the EU and other big economies are starting to make pledges and draw up plans to green the shipping sector and at Cop26, a coalition of countries including the UK and the US signed a declaration committing to “strengthen global efforts” to reach net zero by 2050. Business leaders are starting to take note. “Our crews see this as the number one thing on their boardroom agenda now,” said Guy Platten, the secretary general of the International Chamber of Shipping, a trade association that represents roughly 80% of the world’s merchant fleet. A huge industry with a huge climate footprint The shipping industry is a critical pillar of the global economy, with about 90% of all globally traded goods – from oil and steel to furniture and iPhones – ferried around the world by sea. In order to move all those goods, merchant ships burn approximately 300m metric tons of dirty fossil fuels each year, emitting roughly 1bn metric tons of carbon dioxide in the process. That is roughly equivalent to the annual carbon emissions of Japan. The shipping industry will have to eliminate those carbon emissions by 2050 in order to stay in line with the Paris climate agreement’s 1.5C global heating target. But between 2012 and 2018, its emissions rose by 10%. The International Maritime Organization (IMO), the UN body that regulates shipping, predicts that by 2050, the industry’s emissions could be 30% higher than they were in 2008. For that to change, tougher regulations are needed. The IMO adopted an initial energy efficiency regulation for ships in 2011, which set minimum fuel efficiency requirements per mile traveled and another one this June aimed at reducing the carbon intensity of ships by 40% by 2030. Those standards have “basically codified a business as usual trend”, says Faïg Abbasov, the shipping program director at the Belgium-based non-profit Transport &amp; Environment. The June measure requires shipping companies to give their vessels an A-E grade on energy efficiency and submit a “corrective action plan” for any ships that receive a D or E for three consecutive years. But the scores will not be made public and no mechanism exists to force dirty ships to improve, said Abbasov. In 2018, the IMO set a goal of cutting the industry’s carbon pollution at least in half by 2050. But it hasn’t adopted any binding emissions reduction targets or regulations to achieve the target and even if it did, the goal is still far short of what’s needed to remain in line with the Paris agreement. Industry observers ascribe this partly to the slow nature of rule-making at the IMO, but also to corporate influence at the UN agency, where industry representatives are frequently appointed to serve on state delegations. “There’s very little doubt” the shipping industry has stalled IMO climate regulations, said Aoife O’Leary, the CEO of Opportunity Green, a non-profit focused on international climate issues including shipping. A patchwork of regulations But change appears to be on the horizon. The EU is now moving to regulate shipping emissions under its emissions trading system, with a phase-in beginning in 2023. Under the proposed law, by 2026 shipping companies will need to pay for the carbon they emit traveling to and from the EU and between EU ports. Separately, the EU is proposing a fuel mandate that would compel the industry to use a progressively greater share of low- and zero-carbon fuels in its ships. And in April, the US committed to pursuing a zero emissions shipping industry by 2050. While the shipping industry has pushed back against the idea of a patchwork of climate regulations across different nations, O’Leary said these could compel the IMO to take more ambitious action. “If you look at the history of IMO regulations, they’ve often acted because the EU or the US have acted on their own,” she said. The industry does seem more eager to talk about climate. In March, the International Chamber of Shipping proposed a carbon levy of $2 a metric ton of fuel to go towards research and development of clean shipping technology. This proposal, along with a far more ambitious proposal by the Marshall Islands to tax merchant vessels to the tune of $100 a metric ton of bunker fuel, will be discussed at an IMO meeting in late November. Platten of the International Chamber of Shipping wouldn’t say whether the industry would support the specific fuel tax proposed by the Marshall Islands. But he said that shipping businesses “welcome the discussion and debate of market-based measures” to drive down emissions and make low and zero carbon synthetic fuels more economically viable. In October, the ICS called for next zero emissions for the industry by 2050, doubling the ambitions of the IMO. The quest for zero carbon fuel Transforming the shipping sector means zero-carbon fuels must become available on a commercial scale, along with the infrastructure required to pump them into ships. Green methanol, ammonia and hydrogen can all be made with renewable energy, in processes that start with splitting water in an electrolyzer to produce hydrogen. But while green methanol can be dropped into existing ships with fairly minimal retrofits, the other two will require significant modifications of ship designs and operational procedures. Ammonia and hydrogen are gases at room temperature and will need refrigerated tanks to store as liquids. Ammonia is also toxic to marine life and humans, raising safety and environmental concerns. Hydrogen, meanwhile, has a very low energy density compared with oil, which means that ships using it would have to carry much larger volumes of fuel, or be refilled far more often. Proving that alternative fuels are safe and reliable to use on commercial vessels, then scaling them up and deploying them across the global shipping industry will be an expensive and time-consuming endeavor. “What we are really looking at is decades of investment and innovation ahead of us,” said Bo Cerup-Simonsen, the CEO of the Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Center for Zero Carbon Shipping, a research and development center. “It’s fair to say that we’re talking billions,” he said, “but I think the trillions come when we start to scale this up to become industry wide.” Researchers have estimated that if zero emissions fuels comprise 5% of the international shipping fuel mix by 2030, the industry will be on a path to fully decarbonize by 2050. The Global Maritime Forum’s Getting to Zero Coalition believes that target is achievable based on recently announced plans, including the EU’s 2020 Hydrogen Strategy, which calls for building at least 40 gigawatts of renewable hydrogen electrolyzers by 2030, as well as China and Japan’s goals to ramp up hydrogen fuel production. ‘We’re not there just yet’ While the task ahead is daunting, Cerup-Simonsen is optimistic. The number of large companies expressing interest in carbon-free shipping is growing “day by day”, he said, as is interest from their customers. “You’re seeing mining companies, some of the big retailers, big auto manufacturers starting to demand a greening of their supply chains, including shipping,” Cerup-Simonsen said. Large consumer-facing businesses could be key in helping to drive change in the shipping industry, says Madeline Rose, the climate campaign director at Pacific Environment who recently led a report on the shipping pollution associated with 15 major retail brands, including Amazon, Walmart and Target. In 2019 alone, the report found that these companies were responsible for three coal fired power plants’ worth of carbon pollution through their US shipping imports. Despite making ambitious climate pledges in recent years, most of the companies highlighted in the report do not appear to account for marine pollution in their corporate emissions reporting. Amazon, along with companies including Ikea and Unilever, signed a pledge in October to only move goods on ships using zero carbon fuel by 2040. While retailers demanding cleaner shipping could motivate shipping companies to bring new options online faster, Abbasov of Transport &amp; Environment is doubtful that voluntary corporate pledges will drive transformative change. For now, he says, regulations are needed to make alternative fuels more economically attractive and prevent corporate greenwashing. “Once there are regulations, once the technology has become very common, individual companies can take one extra step and go further than the law says,” Abbasov said. “For shipping, we’re not there just yet.” • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to correct the name of the Getting to Zero Coalition which had been given as the “Getting to Net Zero Coalition” in an earlier version.A second draft of the outcome of the Cop26 climate summit has been published. It will be subject to many further revisions before the final outcome is published, probably on Saturday or even Sunday. Key provisions are still in there, including one calling for countries to return to the negotiating table next year because current targets to cut greenhouse gas emissions are inadequate to limit global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, the tougher of two goals in the 2015 Paris climate agreement. There is also a reference to phasing out coal and fossil fuel subsidies, which has not been substantially weakened, though some civil society groups have complained that it should be stronger. Here are some of the key points: I. Science and urgency 1. Recognizes the importance of the best available science for effective climate action and policymaking; The first draft began with just “science” but the second draft has added “and urgency” – that’s a strengthening that might easily go unnoticed. This is the very first paragraph after the preamble, and it’s easy to overlook but it really is very important. The best available science is at the core of the 1992 UN framework convention on climate change and of the 2015 Paris agreement. And the best available science has changed notably since 1992, and since 2015. The Paris agreement contains two key goals: to limit global temperature rises to “well below” 2C above pre-industrial levels, and to “pursue efforts” to limit heating to 1.5C. In October 2018, at the behest of the 2015 Paris climate summit, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change – the global authority on climate science – produced a special report on what 1.5C would mean. That report found serious damages from 1.5C of heating, including the inundation of some low-lying areas by sea level rises and storm surges; an increase in extreme weather such as heatwaves, droughts, floods and intensifying storms; an accelerated melting of ice that could rapidly become irreversible; and the die-off of coral reefs. The world is currently at about 1.1C of heating and the increase in extreme weather around the world is already apparent. So the reaffirmation of “the best available science” is one of the key ways for negotiators to focus attention on the tougher 1.5C goal, rather than the upper “well below” 2C limit, without being accused of trying to reopen the Paris agreement. Christiana Figueres and Laurence Tubiana, two of the three architects of the Paris agreement, told the Guardian that to be guided by the science was at the core of the Paris agreement and must be at the core of any outcome from Glasgow. 3. Expresses alarm and utmost concern that human activities have caused around 1.1 °C of warming to date, that impacts are already being felt in every region, and that carbon budgets consistent with achieving the Paris Agreement temperature goal are now small and being rapidly depleted; Again, a small change but interesting: the previous draft noted “alarm and concern” – that was quite strong, but it has been upgraded to “utmost concern”. And there’s an additional reference to the carbon budgets being “small”; that wasn’t there before. Some of these words may not make it into the final text, but the tactic of beefing up the science and concern is consistent with the desire of many countries to focus attention on 1.5C and the sense of urgency that is needed to bolster their insistence that negotiators must come back next year with strengthened national plans on emissions (known as nationally determined contributions or NDCs). II. Adaptation 6. Notes with serious concern the findings from the contribution of Working Group I to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report, including that climate and weather extremes and the adverse impacts on people and nature will continue to increase with every additional increment of rising temperatures; 7. Emphasizes the urgency of scaling up action and support, including finance, capacitybuilding and technology transfer, to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to climate change in line with the best available science, taking into account the priorities and needs of developing country Parties; 8. Welcomes the adaptation communications and national adaptation plans submitted to date, which enhance the understanding and implementation of adaptation actions and priorities; 9. Urges Parties to further integrate adaptation into local, national and regional planning; 10. Requests Parties that have not yet done so to submit their adaptation communications in accordance with decision 9/CMA.1 ahead of the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement so as to provide timely input to the global stocktake; 11. Recognizes the importance of the global goal on adaptation for the effective implementation of the Paris Agreement, and welcomes the launch of the comprehensive two-year XX work programme on the global goal on adaptation; The section on adaptation has been much expanded from the initial text. This is good for developing countries, whose key concerns are adaptation and finance. They still regard this text as insufficient, but the crucial “balance” – how much weight the concerns over adaptation and finance are given, compared with obligations on reducing emissions (known as mitigation) – is improved in this draft. Setting up a work programme may seem feeble and “can-kicking”, but in the context of the UNFCCC and Paris Agreement it means the issue becomes a focus of attention, with proper accountability for progress within the process, and an assurance that all parties will have their view heard. 18. Urges developed country Parties to at least double their collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to developing country Parties from the current level by 2025 as a step towards achieving a balance between mitigation and adaptation in the provision of scaled-up financial resources, recalling Article 9, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement; The Guardian understands that some developed countries want to remove the reference to doubling climate finance for adaptation. But for developing countries this is a major concern. Most of the climate finance currently provided – which already falls short of the $100bn a year promised by 2020 – goes to projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions, such as renewable energy, and goes to middle-income countries rather than the poorest. Focusing on adaptation would direct more money to the poorest, and enable them to press ahead with vital resilience projects that are essential to safeguard them against the worsening impacts of extreme weather. III. Mitigation 20. Reaffirms the Paris Agreement temperature goal of holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels; 21. Recognizes that the impacts of climate change will be much lower at the temperature increase of 1.5 °C compared with 2 °C and resolves to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C; 22. Also recognizes that limiting global warming to 1.5 °C requires rapid, deep and sustained reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions, including reducing global carbon dioxide emissions by 45 per cent by 2030 relative to the 2010 level and to net zero around mid-century, as well as deep reductions in non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gases; 23. Further recognizes that this requires accelerated action in this critical decade The Guardian understands that some countries wanted to remove the entire section on mitigation. Reaffirming the Paris goals is essential, and these words are consistent with the countries who want to focus attention on 1.5C. This text retains key language on how far emissions need to be cut this decade and underlines once again why action this decade is crucial. This will bolster those who want to “keep 1.5C alive”. 28. Urges Parties that have not yet communicated new or updated nationally determined contributions to do so as soon as possible in advance of the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement; 29. Recalls Articles 3 and 4, paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 11, of the Paris Agreement and requests Parties to revisit and strengthen the 2030 targets in their nationally determined contributions as necessary to align with the Paris Agreement temperature goal by the end of 2022, taking into account different national circumstances; 30. Also requests the secretariat to update the synthesis report on nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement annually, to be made available to each session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement; 31. Decides to convene an annual high-level ministerial round table on pre-2030 ambition, beginning at the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement; 32. Urges Parties that have not yet done so to communicate, by the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, long term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies referred to in Article 4, paragraph 19, of the Paris Agreement towards just transition to net zero emissions by or around midcentury, taking into account different national circumstances; 33. Invites Parties to update the strategies referred to in paragraph 32 above regularly, as appropriate, in line with the best available science; Countries are still being asked to come back next year to strengthen their NDCs. That is at the heart of this conference, and the slight change in language – from “urge” countries to return to “request” – is not a massive change in the context of the legalese used in the Paris agreement. The crucial point here is that countries will have to return next year to scrutinise NDCs again, and there’s enough language around and about it to ensure that such scrutiny is in line with the 1.5C target. Revisiting countries’ targets next year is absolutely essential, the three architects of the original Paris agreement have exclusively told the Guardian. 36. Calls upon Parties to accelerate the development, deployment and dissemination of technologies and the adoption of policies for the transition towards low-emission energy systems, including by rapidly scaling up clean power generation and accelerating the phaseout of unabated coal power and of inefficient subsidies for fossil fuels; Some activists have been angry that the language on coal and fossil fuels has been watered down. The previous text read simply: Calls upon Parties to accelerate the phasing-out of coal and subsidies for fossil fuels; However, the addition of a reference to “unabated” coal is not surprising. That’s the standard term used, in order to allow for countries to keep open the possibility of using carbon capture and storage technology to cut emissions from coal-fired power plants. It’s surprising that it wasn’t in the original, in fact. As for “inefficient” subsidies – some countries argue that they need to be allowed to continue to protect their poor and most vulnerable citizens against high fuel prices, and that being unable to do so could cause serious hardship. Some NGOs regard this as a fig leaf, but these countries do have a point. The important thing to note is that no Cop decision text has explicitly referred to a phase-out of coal or fossil fuel subsidies before, so it is surprising to many that this reference is still in. Fossil fuel producers are avid in protecting their interests, and the Cops run by consensus, so agreement has often in the past been held up by the work of fossil fuel producers behind the scenes. V Finance, technology transfer and capacity-building for mitigation and adaptation 40. Urges developed country Parties to provide enhanced support, including through financial resources, technology transfer and capacity-building, to assist developing country Parties with respect to both mitigation and adaptation, in continuation of their existing obligations under the Convention and the Paris Agreement, and encourages other Parties to provide or continue to provide such support voluntarily; Finance is the key sticking point for developing countries at these negotiations, and they are still hoping for more action on this. There’s a small but significant addition to this text – the reference to developed countries needing to provide support to developing countries is standard, but “other parties to provide or continue to provide such support voluntarily”. That means big economies that are still classed as developing, such as China, being encouraged to provide climate finance alongside the historically industrialised world. VI. Loss and damage 61. Acknowledges that climate change has already caused and will increasingly cause loss and damage and that, as temperatures rise, impacts from climate and weather extremes, as well as slow onset events, will pose an ever-greater social, economic and environmental threat; Loss and damage refers to the ravages of climate breakdown that are so severe they can’t be protected against or adapted to – for instance, the devastation caused by a hurricane or cyclone. For poor countries, this is separate to the need for finance for adaptation. But up to now, although loss and damage has been recognised as an issue at the talks, there has been now funding made available for loss and damage. Cop26 is still only taking baby steps on this key issue for developing countries, and poor countries will want to see much more on this before there is a text they can fully support.A growing number of private clinics are offering ketamine for depression, according to experts who warn of a potential “wild west” of providers with no national register of patients’ treatment being integrated into overall NHS care. At least six private providers in the UK offer the drug for depression. In March the first service that also includes psychotherapy opened in Bristol, charging £6,000 for a course of low-dose treatments and talking therapy. But health experts expressed concern about creating a two-tier system in which the novel treatment is unavailable to NHS patients. They also warned of “doctor shopping”, where patients go to a ketamine clinic one day and another the next without health professionals being able to keep track of who is getting the drug. Scientists said the NHS healthcare watchdog was taking too long to update its guidance informing clinical practice on prescribing antidepressants in the UK. It was last updated in 2009. Ketamine has a reputation as a party drug because of its short-term dissociative effects but is licensed as an anaesthetic. When abused, the drug can cause long-term problems such as ulcers, pain in the bladder and kidney problems. But it has shown potential in depression treatment trials for those who are resistant to other treatments. Because ketamine is licensed to be used by doctors as an anaesthetic it can be prescribed off-licence for depression, which is what is happening in private clinics. To be prescribed on the NHS, it would need to be approved by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) as a cost-effective treatment. Ketamine would also need to be authorised by the Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory Agency to be marketed as a treatment for depression. Between 10% and 30% of people with depression do not respond to at least two drug treatments, equivalent to about 2.7 million people in the UK. Prof Allan Young, the clinical academic lead in the psychological medicine and integrated care clinical academic group at the South London and Maudsley NHS Ttrust, said: “If it is being done privately, a big question is how is it integrated into their overall care. The model in this country is GP and then secondary care. Nevertheless, you could potentially go and get ketamine and your GP does not know about it and has no referral to psychiatric services. “I certainly think the possibility of it being a two-tier system is correct. There may not be equity of access and availability.” Young raised concern about “doctor shopping”. “I’m not worried about abuse if it is given in a hospital setting,” he said, adding that those who get the drug also need a thorough psychiatric assessment beforehand. He said people tended to need “ongoing treatments” for the drug to be effective, not just a short-term number of infusions. “The NHS tends to only do things that are Nice-recommended. The Nice depression guidelines are currently mired in multiple controversies,” Young said. “In a sense, the health watchdog isn’t doing its job in a timely fashion … The evidence base for infusion is small but certainly very suggestive of benefit. The infusion hasn’t been through the big trials. I’d love to see Nice address this.” The psychedelics researcher Prof David Nutt, of Imperial College London, said he was not sure what was holding back an NHS rollout but there was “resistance to ketamine becoming a licensed medicine”. “I am not concerned about private clinics as long as they are monitored by the right authorities, such as the CQC [Care Quality Commission] … Of course, I am a great believer in the NHS and would dearly love all treatments to be made available via the health service but if it isn’t then I am glad it can be available elsewhere,” he said. “There is growing evidence in the near future that ketamine could be a gamechanger for addiction treatment.” Dr Paul Keedwell, a Cardiff University psychiatrist, said ketamine was an exciting treatment for depression but it was important for private clinics to keep a register of the patients. Esketamine is a related drug, similar to ketamine, that has been approved for depression. Johnson &amp; Johnson developed the ketamine derivative and sells it as a nasal spray called Spravato. However, Nice has not recommended it for use on the NHS, saying it was not cost-effective. Keedwell said Nice’s concerns could be a “false economy” given the money they could save helping those with treatment-resistant depression. A Nice spokesperson said: “We are working with Janssen [J&amp;J’s subsidiary] on the appraisal of esketamine and our committee will meet to review the latest evidence on its clinical and cost effectiveness. “Our updated depression guidelines are due to be released for consultation later this month.”Monday If I were to stumble on a £3m windfall, I wouldn’t be making a donation to the Tory party. I’d get each of the kids somewhere to live, buy a couple of Jennifer Lee pots along with first editions of Brighton Rock and The Great Gatsby, treat myself to a couple of opera away weekends somewhere in mainland Europe, and put the rest aside for a rainy day. But for the mega-rich, donating to the Conservative party – or philanthropy, as George Eustice, the environment secretary, put it – seems quite a cheap way of sharp-elbowing your way into positions of power. The Sunday Times reported that a £3m donation and a token stint as party treasurer was enough to guarantee a seat in the House of Lords. Which actually seems extraordinarily good value at the price. If you’ve got more than £100m in the bank – and the Conservatives know plenty who have – then you’d barely notice £3m sliding out of your account. And for that you get to call yourself Lord and pick up all sorts of other perks that come with the title. It’s time the Tories showed the upper house some proper respect and moved the entry bar into the tens of millions. Tuesday Most of us like to think we have a fairly functional inbuilt bullshit detector. That we can tell when people are talking rubbish. But a new study by Canadian and Israeli academics, published on the PsyArXiv website, suggests we may be more gullible than we thought. Much of our willingness to attribute meaning to something that sounds as if it is nonsense depends on who we think said it. Bill Gates and Michelle Obama we take seriously. Kim Kardashian and Richard Nixon not so much. Take the idea that “we live not, in reality, on the summit of a solid earth but at the bottom of an ocean of air”. If you were told that this came from a Hallmark inspirational greetings card, you’d probably have been inclined to dismiss it immediately. But if you were told it was actually said by the philosopher and mathematician Thales of Miletus, one of the Seven Sages of Greece, you’d have given it the benefit of the doubt. You might even have found it meaningful, despite it not making much sense. It turns out that “pseudo-profound bullshit” studies – the willingness to attribute truthfulness to nonsense – are a fast-growing area in psychology: PsyArXiv has at least six other papers devoted to the subject published this year. What no one seems to have yet been able to determine is whether those who are regular bullshitters are better able to detect it in others. Nor does it seem clear whether bullshitters are always aware they are talking bullshit: it is genuinely possible that Donald Trump and Boris Johnson believe most of what they say. It also seems likely that your receptivity to bullshit rather depends on how desperate you are to believe it. When I was in the mental hospital this summer, some of the therapists used new age language that my normal cynical self would have rejected. But when I was on my knees I didn’t question it. Maybe I’m just shallow. Wednesday Our youngest is 26 today. Happy birthday, Robbie. I couldn’t be more proud of the person he has become, as he’s far more caring and sorted than I was at his age and is the type of young man I would have liked to have been. But his birthday does make me feel ancient. It’s not just that the years seem to be slipping by faster and faster – though I can still vividly remember bringing him home from hospital after he was born, wondering if I was going to be a good enough dad to him and his sister: it’s also that me having adult children feels absurd. A category error. I don’t feel ready to be this old. Then, maybe I should take lessons in the ageing process from my 97-year-old mother. When I visited her in the care home last weekend she informed me that she didn’t think she was going to make old bones. This from a woman who survived being machine-gunned by a Messerschmitt – she tells me she can still hear the sound of the bullets hitting the road beside her – as she was running for shelter during an air raid on Portsmouth where she was serving as a Wren in the war. And who only last year managed to contract the mildest form of Covid, when many others of her age were not so lucky. She was more upset at being placed in self-isolation, with the carers bringing her food in full PPE, than she was by her symptoms of a slight fever and cough. Even so, she didn’t look as if she entirely believed me when I told her she already had made old bones. I just have to hope I have her genes rather than my father’s. He died of heart failure when he was 77. Thursday Parliament is on a two-day recess and no one I’ve asked has any idea why. After all, it was only about a month ago that the Commons was on recess for a week, so it can’t be because MPs need some more time off. The only logical explanation is that some MPs have fallen behind on their second jobs and need a few days to catch up. Much of the investigation into MPs’ outside earnings has focused on the jaw-dropping £1m that Geoffrey Cox has raked in over the course of the last year, but two other Tories have also caught my eye. The first is Chris “Failing” Grayling, who makes an extra £100k a year as a strategic adviser to Hutchison Ports. This has to be a joke. What sea-faring operation would hire a former transport minister who awarded a £13m contract to a ferry company that was planning to operate out of a port that was not designed to take any ferries? Even if it had any, which it didn’t. The other MP to come to my attention is Ben Bradley, who the register of interests says works 30 hours a week as leader of Nottinghamshire county council and 30 hours a week as a member of the executive board of East Midlands Councils. That’s five 12-hour days working outside parliament. Presumably he saves weekends for his constituency work. The register also says he earns £600 a year from East Midlands Councils, so it’s safe to assume he’s not in it for the money. And that he’s never heard of the national living wage. The cabinet had been due to spend one of their two days off on a special management away day at Chequers – I’ve always wanted to go on one of these – but had second thoughts after no one wanted to be shot in the back by Boris during the afternoon paintballing session. Instead, they were holding a cabinet meeting in London where they were to discuss levelling up. Perhaps they could get some input from Cox via Zoom from Mauritius. Friday Cop26 is due to end today but Boris Johnson’s press conference earlier in the week, when he returned to Glasgow for a couple of hours, was remarkable for his declaration that the UK was “not remotely a corrupt country”. Hardly the most reassuring of statements as he urged world leaders to make one last effort to reach a meaningful climate agreement, since it had all the conviction of someone trying to persuade his wife he wasn’t having an affair. Practice doesn’t make perfect in Boris’s case, because since then the media’s focus has been on all the ways Britain is a corrupt country. Paid lobbying, trying to undermine the standards commissioner, cash for honours, signing the Northern Ireland protocol in bad faith and the prime minister’s financing of the redecoration of his Downing Street flat and accepting a free holiday from someone he had put in the Lords naturally all took centre stage, but the UK’s refusal to pay back £400m to Iran – Richard Ratcliffe is now on the 20th day of his hunger strike as part of his heroic struggle to get his wife, Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, released from Iran (don’t forget it was Boris Johnson’s failure to read his brief that was partially responsible for her remaining in prison) – could be added to the charge sheet. The debt dates back to the 1970s when the UK refused to deliver the remaining tanks it had promised and for which it had already been paid when Iran became a theocracy. Clearly the ethical thing to have done would have been just to return the unspent money. After all, that’s what would have been expected of any legitimate commercial business. Instead the UK has been fighting and losing court cases not to pay the £400m. When Ratcliffe brought up the subject in a recent meeting with the Foreign Office, he said the junior minister James Cleverly just clammed up. The Iranians report that our excuse is sanctions prevent us repaying the dosh, even though the central bank of Iran is not a sanctioned body. If the problem is that we just don’t have the cash, then maybe the government could just flog off another 150 peerages. That should cover it. Digested week, digested: Where’s Geoffrey? A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Austria is to introduce a lockdown for unvaccinated people in two of Europe’s worst-hit coronavirus regions from Monday and could extend it across the country, the chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, has said. Millions of people not fully vaccinated against Covid in the regions of Upper Austria and Salzburg will be allowed to leave their homes only for reasons considered essential to life, such as going to work, grocery shopping or visiting the doctor, Schallenberg said – measures believed to be unprecedented in Europe. The restrictions are in line with recommendations from medical experts and will be monitored through random checks that the health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein, compared to traffic controls. Separately, the German government said it planned to tighten restrictions against unvaccinated people, as infections in both countries soared to record highs and intensive care units faced increasing strain. Schallenberg said regional leaders meeting on Sunday would approve the plans, which could then be applied across the country, and that spot checks would be used to enforce the lockdown. “Unvaccinated people will only be allowed to leave their flats to go to work, for food shopping or when they need to stretch their legs,” he said. He added that the measures relied on people using their common sense, because blanket controls were not possible. “We don’t live in a police state and are not able – and nor do we want – to control every street corner,” he said. According to virologists, the aggressive spread of Covid is owing to the Delta variant, coupled with a vaccination rate that remains too low. About 65% of Austria’s population are fully vaccinated against coronavirus, national statistics show, while 67% are vaccinated in Germany. Experts say a vaccination rate of at least 75% is needed to control the pandemic. In Upper Austria, just under 60% of the population are vaccinated. Both countries have a system of digital coronavirus passports, with most people carrying the proof in QR scans on mobile phones. At an earlier press conference, Mückstein announced a vaccine mandate for all health workers, though he did not specify when it would come into force. Mückstein, a member of the Greens, said the lockdown would depend on “everyone pulling their weight … we all have a job to reduce our contacts”. He compared it to speed restrictions in the vicinity of schools. “If you have a 30 km/h [18.6 mph] speed limit you can’t control every vehicle but it’s a sensible rule and you depend on people abiding by that rule,” he said. The police union in Austria has already voiced its concerns about implementing the restrictions, fearing a public backlash. The World Health Organization said Europe was once again “at the centre” of the pandemic, with Covid cases at or surpassing record levels, because of uneven vaccine coverage and a relaxation of preventive measures. It said 500,000 more deaths were forecast in the region by February. Coronavirus deaths rose by 10% across the continent over the past week, making it the only world region where both Covid-19 cases and deaths are steadily increasing, according to a WHO report. Germany’s outgoing health minister, Jens Spahn, said on Friday the country faced a “bitter December” if immediate measures were not taken, as he announced a return to free testing from Saturday and plans to introduce a rule that would mean only people who had proof of vaccination or recovery from Covid could attend cultural or sporting events. They will also have to produce a negative test. Germany recorded record infections for three days in a row this week. On Friday it reported almost 49,000 cases, with numbers doubling every week. The government’s disease control agency, RKI, called for the cancellation of major events, just as the carnival season gets under way and Christmas markets are about to open. RKI’s head, Lothar Wieler, said the fourth wave was “rolling on full power”, describing the situation as “five minutes past 12”. In an effort to boost a flagging vaccine campaign, including encouraging top-up jabs, Spahn said doctors would receive €28 (£24) instead of €20 a jab, and a further bonus for jabs given at the weekend. In the Netherlands, the government was expected to announce new lockdown measures on Friday after a record number of daily infections – 16,364 – were registered. According to media reports there are plans for a three-week set of restrictions, including a 7pm closing time for restaurants, pubs and non-essential shops and a restriction on the size of private gatherings in households to just four additional people. Austria has the lowest vaccination rate of any western European country apart from Liechtenstein, according to data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The chancellor said on Thursday that the rate was “shamefully low”. Many Austrians are sceptical about vaccinations, a view encouraged by the far-right Freedom party, the third biggest in parliament. Schallenberg said on Thursday: “I don’t see why two-thirds should lose their freedom because one-third is dithering. For me it is clear that there should be no lockdown for the vaccinated out of solidarity for the unvaccinated.” The number of new coronavirus infections in Austria has risen again to a record high, with 11,975 cases recorded within 24 hours, according to authorities. The seven-day incidence per 100,000 inhabitants climbed to 751, three times the figure in Germany. Eastern European states have some of the continent’s lowest vaccination rates and are recording some of the world’s highest daily death rates per capita. With reporting from Reuters and Associated PressRon Flowers, who has died aged 87, played football of such quality and consistency across such a prolonged period that his career was able to span not just a whole era of huge achievement at Wolverhampton Wanderers in the 1950s, but England’s victorious 1966 World Cup victory and beyond. He won three First Division titles and an FA Cup with Wolves during a golden period at the club, and was 31 when called up for the 1966 World Cup finals as the oldest player in England’s 22-man squad. While he did not actually play in any of the matches during that tournament, he came agonisingly close to appearing in the 4-2 defeat of West Germany in the final. On the night before the match, Flowers was told by the England manager, Alf Ramsey, that Jack Charlton had taken ill – and that if he was no better in the morning then he would be in the starting lineup. After a sleepless night, it transpired that Charlton had made a recovery, and so Flowers had to sit out the match on the bench. Under the rules that then pertained, Flowers therefore did not receive a World Cup winners’ medal, although many years later football’s governing body changed its mind, and – along with a number of other members of the England squad – he took delivery of one at 10 Downing Street in 2009. The 1966 tournament had been a second tilt at the World Cup for Flowers, who had played with distinction in the 1962 version in Chile. By that time he had been at the top level of the game for a decade with a great Wolves side, and had retreated from an attacking midfield position at wing-half to a more defensive role, playing at left-half for England with Bobby Moore, newly capped, on the right. Twice Flowers would show his cool accuracy from the penalty spot in Chile, first in the opening game, which was lost 2-1 to Hungary, and then in the 3-1 victory against Argentina in the third, before England lost to Brazil in the quarter-finals. He had not looked quite so assured when he made his debut for England against France in Paris as a 20-year-old in 1955. Playing at wing-half, Flowers found that the long passing ethos of Wolves had become so ingrained in his play that he kept firing the ball ahead of Stanley Matthews to run on to, rather than directly at his feet, as the great winger always required. As a result, he did not play for his country for another three years. However, Flowers returned to the fold in 1958 for a home international against Wales, and would keep his England place with only an occasional absence for the next seven years, having a run of 40 consecutive games at one point. He was still there in 1966, playing against Norway in Oslo on the eve of the World Cup, although that match turned out to be the last of his 49 international caps. He captained his country three times and scored 10 goals, with a six-out-of-six penalty record. Born the son of a coalminer in Edlington, near Doncaster, Flower was spotted as a schoolboy playing for Edlington grammar school and then Yorkshire Boys. He developed his talents at Wath Wanderers, then a nursery team for Wolves, and signed for the Midlands club as a professional on his 18th birthday. The Wolves manager, Stan Cullis, gave him his debut a couple of months later in September 1952, against Blackpool. Flowers scored with a header in that match and played 20 games in the 1952-53 season, establishing himself as a regular attacking midfielder in a team that became a dominant force in English football for the best part of a decade. With Wolves he won the First Division championship in 1953-54, 1957-58 and 1958-59 – and the FA Cup in 1960 after a 3-0 defeat of Blackburn Rovers. He also played in the pioneering “floodlit friendlies” at Wolves against continental European sides such as Honved and Real Madrid, which caught the imagination of the British public. Eventually the good times ended, and Cullis was sacked in 1964 when Wolves were relegated. Flowers helped his team regain First Division status after two seasons, but left at the end of the 1966-67 season to become player-manager of Northampton Town, having played 515 games for Wolves. At Northampton he made 62 league appearances, but in his second season the team were relegated to the Fourth Division, and in 1969 he switched to become player-manager at non-league Telford United, whom he led to the first ever final of the FA Trophy, losing 2-0 to Macclesfield Town in 1970. He lost his job at Telford in October 1971 and then moved out of the game to concentrate on running a successful sportswear store in Wolverhampton, which still flourishes. He was made MBE earlier this year. He is survived by his wife, Yvonne Hart, whom he married in 1957, and their two sons. • Ron Flowers, footballer, born 28 July 1934; died 12 November 2021A former RAF officer who organised the flight in which the footballer Emiliano Sala was killed has been jailed for 18 months. David Henderson, 67, who was accused in court of running a “cowboy outfit”, showed little emotion as the judge, Mr Justice Foxton, told him he had put profit before safety. Foxton said Henderson had been keen to assist an “important client”, the football agent Willie McKay, and he arranged for pilot David Ibbotson to fly Sala, 28, even though his licence did not allow him to carry passengers in commercial flights. The judge said: “You sent numerous messages to Mr Ibbotson; I’m sure these messages illustrate a lurking doubt as to whether he was fully up to the job.” He told Henderson he had a “cavalier” attitude to organising the flight, adding: “Air safety regulations and systems … are written in blood.” The judge said Henderson was guilty of a “flagrant breach” of safety regulations for profit. He continued: “I am sure aspects of your operation were unlawful and you took steps to keep them off the radar as far as the CAA [the UK Civil Aviation Authority] were involved. “This was illustrated by your message to Mr Ibbotson, which read: ‘We both have the opportunity to make money out of the business model but not if we upset clients or draw the attention of the CAA’. You were reckless rather than merely negligent by disregarding the regulations.” The Argentinian striker Sala was being flown from Nantes in France to the Welsh capital to join his new club, Cardiff City, on the evening of 21 January 2019 when the single-engine Piper Malibu aircraft plunged into the Channel north of Guernsey in bad weather. His body was recovered from the seabed 68 metres down. The body of Ibbotson, from Lincolnshire, has not been found. Jurors heard that McKay had asked Henderson to arrange the flight. Henderson could not fly Sala himself as he was in Paris with his wife so he asked Ibbotson to do it. But Ibbotson did not hold a commercial pilot’s licence, a qualification to fly at night, and his rating to fly the single-engine Piper Malibu had expired. Henderson, of Hotham in east Yorkshire, was found guilty of endangering the safety of an aircraft by a jury at Cardiff crown court. During the trial, the prosecutor, Martin Goudie QC, said Henderson had created a culture of breaching air navigation regulations among the pilots he hired and ran a “cowboy outfit”. At the sentencing hearing Goudie claimed Henderson cut costs “at the expense of safety”. Henderson alleged in the witness box that McKay could be “insistent” but Goudie rejected the idea that Henderson felt “pressured” into organising the flight. Stephen Spence QC, defending, said flying had been Henderson’s passion and livelihood, and since the crash and prosecution he had suffered mental health difficulties and heart problems. A report by the Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) concluded Ibbotson was probably suffering from carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning when the accident happened, possibly caused by a fault in the exhaust tailpipe that allowed gas to enter the cabin through the heating system. Outside court, Henderson’s lawyer, Andrew Shanahan, said his legal team would consider an appeal. The Air Charter Association, the global trade association for the charter industry, warned illegal flights were still taking place every day. Its chair, Kevin Ducksbury, said: “We hope the guilty verdict and the sentence issued will set a precedent for those involved in illegal air charter operations. There is still work to be done to ensure that illegal charter is fully eradicated from our industry. Whilst instances like this case, with tragic and fatal consequences, are rare, there are still illegal charters being operated globally every day.”After 40 years at his master’s side, Michael Fawcett’s resignation as the head of Prince Charles’s charitable arm amid an alleged cash-for-honours scandal is a blow for the heir to the throne. The announcement that the one-time valet, 59, has decided to step down from The Prince’s Foundation before the outcome of an inquiry into the claims is seen by royal observers as a necessary step on Charles’s road to the crown. With confirmation that Fawcett’s party planning company will also no longer provide services to the prince, Clarence House will be hoping it is enough to draw a line under a potentially toxic affair in which Fawcett is accused of having promised to help secure a knighthood and British citizenship for a Saudi billionaire donor. The Mail on Sunday published a letter from 2017 in which Fawcett reportedly said he was willing to make an application to change Mahfouz Marei Mubarak bin Mahfouz’s honorary CBE to a KBE and support his application for citizenship. The letter, written on headed notepaper in Fawcett’s then capacity as chief executive of the Dumfries House Trust, said the applications would be made in response to “the most recent and anticipated support” of the trust. When the claims emerged in September, Fawcett temporarily stepped down as chief executive of The Prince’s Foundation, with Clarence House stressing Charles had “no knowledge of the alleged offer of honours or British citizenship on the basis of donation to his charities” and insisting he was fully supportive of an investigation by the foundation. In a statement on Thursday evening the foundation announced Fawcett’s resignation. A Clarence House spokesperson said: “Michael Fawcett and [his company] Premier Mode will not be providing services to us in the future. We have all agreed to end these arrangements.” The decision is said to be Fawcett’s, who friends told the Daily Mail was “heartbroken” and “shattered” by events that had had a “devastating” effect on him. “Michael has resigned and he will never be coming back. He has lost five stone in weight and is a shadow of his former self,” one was quoted as saying. The decision is said to have been taken without sight of the inquiry’s report, with Fawcett now said to feel well enough to make a decision about his future. Observers believe his resignation would not have been sanctioned unless it was endorsed by Charles, who once said of Fawcett: “I can manage without just about anyone except for Michael.” Crucially, it is said Fawcett had recently lost the support of the Duchess of Cornwall, once a stalwart fan. Some courtiers are also understood to have viewed his influence in a negative way. “Clearly this is a situation that needed a speedy resolution. In the royal world at the moment there are several clouds in the sky: Fawcett, the Duchess of Sussex’s court case, the Duke of York’s court case and the question mark over the Queen’s health. One less distraction is obviously a step in the right direction,” said Joe Little, the managing editor of Majesty magazine. “I know Charles is alleged to have said years ago that Michael was the only person he could not do without. But he will, of course, do without him. In the royal world nobody is indispensable,” Little added. He said Fawcett may well prove a hard act to follow in terms of his fundraising capabilities. Clarence House’s severance of links to Fawcett could be seen as a way of clearing the decks as Charles prepares for kinghood. “It could be seen in that way. I wonder if it is a decision that Charles was reluctant to make,” said Little. “ It may well be he saw that it was not helpful to the overall picture and that it was a decision he had no choice but to make. A lot of tidying up and housekeeping is necessary before the new reign begins. And clearly this is a case in point.” However, the royal biographer Penny Junor said Fawcett – a former footman who rose to power – was so important to Charles as a fixer managing things exactly the way the prince wanted them that he may still retain some influence. “I think he had to go. Damage limitation dictated he had to go. But how far he’ll go I don’t know,” she said. “I think he might still be around in some form or another. He’s been working for the prince for so long. If Fawcett was disaffected and, say, decided to write his memoirs, he knows where all the bodies are buried more than anyone. “So I think the public night have seen the last of him. But I would be very surprised if Charles cuts him off completely.”A curious concert this from the Scottish Chamber Orchestra and composer/conductor James MacMillan. From the enigmatic opening work, Charles Ives’ The Unanswered Question through the Adagietto from Mahler’s Symphony No 5 (a declaration of love) and Wagner’s Siegfried Idyll (celebrating birth) the programme traced a journey through the major events of life to its inevitable conclusion: death. And not just any kind of death either. Jay Capperauld’s new work takes its title and inspiration from the magnum opus of Frances Glessner Lee, the pioneer of forensic science in mid 20th-century America. Her Nutshell Studies of Unexplained Death are a series of meticulously created miniature replicas of homicide scenes compiled from court documents. From this macabre doll’s house of atrocities, Capperauld has created six musical miniatures, each taking inspiration from one of the rooms. There’s a film-score quality to Capperauld’s work – all eerie footsteps and visceral hammer blows. His fondness for exuberant use of percussion recalls the early works of MacMillan himself, and at times it proved rather too much for the constrained acoustic of the Queen’s Hall. While Death in a Nutshell puts Capperauld’s facility with orchestral colour centre stage, it doesn’t have much to say about his handling of big musical structures. Atmosphere not thematic development is all. At times it seems as if some gallows humour might be peeking through, but overall this is a work that takes itself rather seriously. It also suffers from a curiously nondescript ending; the music just seems to stop, unresolved, presumably like the crimes Gleeson depicts. There is no sense of resolution or redemption. For all the neatness of the life-span construct, musically the flamboyance of Capperauld’s work was strikingly at odds with the overall serenity of what had come before. And while there were plenty of well-judged moments – the glassy strings of the Ives or the way MacMillan managed the gradual swell of the Wagner without tipping too much into bombast – as a whole it was decidedly underwhelming.The wife of a jailed Kurdish politician has been sentenced to two and a half years in a Turkish prison over a typo in a medical report on a miscarriage, in a case denounced as an “appalling” political persecution. A court in Diyarbakır handed down sentences of 30 months each for Başak Demirtaş, a teacher, and her doctor on Thursday for submitting a falsified medical report, a local Kurdish news agency reported. The charges in the case, which began in March 2018, relate to hospital admissions and two surgeries for a miscarriage Demirtaş suffered in 2015. According to her legal team, the teacher was charged with fraud because a doctor’s note for five days of medical leave from work was issued during an appointment on 11 December 2015, but erroneously dated as 14 December, four days later. Demirtaş then took unpaid leave for the second half of the 2015-16 school year to recover. “The sentence of [Demirtaş] to 2.5 years of prison for a mere clerical error concerning a medical record is appalling and seems beyond common sense. It just looks so political. It gives the measure of the worrying state of Turkish judiciary,” Nacho Sánchez Amor, the European parliament’s rapporteur on Turkey, said on Twitter. Her husband, Selahattin Demirtaş, the former leader of the pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic party (HDP), is one of the most high-profile of thousands of politicians, academics, judges and civil servants who have been jailed in Turkey in recent years in Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s crackdown on opposition. He was imprisoned after his party won enough seats in 2015’s general election to destroy Erdoğan’s parliamentary majority and faces more than 100 charges, most of which are terrorism related. The politician denies all allegations against him. The European court of human rights ordered Demirtaş’ immediate release last year, ruling that his detention goes against “the very core of the concept of a democratic society”. In an interview in October, Başak Demirtaş said she and the couple’s two children had not been allowed to visit him since the pandemic began. In a statement after the ruling in her trial, Demirtas’s lawyers said that although the Diyarbakır court board ruled that the hospital record book showing the dates she attended should be submitted as evidence to show that a mistake was made, the court handed down the sentence without looking at it. “While the truth is apparent, sentencing Başak Demirtaş as a result of such a trial is openly unlawful and grossly unfair … It is the product of a mentality of collective punishment,” Demirtaş’ team said. “In spite of this situation, we will keep on waging our legal struggle. We still believe that the ruling will be overturned by the [appeals court] and justice will be served.”AstraZeneca has started signing commercial contracts to supply its Covid-19 vaccine next year as the pandemic moves to an “endemic phase” – in a major shift away from the drugmaker’s not-for-profit pricing. Britain’s biggest pharma firm expects the vaccine to move to “modest profitability” as new orders are received. However, the chief executive, Pascal Soriot, insisted that it was offering affordable and tiered pricing, depending on countries’ ability to pay. He said the vaccine, developed with Oxford University, would not become “a huge profit earner”. AstraZeneca has sold more than $2.2bn (£1.64bn) of its Covid-19 vaccine, called Vaxzevria, in the first nine months of this year, half of which it booked in the three months to September. AZ’s $1.1bn vaccine revenues in the third quarter are far below the sales made by US rivals Pfizer ($13bn) and Moderna ($4.8bn). Earlier this month, Pfizer forecast vaccine revenues of $36bn this year and $29bn next year after it started shipping booster jabs and shots for children. AZ had pledged to sell its vaccine at cost for the duration of the current Covid-19 pandemic, and has charged about $5 a shot. On Friday, Soriot effectively declared the pandemic over. “We have to accept that … the virus is becoming endemic. And we’re going to have to learn to live with it, which means in great likelihood regular boosters,” he said. “We are moving to an endemic phase and next year is the target for these commercial contracts.” AZ has come in for a lot of political criticism outside the UK even though it has been one of the few vaccine makers selling its shot at cost. Its jab has not been approved in the US after questions were raised over the way it had reported trial data. AZ intends to file for US approval by the end of the year. Confidence was eroded further when a rare link with blood clots was reported. The firm has also been embroiled in a public row with the EU over delays to vaccine supplies, and the EU has not placed further orders. Soriot said he had “no regrets” about not making a profit from the vaccine when others have, and insisted it had a future. He said it was the world’s second-biggest Covid jab by volume, after the shot produced by China’s Sinovac. “We are all very proud of the impact we’ve had,” he said. “We saved a million lives, and millions of hospitalisations. Mostly we’ve been used in emerging markets.” By the end of September, AZ had supplied more than 145m doses to low- and middle-income countries through the UN-backed Covax initiative – half of all the Covax supply – which is set to rise to 250m by the end of the year. It will continue to supply its vaccine to the poorest countries at cost price. It expects to report results from two separate trials of the jab in children and teenagers aged six to 17 before the end of the year. Nicholas Hyett, an equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “AstraZeneca may be moving to a world where it generates a profit from its Covid vaccine but it’s not going to be a big number any time soon. Existing contracts are likely to make up the majority of orders for some time. “Profits also depend on long-term demand for the vaccine in 2022 and beyond. It would seem remarkable 18 months ago but the Covid vaccine market is crowded now and Astra’s unique selling point has long been simplicity and lower cost. A significant increase in prices might simply drive governments into the arms of other suppliers. We think it’s unlikely that Covid-19 vaccines will ever become a major source of profit for Astra.” AstraZeneca’s share price fell by almost 5% on Friday, making it the top faller on the FTSE 100. Earlier this week the Anglo-Swedish drugmaker announced it would create a separate vaccines and immune therapies business as it planned for the future of its coronavirus shot. The company said it would be dedicated to the Covid-19 vaccine and tweaked versions to deal with new variants of Sars-CoV-2. In the final three months of the year, the contribution from the Covid vaccine is expected to offset costs relating to its long-acting antibody treatment AZD7442 for Covid, and earnings guidance for investors remains unchanged. Soriot said the company was on track to achieving its $40bn sales target (at current exchange rates), set out in 2014 when it fended off a hostile takeover bid from Pfizer, in 2022 – a year earlier than expected.Thailand’s King Maha Vajiralongkorn has reportedly flown to Germany in what is believed to be his first trip abroad since pro-democracy protests escalated last year, breaking long-held taboos to call for reforms to the monarchy. The German tabloid Bild reported that Vajiralongkorn arrived on Monday in Bavaria, where it said he and his entourage of 250 people and 30 royal poodles had booked an entire floor of the Hilton Munich airport hotel for 11 days. His previous prolonged stay in Bavaria, in a villa on Lake Starnberg at the height of anti-government protests last year, became a diplomatic issue in Germany when the foreign minister, Heiko Maas, warned foreign affairs of state must not be conducted from German soil. “We have made it clear that politics concerning Thailand should not be conducted from German soil,” Maas told the Bundestag in October 2020. “If there are guests in our country that conduct their state business from our soil we would always want to act to counteract that.” A spokesperson for the German foreign office later said it had been assured that affairs of state were being handled solely by the Thai prime minister while the king was staying in Germany on private business. Protesters in Thailand had criticised the king for his extended trips abroad and called for changes to curb his powers and wealth. They argued that the king should relinquish control of the royal funds and of key army units that he had brought under his direct command. They also argued that the lese-majesty law, which bans criticism of the royal family, should be scrapped. Since the protests, at least 156 people have been charged with lese-majesty, which carries a maximum 15-year sentence, including 12 minors. Twenty-four protesters have been denied bail and remain in pre-trial detention for their political activities. On Wednesday, Thailand’s constitutional court ruled that protesters’ calls for monarchy reform amounted to an attempt to overthrow it. Their demands were an “abuse of the rights and freedoms and harmed the state’s security”, the court said, and ordered an end to them. Rights groups warned this could pave the way for treason charges for protest leaders. Following the ruling, the website of the court was hacked, according to local media, and replaced with the music video for Guillotine by the hip-hop group Death Grips, while text was changed to read “kangaroo court”. Student groups from across 23 universities issued a joint statement rejecting the ruling, while images on social media showed some protesters holding signs in public calling for the lese-majesty law, also known as article 112, to be abolished. Some stuck signs on to the glass doors of the boutique fashion shop of Princess Sirivannavari Nariratana Rajakanya, daughter of the king, which read “reform does not equal overthrow” and “abolish 112”. Four people were later arrested over the signs, according to Thai Lawyers for Human Rights. The monarchy reform protests were unprecedented in Thailand, a country where the constitution states the king “shall be enthroned in a position of revered worship”, and where portraits of the monarchy are displayed on the streets, in schools and many businesses. In a sign of how attitudes have shifted among the Thai public, the prime minister, Prayuth Chan-ocha, on Thursday encouraged cinemagoers not to abandon the tradition of standing when the royal anthem is played before films. Before last year’s pro-democracy protests, it was rare for people to remain seated and in some cases individuals who chose not to stand were attacked. Prayuth said some people were afraid to stand, fearing they might be bullied by pro-democracy activists. “We must be brave to stand up. This is not mandatory but we are in the same family,” he said in a speech on Thursday. Pavin Chachavalpongpun, an associate professor at the Center for Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University, who lives in exile due to his criticism of Thailand’s military and monarchy, said it appeared likely the king felt confident the protest movement was under control despite recent public debate over the lese-majesty law. “Suddenly in the past two weeks the issue of abolition or reform of article 112 has come up, and that is linked directly to the issue of reforming the monarchy. The fact he decided to leave now in the middle of this debate in Thailand, that does show that he somehow is confident,” he said. “If you ask me this question from an analyst [perspective], of course the confidence might be a miscalculation. It’s just like simmering water, boiling water, the lid can come off at any time,” said Pavin. Additional reporting by Rebecca RatcliffeCarrying blood-red ribbons to represent the crucial red lines already crossed by Cop26 negotiations, hundreds of representatives of global civil society walked out of the convention centre in Glasgow on the final morning of the summit in protest. The audience at the People’s Plenary in the conference blue zone heard speakers condemn the legitimacy and ambition of the 12-day summit before walking out to join protesters gathered on the streets beyond the security fencing. “Cop26 is a performance,” the Indigenous activist Ta’Kaiya Blaney of the Tla A’min Nation told the meeting before the walkout. “It is an illusion constructed to save the capitalist economy rooted in resource extraction and colonialism. I didn’t come here to fix the agenda – I came here to disrupt it.” Tracy Bach of the advocacy steering group Ringo, shot down claims that this summit was “the most inclusive Cop ever”, telling the audience: “Most of the observers sitting here right now have not had access to the negotiation space.” Singing and whooping, representatives of farmers, Indigenous people, youth, women, academics, trade unions and environmental NGOs processed slowly through the conference centre to be greeted by chants from the throng of activists outside the gates. Chanting “climate justice now” and “power to the people”, the snaking line of activists still carrying the red ribbons exited the secured area where activists holding fluttering Extinction Rebellion flags were listening to speakers. John Deman from Devon was in the waiting crowd with his one-year-old son asleep in a back carrier, wearing yellow ear defenders. “We’ve been coming to different climate negotiations since before the little one was born, so we’re getting used to the results every time being downsized and not as strong as we need. This summit is becoming a joke again, and there’s a real need for them to listen to people like these,” he said, indicating those who had just walked out of the conference. Moving to the call “we are unstoppable”, activists further up the mixing crowd replied “another world is possible”.Do you tend to stop drinking white wine (or a particular style of white wine) at this time of year? Sauvignon blanc, say, on the grounds that it’s too summery? My hunch is not, and if we drink white wine year round because we enjoy it, why on earth not rosé, too? Turns out, in fact, that we do: supermarkets report that these days rosé sales hold up throughout the autumn and winter, and indeed why shouldn’t they? If rosé goes with tapas or Thai green curry, there’s no reason not to bring it on at any time of year. Part of the perception that rosé is predominantly a swimming pool wine is because it is mainly associated with the pale, baby-pink style popularised by Provence. And despite the best efforts of retailers to introduce other styles to their range, that’s still what most people are looking for in a rosé. When I did a tasting at the Dartmouth food festival a couple of weeks ago, the Maia Côtes de Provence Rosé 2020 (£18.95 Red &amp; White, 12%) was among the wines the audience liked the best, another being the similarly pale Château Bauduc Bordeaux Rosé in today’s picks. But good rosé comes from other countries than France, including Spain, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand and even the UK nowadays. In my view, the deeper-coloured styles such as the Muga rosado and the Tavel below (OK, the latter is also French, albeit from the Rhône) are particularly good at this time of year, capable of standing up to quite substantial and even spicy dishes. If you can wean yourself off the paler style, even temporarily, you’ll find rosé a versatile and enjoyable food match. Sparkling rosé has also given a shot in the arm to the category, as pink prosecco, which was authorised last year, has proved (until then, for some unfathomable reason, it could be referred to only as a rosé spumante). I prefer what South Africa has to offer on this front: Graham Beck, whose brut rosé is currently £11.99 on Majestic’s mix-six deal, and Boschendal, which I wrote about a few months ago, both make really attractive, affordable fizz. And if you want a bit of fun, try a pet nat (AKA pétillant naturel), a joyously frivolous, semi-sparkling wine that in the case of Camillo Donati’s Ribelle Rosato 2019 (£18.85 Les Caves de Pyrène, 13%) tastes like a fresh cherry soda. I don’t know about you, but that really hits the spot for me right now. Five rosés to enjoy in winter Château Bauduc Rosé 2020 £12.50 from bauduc.com, 12%. Bordeaux produces rosés, too, and from the same grape varieties as the reds. This one is as prettily pale as Provençal rosé, but fruitier – try it with Thai green curry. Muga Rosado 2020 £9.50 The Wine Society (Majestic has the 2019 for £10.99 on the mix-six deal), 13.5%. A more full-bodied, savoury style of rosé that can handle hearty food such as pork and beans or a paella. Bird In Hand Pinot Noir Rosé 2020 £10.50 Sainsbury’s, £13.99 Waitrose, £14 Booths, 12%. If you like Provence rosé, you’ll love this stylish Aussie number made from pinot noir. Mirabeau Pure Provence Rosé 2020 £29.99 on Majestic’s mix-six deal, £31 Waitrose Cellar, 12.5%. Rosé in magnum automatically feels festive, and perfect for Christmas parties. Domaine Maby Tavel Cuvée Prima Donna Rosé 2020 £12.50 The Wine Society (Yapp Brothers also stock a tavel from Domaine Maby called La Forcadière for £14.50), 14%. More like a light red, this full-bodied, dark, deliciously fruity rosé should tick your boxes if you’re a beaujolais fan. Tavel is an appellation that produces only rosé, so it’s really quite special. Perfect for the Boxing Day leftovers. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comShowcasing a new album months before its release is a tricky endeavour. Especially if that album edges your band’s hyperactive sound – one that had previously skipped playfully from electro-pop to yacht rock to Motown-tinged psych – dangerously towards MOR maturity. But that’s the challenge facing Metronomy’s frontman Joe Mount as he straps on an acoustic guitar at the start of this comeback gig as part of the inaugural London festival from Pitchfork. Looking slightly worried, the band – keyboardist Oscar Cash, bassist Olugbenga, drummer Anna Prior and Michael Lovett on guitar – tiptoe into the breezy Love Factory, a swaying singalong-in-waiting from next February’s pared down seventh album, Small World. It’s swiftly followed by a handful of crowdpleasers, however, with the elasticated Everything Goes My Way rubbing shoulders with a beefed-up Night Owl, the latter a showcase not only for Olugbenga’s undulating bass riffs but a megawatt perma-grin that powers most of the set. After The Reservoir’s bouncy keyboard riff leads to a crowd singalong, Mount seems to settle, his endearingly awkward between-song patter covering east London gentrification (he’s a fan of Hackney’s nearby “big Boots”) and the climate crisis (London’s Ultra Low Emission Zone gets a shoutout). The subsequent new songs, including the ebullient, Scissor Sisters-esque single It’s Good to Be Back and the buoyant Right on Time, which canters merrily along on a chorus of “for now let’s enjoy the sunshine”, benefit from this new relaxed mode. Meanwhile, the calming balm of Things Will Be Fine just about manages to stay on the right side of twee. Lyrically simplified and free of Mount’s usual arched eyebrow, the new songs seem laser-focused on the heart rather than the head. Only the threadbare indie plod of Hold Me Tonight feels like a misstep, its position as set closer deflating a crowd hopped up on the sugary pop of Salted Caramel Ice Cream and the band’s masterpiece, 2011’s immaculate The Look. They still walk off to roaring chants of “one more song”, having elegantly walked that tightrope of mixing the old with the new.‘I like the way you call me Irvine,” says Irvine Welsh to a young woman who’s just offered him a cup of tea, and pronounced his first name to rhyme with wine. “I’ve been living in Miami and it makes me feel like I’m back there.” The so-called Magic City is his happy place, “the polar opposite of Edinburgh. All people do in Scotland is fucking talk, they rabbit in each other’s faces. Miami is nothing like that. At the start, I found it so vacuous, but you can get all your stuff from Edinburgh and London, then take it away to Miami and write in peace.” The world is one long, warm bath to this man, it seems. He is “happy everywhere. All the shit comes out in the writing. In normal life, I focus on the good things: the beauty in life, romance, friendship.” The undisputed king of the 1990s, of swear words, of Scottishness, is here to talk about Crime, in which he breaks new ground with his first script for television. It’s a riveting and quite surprising move from him – it starts off looking like a classic cop show, although I’ve only been allowed to watch the first three episodes. “I know this sounds like what everybody would say, but episode four is when it really kicks off, and five and six go absolutely fucking mental.” It really doesn’t sound like what everybody would say. It’s hard to figure out what is more charming about Welsh – how much of a one-off he is, or his conviction that he’s exactly like everyone else. If his latest project comes as a shock, it’s because Welsh is so established as the novelist of a particular, ludic period in British culture. But he was 35 when Trainspotting was published in 1993, and had already lived one, if not two, lives. First, as a young tearaway, escaping Edinburgh’s sky-high levels of drug abuse and HIV to head to London to try to make it in bands (the most successful being the Pubic Lice, which is to say, not successful at all). Second, as a training officer in the housing department, once he’d gone back to Scotland. An unnamed colleague remembered him thus: “He could have gone right to the top in local government … He was diligent, hard-working and well-liked.” That wasn’t exactly how he came across when he became famous, yet the ease with which he now moves into writing primetime TV does suggest at least a bead of truth to the diligence he hides so assiduously. If the concept of Crime – missing girl, emotionally tortured cop – sounds like a standard police procedural, don’t be fooled. “We didn’t want anyone going ‘guv’ or ‘ma’am’; we wanted the cops to be this bunch of shabby people. Not so much about good guys trying to catch bad guys, but fucked-up guys trying to catch even more fucked-up guys.” One thing that feels prescient is its presentation of toxic masculinity, the symbiosis it tacitly insists upon, between the casual misogyny of individual policemen and the brutal violence against women that occupies their time. But Welsh insists it’s not prescient at all: “This conversation has been going on for years. A case like Sarah Everard will come along. All these pious statements – ‘We take this very seriously, we’re all for women’s rights’ – are absolute nonsense. That’s just the way organisations are, particularly organisations that are the harsh end of enforcing the state’s power.” Society is, he says, “a fucked-up zoo that doesn’t really work for anybody” and now we’re staring down the barrel of the most important question humanity has ever faced: “We all have to work out what really happens post-capitalism, when we can’t pay people wages, which is the world we’re coming into now. Maybe we can’t survive it. Maybe we’re not meant to survive it.” He can sound like a student, also stoned, but I’m not sure there’s anything I disagree with. Trainspotting, he summarises, immortalised four magnificent creatures: “The cynical intellectual, the lovable loser, the philandering rogue and the absolute nutter.” There was a time when Welsh was just everything, in publishing terms – the bad boy, the money tree, the workhorse, the avant garde experimentalist but also the ultimate crowd-pleaser. I remember going on holiday just after Filth was published in 1998, and everyone round the pool in this Ayia Napa 18-30 was reading a Welsh book. How was that for him? “Mostly, I was relieved I could do something creatively. I messed around with music for years and got nowhere. I just thought: ‘This is fabulous.’” He had a strong work ethic, not rooted in anxiety but actual delight in the creative process, that insulated him from the perils of fame. “I was too immersed in actually being a writer to think about all the publicity stuff,” he says. “I’d do the odd splurges and parties and make a fool of myself, all the obligatory things you do when you suddenly get fame and money. But I was never massively interested or impressed by it all. I just wanted to get back to my dingy little room and type.” He has fond memories of the era, personally speaking – but his overall assessment of that decade, the age of Cool Britannia, is stark. “The 90s were seen as a big celebration of British culture. In retrospect, it was more like a requiem mass for British culture. Everything we had to that point was then recycled, ready to be sold off to the global marketplace through the internet.” Trainspotting’s characters – Renton, Spud, Sick Boy and Begbie – went on to launch or solidify a number of other careers after Danny Boyle made the film, but they were never quite over for Welsh, although he’s a little contradictory on this point. One minute he says: “There is no Renton. He doesn’t exist for me. They’re all dead to me until I come to write them.” The next, he describes how they gatecrash his projects: “That’s how I wrote Porno. I didn’t mean Sick Boy to be one of the main characters. I just realised: ‘This guy is actually Sick Boy.’” He talks about the actor James McAvoy – who starred in a 2013 film adaptation of Filth – telling him how to “de-role”, unbecome the character you’ve been inhabiting so you can return to your life. “You have to think of three ways you’re like the character and three ways you’re not. You give yourself permission to come back to yourself. It helps. It saves a lot of money on divorces.” This advice came too late for his second divorce, which was around the time Dead Men’s Trousers was published in 2018. It was his fifth novel about Begbie et al. Welsh is tight-lipped about his relationship status now, saying only: “You know Mr Peanutbutter in BoJack Horseman? That’s who I’ve been compared to.” Who made the comparison? “I’m not going to say, but I wake up with her most mornings.” Mr Peanutbutter is a cartoon labrador who is completely cheerful, high-octane, pleasant and nice, all the time. So whoever it is obviously loves him very much, unless she’s a cat person. His next writing project is a novella about gamers but he has an unusual approach to research. “I don’t want to authenticate it at all,” he says. “I don’t want to go talk to them.” But he is writing the score for Trainspotting: The Musical. “We didn’t want to just license the soundtrack from the film, we wanted it to have its own identity.” In dismay, I say: “But people are going to want the film soundtrack!” “Fuck people!” he says, delighted. “And you can print that!” His relentless creative enthusiasm contrasts with his overall view of culture. “Now that it doesn’t operate in the street, it’s not contested. It’s all Instagram influencers.” Publishing, meanwhile, is all “retail-dominated” with books commissioned to fill genre holes in the shops. If he takes heart from anything, it’s that people can still be bothered to riot. “Whatever your views on vaccines, I think it’s good that people are out on the streets, having a row with the authorities. I think that’s where culture is made.” There’s a pause, then he modifies his thoughts about these protests: “A lot of it is inherently weak and stupid and fascist.” But you like it anyway? “But I like it!” Do not, however, mistake any of these cascading statements for pessimism. “I’m very optimistic about things in general,” says Welsh. “I think we’re heading towards an anarchist paradise where we’re running around in the fields and playing football and writing poetry and making love and painting pictures. I believe in the Age of Aquarius. This is just a load of shit we’ve got to get through first.” Crime is on BritBox from Thursday 18 NovemberThe US journalist Danny Fenster has been sentenced to 11 years in prison with hard labour by a court in military-ruled Myanmar after he was found guilty on a series of charges including incitement. Fenster, who is the managing editor of Frontier Myanmar, an independent outlet that has covered the military coup extensively, was arrested in May 2021 at Yangon international airport. He was due to fly back home to Michigan, where he planned to surprise his parents. He is the only foreign journalist to be convicted of a serious offence since the military seized power in February, and his detention has been widely condemned by rights groups, press freedom advocates and the US government. Fenster, 37, appeared in court on Friday wearing blue PPE, and cried as he was told of the sentence, according to his lawyer, U Than Zaw Aung. No observers were allowed in the courtroom. He was sentenced to three years for incitement for allegedly spreading false or inflammatory information, three years for contacting illegal organisations and five years for violating visa rules. Fenster will face two further charges under the anti-terrorism act and under a sedition law. Either case could result in a life sentence, according to his lawyer. The Myanmar military, which has killed more than 1,200 people since taking power, has sought to crush all independent media. It has arrested dozens of journalists, stripped media outlets of their licences, and imposed multiple internet blackouts to hamper the flow of information. Than Zaw Aung said Fenster had told him before the hearing that a police officer had said he would be sent back home. “[Fenster] asked me whether it was true or a joke. But when he actually heard about the sentence, that it is 11 years, he was in shock. He told me that he was angry and he didn’t want to stay in prison for 11 years. He looked worried.” After the sentencing, Than Zaw Aung said he told Fenster to stay calm. They weren’t able to speak together for very long, he added, because officials spent time taking Fenster’s records and fingerprints. Fenster had lost weight, he said, and his hair and beard had grown longer. “An 11-year sentence is the highest punishment for each case. It is inappropriate that a journalist got sentenced like this. It shouldn’t have happened that way,” said Than Zaw Aung. A spokesperson for the US state department denounced the sentence and called for Fenster’s release. “We strongly condemn the regime’s sentencing of Danny Fenster. The ruling today represents an unjust conviction of an innocent person,” the spokesperson said. “Journalism is not a crime. Free and independent media is indispensable to building prosperous, resilient and free societies.” The charges against Fenster were based on the allegation that he was working for Myanmar Now, a banned media outlet, in the aftermath of the February coup. However, Fenster had resigned from Myanmar Now in July 2020 and joined Frontier Myanmar the next month, Frontier Myanmar said. He had been working for Frontier for more than nine months by the time of his arrest in May 2021, the publication said. “The court disregarded a significant amount of evidence of his employment at Frontier, including tax and social security records and testimony from a Frontier employee,” it said in a statement. Thomas Kean, Frontier’s editor-in-chief, said: “There is absolutely no basis to convict Danny of these charges. His legal team clearly demonstrated to the court that he had resigned from Myanmar Now and was working for Frontier from the middle of last year. “Everyone at Frontier is disappointed and frustrated at this decision. We just want to see Danny released as soon as possible so he can go home to his family.” Than Zaw Aung said that, prior to the court hearings, he had not had sufficient opportunity to talk with Fenster. He had previously represented Reuters journalists in 2018, who were jailed after their reporting of atrocities committed by the military against Rohingya Muslims. Even then, he said, he was able to meet the journalists in prison. Ming Yu Hah, Amnesty International’s deputy regional director for campaigns, described the sentencing as “a reprehensible outcome in a case that has been deeply flawed from the start”. “Danny has done nothing wrong, but has somehow been charged with multiple alleged offences that are completely out of touch with reality and his work as an independent journalist. The court also ignored reams of evidence showing where he worked and records of his time in the country. He should be immediately and unconditionally freed and all charges dropped,” she said. “His case has illustrated the enormous increase in risks and challenges faced by journalists in Myanmar since the military seized power on 1 February. But despite internet blackouts, legal threats and detentions, they continue to courageously report on the dire situation in Myanmar.” Shawn Crispin, the south-east Asia representative of the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists, also called for Fenster’s immediate and unconditional release. “Myanmar must stop jailing journalists for merely doing their job of reporting the news,” he said.Inspiration often strikes at lunch in the office of Dutch architects MVRDV. It’s the one moment in the day when everyone breaks from their screens and comes together around a long communal dining table, spread with assorted salads, to eat and chat. One fateful day in 2013, during a lunchtime brainstorming session, the tableware would prove to be more inspirational than ever. Eight years on, a monumental Ikea salad bowl has been added to the Rotterdam skyline – a €3.99 Blanda Blank rising 40 metres high. “I was looking for something round,” says Winy Maas, the puckish frontman of MVRDV, describing the origins of the Depot Boijmans Van Beuningen. This €94m (£80m) open archive for the city’s art museum now stands as a colossal mirrored bowl in Rotterdam’s Museumpark, reflecting the surroundings in a surreal panorama. “The interns had put a big rectangular block of Styrofoam on the site model,” Maas recalls. “It was too rude. I thought something round would be nicer to our neighbours, so I replaced it with a mug. Then we wanted to reduce the footprint, so I grabbed the stainless steel bowl, with its nice mirroring aspect. That was it.” Such is the design process in an office founded on whimsical spectacle. Maas revels in turning models upside down, or grabbing whatever is to hand and adding it to the mix. One project began as a cluster of blocks before he draped a cloth over the model, turning it into a lumpy hill. Another building, with house-sized blocks dramatically cantilevered from its side, was the result of a model of a grid of little towers being mistakenly placed horizontally on the table. The comical process is intrinsic to the practice’s quirky Superdutch brand, and key to their global exportability. (For the Depot launch, a dedicated press conference was held in Chinese.) As architectural slapstick, their work transcends cultural boundaries. Rotterdam, Maas thinks, is particularly suited to such eccentric form-making. “It is not a city with regular urbanism,” he says. It was flattened in the second world war, and the decades since have seen all manner of strange experiments, from rotated cube-houses on stilts to MVRDV’s own elephantine market hall (another result of a model being turned upside down). “It’s about making objects. Every generation makes its mark, and the next reacts.” This particular mark had a bumpy ride. MVRDV originally won the Depot project in 2007, with a design that looked like another Ikea classic, the Lack table. It was to be a gargantuan square platform on 35m-high legs, with cranes lifting crates up and down in a vertical ballet of storage, but it was deemed a step too far, even for Rotterdam. MVRDV won a second competition in 2014, but they were then disqualified after it emerged Maas had met the Boijmans co-director, Sjarel Ex, during the process. The architects challenged the ruling, claiming they had no unfair advantage, and were reinstated. The design faced a barrage of opposition from neighbours – the nearby Kunsthal director feared it would be the “cannibal” of the park – but the city gave approval, and has duly placed it on the cover of its tourist map as the latest star attraction. In the age of Instagram, this supersized salad bowl has already proved to be an irresistible selfie-magnet. On the blustery opening weekend, with icy winds whipping around the Depot’s streamlined flanks, Rotterdammers came in droves to photograph themselves reflected in its bulging skin. The idea was to create something akin to Anish Kapoor’s mirrored bean sculpture in Chicago, but cladding the Depot with seamless, polished steel proved far too expensive, so panels of mirror-coated glass were chosen instead. It creates a similar impression from a distance, where the skyline is captured in a compressed ball but, as you get closer, it’s more like a low-budget hall of mirrors. The Chinese-made panels are clipped on to the concrete bowl in a widely spaced grid, their warped surfaces giving it the look of a pound-shop Kapoor – one that comes with an annual window cleaning bill of €50,000. The architects say the ambition was to create a building that “seems to disappear into its surroundings”, but a 13-storey high mirrorball does anything but – as the neighbouring Erasmus hospital always feared. The hospital fiercely opposed the project, and it has now had to erect a screen to prevent children in the psychiatric ward having excessive visual stimulation. Maas promises that a row of freshly planted trees will soon help, but this gleaming ark is not an ideal neighbour for anyone wishing to retain their sanity. Once inside the big bowl, €20 ticket in hand, visitors are free to roam its six floors, where some of the 151,000 items in the Boijmans collection are visible through windows in the thick concrete walls. You get to glimpse racks of old masters, bits of Memphis furniture in crates, and piles of Yayoi Kusama’s red-spotted phalluses being examined by conservators. The collections were previously housed across seven different sites, including the flood-prone museum basement, so this is a distinct upgrade for the safety of the €8bn collection. To compensate for the loss of park, the building is crowned with a rooftop garden. When you reach the summit, it turns out that the promised forest is in fact a ring of trees around the edge, with a restaurant and rentable party room taking up most of the roof. The trees are thankfully faring better than those on MVRDV’s ill-fated Marble Arch Mound, here grown in a nursery with their roots intertwined for stability against the wind. Below, crisscrossing staircases leap their way up through the dimly lit atrium, which has the air of a Bond villain’s mineshaft hideaway. The vertiginous space is dotted with big glass vitrines featuring objects from the collection, where you can see the backsides of paintings and the undersides of sculptures. Views into the stores provide unusual juxtapositions – a pair of mating dwarfs next to a telephone – as the items are arranged by material and size, rather than chronology. There are no labels or captions (“This is not a museum,” I am told), but visitors can download an app and scan QR codes to find out about some of the objects. For a more behind-the-scenes experience you can also don a protective white coat and sign up for a tour, which takes you into one of the 14 store rooms, where a guide will pull out a single designated rack and tell you about the conservation methods. But don’t expect to view a Rothko or Bruegel – the stars of the collection are too precious to be wheeled out. Such is the reality of fragile art storage. It is a worthy ambition to open the back-of-house world to public view – an idea being followed by the V&amp;A with its Olympic Park Storehouse in London – but the truth is that you don’t actually get to see much. Most visitable parts of the building actually house the private art collections of corporations, such as Rabobank or the KPN phone network, which amassed a haul of Dutch contemporary art in the 1980s as part of its corporate social responsibility programme. There is a customs warehouse dock here, too, where imported works can be temporarily stored without import duties being paid. Such commercial aspects have helped to make the project stack up, along with €42m raised from private sources, but the hefty ticket price seems at odds with so much of the building being a corporate showcase to burnish big brands. There is also the more fundamental question of how well-suited a circular bowl is to the function of storing art. In the main semi-circular painting store, the curved geometry creates a pleasing fan-shape of racks, but in other wedge-shaped rooms the racks are forced to taper into unusable triangular corners, or fit around columns. The storage has been forced to fit the quirks of the building, rather than the other way around, which seems like an odd way to design an art store. “It’s not dysfunctional,” says Boijmans co-director, Ina Klaassen, “but we had a challenge. Of course a rectangular building would have been easier, but this is so much more fun. We wanted something iconic.” That is the museum’s achilles heel. It is currently engaged in a €260m renovation of its handsome 1930s building, led by icon-makers Mecanoo, whose wiggly shaped plan involves demolishing an entire (award-winning) wing that was only built in 2003, at a cost of €17m. Its architects, Robbrecht and Daem, are suing the museum to try to prevent demolition, and it’s hard not to view the proposal as an act of staggeringly wasteful vandalism, particularly given the climate emergency. Whatever the outcome, when the museum finally reopens in 2028, it will have the ultimate supersized selfie mirror to admire its new curves.US Olympic gymnast Sunisa Lee has revealed that she was pepper-sprayed in a racist drive-by attack weeks after she won gold in the Tokyo games. Lee, 18, was waiting for an Uber in Los Angeles after a night out with a group of friends, who are all of Asian descent. A car sped by and its passengers began yelling anti-Asian slurs and told Lee and her friends to “go back to where they came from”. One passenger sprayed Lee’s arm with pepper spray as the car sped off, said Lee, who became the first Hmong American Olympian and the first Asian American woman to win a gold medal in the all-around gymnastics competition this year. “I was so mad, but there was nothing I could do or control because they skirted off,” Lee revealed in a recent interview with PopSugar. “I didn’t do anything to them, and having the reputation, it’s so hard because I didn’t want to do anything that could get me into trouble. I just let it happen,” she added. The attack happened in October while Lee was in Los Angeles to film Dancing with the Stars. Lee grew up in a tight-knit Hmong community in St Paul, Minnesota. Her parents emigrated from Laos before she was born and settled in the city, which is home to the largest Hmong community in the US. The Hmong people are a displaced ethnic group from south-east Asia that sided with the US during the Vietnam War. After the war, Hmong who remained in Laos were persecuted, conscripted into forced labor and taken to concentration camps. As a result many, including Lee’s family, fled the country. Since the coronavirus was first reported in China, members of Asian American and Pacific Islander communities across the US have faced bigotry and racism in the form of verbal harassment and physical attacks. Many blame Donald Trump for helping to stir anti-Asian sentiment by using racist terms when referring to the coronavirus, such as “Chinese virus” and “kung flu”. More than 9,000 anti-Asian incidents have been reported since last March. According to Stop AAPI Hate, a national coalition that tracks and responds to racially motivated crimes towards Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, 4,548 hate crimes occurred in 2020 and another 4,522 occurred in 2021.Boris Johnson’s independent adviser on ministerial interests is under pressure over his own financial dealings, with academics calling for him to step aside from his role as chair of a London university. Christopher Geidt, who is chair of the council of King’s College London (KCL), is facing scrutiny from the University and College Union (UCU) over his job as chair of a board of the investment firm Schroders, and his advisory role at BAE Systems until April this year. The UCU has also demanded clarification over a trip to Oman to the privy council of its former dictator Sultan Qaboos bin Said, as revealed by the diaries of the former Foreign Office minister Alan Duncan. Lord Geidt, a former private secretary to the Queen, was appointed as Boris Johnson’s independent adviser in April. He subsequently cleared the prime minister of breaking any rules over the funding of the Downing Street flat refurbishment via a loan from a Tory donor. In a letter seen by the Guardian, the UCU’s KCL branch, which represents about 1,500 academic and staff members, called on the university to ask Geidt to step aside pending an investigation into whether his interests were properly managed. The UCU said it could be considered a potential conflict that Geidt was an adviser to BAE Systems from 2016 to April 2020 – at the same time as the KCL endowment fund was invested in the defence company through an intermediary fund. The university’s interest was only revealed through a freedom of information request. The union highlighted Geidt’s role as a paid chair of a board of Schroders, an asset manager, at the same time as KCL’s endowment fund was invested in Schroders funds. The UCU also demanded clarification over Geidt’s visit to the privy council of Qaboos, Oman’s dictator from 1970 to 2020, pointing out that “Oman state organs have multiple partnerships with the college”. The union criticised the lack of information about the interests on the college’s official register of interests, which stated Geidt had held roles at BAE Systems and Schroders, without listing the transactions involved or the start dates of those relationships. The register does not mention Oman. Its letter said: “It is vital that in a time of major crisis in higher education, with threats to funding cuts, a proposed 25% cut to the staff pension, the astronomical rise in student tuition fees, and an increasing divide between management and the people who make our university, that good governance is not only done in deed, but seen and sincere. We cannot see a prudent course of action except to suspend Geidt from his post pending a full, independent review.” A KCL spokesperson defended Geidt, saying: “These claims of conflicts of interest are simply untrue, as we have robust processes to ensure that investment management decisions are made entirely independently. Lord Geidt has no involvement with investment management decisions, and no influence over investment policy and strategy. The university does not have any investments in BAE Systems. As part of our policy all members of council, including the chairman, disclose their interests every year. “Lord Geidt provides invaluable service to King’s and we have absolute confidence in his continuing stewardship.” They earlier said they were aware of the UCU letter and were following standard procedures in response. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, who has been critical of Geidt’s decision to clear the prime minister over the Downing Street refurbishment, said: “The public will rightly expect the government’s adviser on ministerial interests to be above reproach.” The UCU previously passed a motion of no confidence in Geidt by 46 votes to three at a meeting in April. In May, after his appointment as Johnson’s independent adviser on ministerial interests, Geidt was criticised by the former shadow chancellor John McDonnell at a parliamentary hearing because of his links to BAE Systems. McDonnell cited how the the company had been convicted of defrauding the government in the US, paying $400m in a plea bargain. In response, Geidt said: “I absolutely appreciate what you have said, Mr McDonnell, about the record of BAE Systems, but I placed my reliance in taking on this role on the attitude of the British government, which is active in licensing the activity of BAE Systems … I was proud to do this work for a couple of years because it aligned to my previous experience and interests.” In the same parliamentary hearing, Geidt said the cabinet secretary had examined his interests for any potential conflicts and found none, but would keep that under review.A student has been sentenced to life in prison for the murder of his step-grandmother after confessing to the crime in a game of truth or dare. Tiernan Darnton, 21, who was caught after a counsellor alerted police to the confession, was told by a judge at Preston crown court that he must serve a minimum of 15 years of his sentence. His 94-year-old step-grandmother, Mary Gregory, was discovered under a table in the conservatory of her smoke-filled bungalow in Heysham, Lancashire, in May 2018. She died four days later in hospital. Her death was initially treated by fire investigators as an accident caused by a cigarette. But police reopened the case in May 2019 after being alerted to what Darnton had told a counsellor. He said he had killed Gregory by setting fire to a curtain at her home and that others knew about the crime. Darnton had made a similar confession several weeks after Gregory’s death, during a game of truth or dare with two friends, the court heard. “I have a secret I haven’t told anyone. I may have killed someone,” he told the pair. When pressed, he said he started the fire because he did not want Gregory to suffer any longer from dementia, the court heard. He told the counsellor in May 2019 about a friend “who could send me to prison cos of what he knows”. A week later he told the counsellor and his stepfather, Chris Gregory, 66, that he had started the fire, the court was told. The counsellor then informed the police. Sentencing Darnton to life, Mrs Justice Yip told him: “Murder had been on your mind for some time. On your own evidence, you were fascinated by serial killers and their crimes. You had dark thoughts. Internet searches which you made before and after you killed Mrs Gregory paint a worrying picture. “Your opportunity to act on your dark thoughts came when your stepfather was away. In the early hours of 28 May 2018, you went to Mrs Gregory’s home and deliberately started a fire in one of the bedrooms.” The judge went on: “It is hard to imagine the horror Mrs Gregory must have felt when she realised her house was on fire and was filling with smoke. Neighbours heard her screams. Despite her frailty, she tried to get out, but she had been trapped. The fire service found her near to the conservatory doors, where you had blocked her exit. “Her final days were spent in hospital. Quite understandably, her condition in those days continues to haunt those who loved her. The manner of her death was particularly cruel.” The court heard that an examination of his mobile phone and laptop found internet searches made after the fire including “I’m a murderer”, “I’m a monster and I’m going to hell”, “I want to cause evil” and “urge to kill again”.Australia stand within a single victory of the one major cricketing trophy to elude them, a development few would have expected when they arrived in the United Arab Emirates before the T20 World Cup with little fanfare or recent match practice. But what started with a low-key warm-up game against New Zealand and will end against the same opponents in very different circumstances has not so much been a campaign as a transformation. The first thing that seems to have built since that day is spirit. T20 cricket is increasingly data-driven but Australia seem to tread a different path, guided by attitude and camaraderie as much as statistical analysis. “The team and the way we’ve been getting on, and the way we’ve been with each other, and the confidence we feel about how we play, it’s as good as I’ve had in a long time,” Marcus Stoinis said on Friday. Take, for example, the partnership between Stoinis and Matthew Wade, which has now seen the side home in two crucial matches – their first, against South Africa, and their semi-final against Pakistan – and is built on a friendship formed at state level with Victoria. Other than in those games Stoinis has faced only 11 deliveries, while across the tournament Wade has been at the crease with only one other batter. “We did have a laugh, because we haven’t had to do too much through the tournament, and the couple of times [we have] the pressure’s been on,” Stoinis said on Friday of their semi-final-winning partnership. “He was my captain at Victoria when I was there for six years, so we know each other very well, we’re having fun out there as well as being serious, so you draw on a lot of things. It’s brilliant because that gives us confidence, and it builds that little bond that we’ve got going there.” But beyond the bromance there has been a more fundamental shift in the Australia side since the evening just a fortnight ago when they crumbled to humiliating defeat against England. It was an ideal time to lose a game, forcing them to reset a mindset that had delivered meek batting displays in two of their first three matches and giving them a chance to embed a new approach before the knockout stages. Having experimented with an extra bowler for the England match, Australia immediately returned to a bat-heavy selection and have coupled that with aggressive intent and a willingness, given the safety net provided by the depth of their batting, to take risks. This contrasts with England, who despite also fielding a batting-heavy side seemed to play freely only in matches that already felt won. As the dust settles on their departure it feels as if they taught Australia a lesson that they themselves never grasped. “It’s one thing to talk about fearlessness, and it’s almost like every T20 team will use that word,” said Justin Langer, the team’s head coach, “but the first time I’ve really seen it was when we had that Bangladesh chase [their first game after the England defeat, when they reached their target of 78 two balls into the seventh over] and I think it’s a real blueprint for this tournament and also into the future for Australia’s white-ball cricket. “So when Marcus Stoinis, the ball after [Glenn] Maxwell’s wicket, hit six off Shadab Khan – I mean, that’s what you call fearless cricket. And if we’re going to win this tournament, we’ve got to continue on with the way we played from Bangladesh. Bat first or second, that fearless and aggressive batting is going to be crucial.” Over the last two years seven of the eight teams that qualified automatically for the Super 12s have scored between 8.33 and 8.89 runs an over while Australia lagged behind on 7.97; across their last three matches that figure has been 9.98. But for Australia’s adoption of this approach to feel complete they will have to deal in full with its implications. Foremost among them is the fact that Steve Smith’s particular skillset is probably no longer required. He wears his team’s new style as he might platform shoes and a metallic silver codpiece – very awkwardly. The result is innings like the one he played on Thursday, in which he attempts to impersonate a completely different cricketer and almost immediately top-edges a slog-sweep to deep midwicket. On the other hand, David Warner has probably never felt more at home. There was a moment in the semi-final which perfectly summarised new-look Australia: Mohammad Hafeez completely muffed his first delivery of the night and as the ball bounced gently down the track Warner unhesitatingly attacked, remorselessly pulverising the ball into the stands. “Oh my gosh, it’s one of the best things I’ve ever seen in the game of cricket,” said Langer. “I can’t believe anyone would have the instincts to do that, and then to have the talent and ability to hit it for six. Unbelievable.” In the final, a newly daring Australia face a bowling-heavy side constructed specifically to stamp out this kind of behaviour. For all the Kiwis’ qualities, the one thing they should really fear is fear itself.On a dark forest road last month, Polish police were in pursuit of a speeding car that had skipped a checkpoint. The car’s driver was a people smuggler, and his passengers three Syrians who had paid thousands for him to take them to Germany, the final leg of their journey from the Middle East via Belarus. A truck coming in the opposite direction tried to dodge them but could not. Ferhad Nabo, 33, a married father of two from Kobane, was killed instantly in the crash. “He left Syria, like many others, to reach Europe,” said his cousin Rashwan Nabo, a Syrian humanitarian worker. Ferhad had boarded a direct flight to Minsk from Erbil, in northern Iraq. “In Raqqa, Damascus and Aleppo, word has been spreading for months that the easiest and fastest way to reach Europe is a direct flight to Belarus,” his cousin said. Ferhad Nabo is one of at least nine people who have died since the beginning of the border standoff between Poland and Belarus. Alexander Lukashenko, the president of Belarus, has been accused of deliberately provoking a new refugee crisis in Europe by organising the movement of people from the Middle East in revenge for EU sanctions on his authoritarian regime. Thousands of Iraqi Kurd and Syrian families are living in small tents hidden among the trees between the two countries, where night-time temperatures fall below zero, and many more still are preparing to attempt the perilous journey, queueing every day outside the doors of travel agencies, while Nabo’s family is waiting for his body to be returned from Poland. At first it had been a trickle: small numbers of people who had heard of a new way to get to the eurozone without the need for a Schengen visa. “Not so many came at first because they were suspicious,” said a travel agent in south Beirut who caters to Syrians trying to reach Belarus. “This was in April. But then many people made it to the good parts of Europe, and business started to improve.” In the Kurdish north of Iraq, the timeline was similar. “We got a directive from an agent in Baghdad before the summer that Belarus was issuing visas,” said one agent in Erbil. “It didn’t take long before word got around, but it has really got busy in the last two months.” In both cities, the process and price is similar. Iraqis who want to travel are charged $3,500 (£2,600) each, paid in cash, the bulk of which goes towards paying for the visa itself. In the recent rush for visas, an estimated 3,000 to 4,000 Syrians have applied in Lebanon, with the help of the Syrian embassy in Beirut. Abu Fahid, a builder from the outer Damascus suburbs who has been living in Beirut for five years, said: “It is time to leave, and this is the opportunity I’ve been waiting for. Do you think I’ll stay in Lebanon now? It’s worse than Syria.” Successful applicants cross the land border back into Syria and drive to Damascus for flights: some transiting in Istanbul on to Belarusian airlines and others, mainly on Syrian carriers, flying direct to Minsk. Last month Minsk international airport published a new winter schedule, increasing the number of flights from the Middle East to 55 a week. “I know it’s too risky to go through Belarus,” said Dlovan, 27, an unemployed man from Duhok in Iraqi Kurdistan. “But I will go anyway if God wills it.” Kurdish leaders have been alarmed by the recent exodus, which they say they have been unable to stop. But after the desperate scenes at the eastern fringe of the EU, officials say they are now seeking ways to intervene. “We’re looking into travel agents involved in what is clearly a dangerous political game by Belarus masqueraded as a routine issuance of tourist visas,” said a senior official in the Kurdish regional government. “It’s straight up human trafficking, using vulnerable families as cannon fodder to strengthen Belarus’s hand in an internecine European dispute.” The Guardian spoke to dozens of Syrian, Iraqi and Afghan asylum applicants in the Polish city of Białystok who had recently managed to cross the border from Belarus. All confirmed they had arrived by buying packages offered to them by travel agencies that, according to the asylum seekers, appeared to be closely connected to the Belarusian authorities. “These travel agencies are 100% connected to the Belarusians,” said Aras Palani, 50, an Iraqi interpreter. Palani had spoken to hundreds of people who said they had bought a travel package that included a one-way flight, a visa and two days in a hotel. “They [the travel agents] tell people that they have connections with the border police and that crossing the border is easy. But it’s all lies.” Anna Alboth, of Minority Rights Group, said: “I met families who were told by travel agencies that the border between Minsk and Poland was about three hours on foot.” Minsk is about 200 miles from the frontier. The Belarusian state-owned airline Belavia, which has previously denied any involvement in trafficking, said it could not “specify the names of travel agencies, as we can’t be 100% sure that these agencies are consciously engaged in trafficking migrants”. Once the migrants reach the Belarusian capital, the smugglers come into play. Ahmed, 29, who was a law student in Syria, spoke of Facebook pages with phone numbers for smugglers who put the migrants in contact with Belarusian drivers. “They picked me up at the Planeta hotel in Minsk,” said Ahmed. “From there, for about $100 they take us to the barbed wire of the border.” It is at that moment that the journey usually turns into a nightmare. The migrants told the Guardian how Belarusian troops gathered groups of up to 50 people and then cut the barbed wire with shears to allow them to cross. On the other side, nearly 20,000 Polish border police, flanked by the military, are deployed in a show of force unknown in the country since the end of the cold war. Hundreds of people are being pushed violently pushed back to Belarus, with some attempting the crossing dozens of times. It is a question of luck whether they eventually manage to make it through safely. Despite promises from Turkish and Belarusian airlines to stem the flow, the crisis appears to be far from over. Thousands of people remain in Belarus and thousands more are desperate to join them. “People will never stop finding other ways to reach Europe,” said Rashwan. “Blocking the border with barbed wire did not stop my cousin Ferhad and people like him who are fleeing wars and poverty. People will simply never stop finding other ways to reach Europe.” Additional reporting by Nechirvan Mando in Erbil, Safi Shdeed in Beirut, Marta Bellingreri in Catania.Gareth Southgate is expected to extend his England contract until 2024. The Football Association has been desperate to agree fresh terms with the manager, whose deal expires after the 2022 World Cup, and negotiations are looking positive. The contract is yet to be finalised but Southgate’s readiness to continue in a job he started in 2016 will come as a major boost to his bosses. The FA’s chief executive, Mark Bullingham, is a big fan of the 51-year-old and has made clear that he wants him to stay. Southgate, who earns £3m a year, is expected to double his money if he commits to leading England into Euro 2024. He has been keen to delay negotiations until England’s place in Qatar is secure, but it is understood there has been progress in private. Uncertainty has surrounded Southgate’s future since England’s run to the Euro 2020 final. There have been suggestions that he would prefer a return to club management after Qatar. However, there is doubt over whether a top Premier League club would be prepared to appoint Southgate on the basis of his England work and he will be conscious he is already working with some of the best players in the country in his current role. Southgate refused to discuss his contract after England moved closer to securing their place at the World Cup by beating Albania 5-0. “My job is to get this team to a World Cup,” he said. “We can look at everything else after that.” The FA declined to comment on Southgate’s contractual situation. England need four points from their remaining two qualifiers to be sure of reaching Qatar. They host Albania on Friday night and visit San Marino on Monday. Harry Kane, the captain, has said he wants Southgate to stay and has insisted that the squad are not worried about the uncertainty. “That is obviously between the manager and the FA and, as players, we would never put pressure on a manager to make a decision before then,” Kane said. “We have a job to do in these two games and a job to do going into a big year next year. I don’t think it matters from a player’s point of view if it is decided [before] then or not. “I think I speak for a lot of players and, personally, I get on well with the manager. He has been great and his record at international level speaks for itself. And I still feel we are improving as a team. Semi-final in the World Cup, final in the Euros – we are heading in the right direction. Of course I would love him to stay, but it will come down to him and the FA and his personal decision.”The first look at the much-anticipated Sex and the City follow-up has arrived, a 10-part series called And Just Like That. The latest installment of the hit franchise follows six seasons and two movies, telling the story of women dealing with sex, work and romance in New York, breaking new ground when it started back in 1998. And Just Like That reunites Sarah Jessica Parker, Cynthia Nixon and Kristin Davis, but their fellow co-star Kim Cattrall decided not to return. “We have some new people, and we have some people who aren’t back any more,” Parker said in a recent Vogue interview. The new series will see the characters deal with the “complicated reality of life and friendship in their 50s” with help from returning faces, such as Chris Noth and Mario Cantone, and new cast members such as Sara Ramirez and Sarita Choudhury, shifting the makeup of a show that was a famously straight and white look at life in a diverse city. “The incredible lack of diversity was the achilles’ heel of the show, the first time around,” Nixon said recently. Cattrall told Piers Morgan in 2017 that she wouldn’t return to the role of Samantha Jones but denied it was down to reports of a “diva” demands for more money. She did say, however, that Parker could have been “nicer” to her. “The thing that still bothers me is this feeling of being in some way made to be the baddie,” she said. “I never asked for any money, I never asked for any projects, [so] to be thought of as some kind of diva is absolutely ridiculous.” Reports suggest the slot in the friendship group will be filled by Nicole Ari Parker, most recently seen on Chicago PD. “The writers are skillful about having the characters, whether they’re of colour or not, acknowledge the newness they’re experiencing,” Parker said to Vogue. “But it all fits in with the same beloved tone of the show. The clothes alone are to die for. And let me tell you, there’s still a lot of sex in this version of Sex and the City.” The series will also see the final screen appearance of Willie Garson, who plays the character of Stanford, after he died in September at the age of 57. And Just Like That continues to film in New York City and will premiere on HBO Max on 9 December and on Sky Comedy on the same date.The chairman of Essex County Cricket Club has resigned following an allegation that he used racist language at a board meeting in 2017. John Faragher, who strongly denies the incident took place, stepped down on Thursday evening, and Essex will now review why the matter was not fully and independently investigated at the time. Essex’s new chief executive, John Stephenson, who took over the day-to-day running of the club only in October, said he had first found out about the allegation last week. “This is a proud club with a zero-tolerance policy towards racism and any form of discrimination,” he said. “I will not hesitate to uphold those principles and drive out any form of discrimination that is uncovered.” “I was made aware of this single allegation on Thursday having joined the club four weeks ago. The board met last night, during which John Faragher’s resignation was unanimously accepted by the board. “We are committed to working with the England and Wales Cricket Board to eradicate discrimination from the game. This is an important first step, but the club must now act further. Our internal reporting mechanisms will be reviewed to ensure that matters such as this are dealt with appropriately and immediately.” Faragher did not respond to a request for comment. His departure comes as cricket starts to come to terms with the wider fallout from the allegations of racism – and a failure to investigate them properly – made during the longrunning case of Azeem Rafiq at Yorkshire. On Thursday Mark Arthur, the Yorkshire chief executive, became the latest person to leave Headingley in the wake of the scandal and next Tuesday Rafiq will give evidence to the digital, culture, media and sport select committee of MPs investigating complaints against the county. Meanwhile Yorkshire have announced that their independent whistleblowing hotline will be operational from Monday. In a statement the club said anyone wishing to lodge a formal complaint about any form of discrimination or harassment that they have suffered as a result of any act or omission of the club will be able to do so using a dedicated email address. Mohinderpal Sethi QC, who recently conducted an independent investigation for British Gymnastics into complaints brought by Olympians, has been appointed to lead an independent investigation process which will consider any allegations that are lodged through the hotline.The veteran broadcaster Eamonn Holmes is reportedly leaving ITV’s flagship daytime programme This Morning after 15 years to join the struggling rightwing network GB News. Holmes’s decision to join the likes of Nigel Farage and the former News of the World showbiz editor Dan Wootton at GB News comes after he was the subject of a watchdog inquiry when – during the first wave of the Covid pandemic – he suggested conspiracy theories linking coronavirus to 5G phone masts should not be dismissed, in an outburst that railed against the “mainstream media”. The regulator Ofcom issued guidance to ITV over the comments and Holmes provided a clarification the following day, distancing himself from the conspiracy theories. But a few months later, he and his wife, Ruth Langsford, were dropped from their Friday slot and replaced by Dermot O’Leary and Alison Hammond. According to the Mirror, Holmes will front his own show several times a week at GB News. An unnamed source told the newspaper: “Eamonn’s move to GB News marks the end of an era. He’ll be missed by many ITV viewers but, the truth is, this job offer probably came at just the right moment for both him and ITV. All good things come to an end.” ITV and GB News have been approached for comment. Born in Belfast, Holmes started his broadcasting career in 1979 at Ulster Television, the ITV franchise in Northern Ireland. He has since worked for ITV’s GMTV and for Sky News, and has presented sports coverage and quizshows. GB News launched in June with its then chairman, Andrew Neil, claiming it would not “slavishly follow the existing news agenda”, would cover “the stories that matter to you and those that have been neglected” and deliver “a huge range of voices that reflect the views and values of our United Kingdom”. Neil was the face of GB News before it went on air, but left after presenting just eight programmes in three months, because of technical hitches, the loss of senior staff and differences of opinion over its political direction. Neil left the chairman’s seat as well as his presenting duties at GB News, which is run by the former Sky News Australia chief executive Angelos Frangopoulos, claiming it “would have killed me” to carry on. From July, Farage, the former Brexit party and Ukip MEP, will host his eponymous evening show on Monday to Thursday and has replaced Neil as the face of the channel.The Paris St-Germain women’s midfielder Aminata Diallo has been released without charge as police continue to investigate a violent assault against her teammate and fellow midfielder Kheira Hamraoui. Diallo was taken into custody for questioning by police this week but was released on Thursday with no charges against her and is expected to resume training with the squad. An acquaintance of Diallo’s who was also questioned by police was similarly released without charge. “He had absolutely nothing to do with this attack,” the man’s lawyer, Frédéric Lalliard, told AFP. “He explained that he knew the two players and had had telephone contact with them in the past, but with no connection to this event.” After Diallo’s release, the club issued a statement saying: “We note that Aminata Diallo has been released. The club continues to stand by our players to help them get through this ordeal and swiftly return to calm.” Diallo and Hamraoui were absent from training on Friday. The Versailles regional police service is investigating an attack on Hamraoui, who was dragged out of Diallo’s car and assaulted by two masked men on 4 November. The men fled and have not been caught. French media reported that the assault took place after an evening event at a restaurant near the Bois de Boulogne west of Paris. All the PSG female players and staff had been at the event. Diallo had driven Hamraoui and another player home. L’Équipe reported that during the journey, as the car approached Hamraoui’s home, she was pulled out by two people in masks, one of whom proceeded to violently assault her, beating her legs with iron bars, before fleeing. The attack reportedly lasted several minutes and resulted in Hamraoui needing stitches to her legs and hands, meaning she had to miss a match against Real Madrid in which Diallo played. AFP reported that Diallo was restrained by one assailant during the attack but was not physically injured. Hamraoui and Diallo are teammates in France’s national team and close friends who have holidayed together. Diallo, capped seven times, joined PSG from the rival French club Guingamp in 2016.Time’s a great healer. It may feel incredible now, but I think Boris Johnson will eventually look back on his final appearance at his own climate conference and regard it as a win that he spent it answering questions about some pompous Devonian QC-slash-MP. Let’s face it: the question of why Geoffrey Cox was allowed to coin it in the British Virgin Islands is ultimately going to feel a lot easier to handle than the question of why the British Virgin Islands were allowed to be permanently submerged under six feet of water. So yes – right now, there are those who might imagine it embarrassing for the prime minister to have to spend so much as one nanosecond of Cop26 podium time addressing the institutionalised chiselling that still riddles both houses of parliament. But look at the bigger picture, guys! You’ve simply failed to consider how much more awks it’s going to be when we’re all distilling urine for drinking water, composting the dead, and fighting our own vengeful children for control of the higher ground. If Cop26 ends disappointingly, Johnson will eventually judge it a dodged bullet that the most significant failure of his premiership was veiled by 10 days of ferocious sleaze coverage. Having said that, other failures were available. Incredibly, the prime minister even managed to tank a borrowed-time metaphor. “If this was a football match,” he explained in a speech in week one of the conference, “the current score would be 5-1 down in the match between humanity and climate change. What I think you can say today after two days of talks with about 120 world leaders is that we’ve pulled back a goal, or perhaps even two, and I think we’re going to be able to take this thing to extra time.” Righto. This mainly confirmed that the prime minister doesn’t even understand how football works, which suggests that stewarding a historic international effort against climate change might be a conceptual task some galaxies of distance beyond him. (It also confirmed that apart from a meaningful climate deal, the greatest gift humanity could be given is a SKIP INTRO button on Boris Johnson speeches. For seasoned Johnson watchers, the sheer relief of being able to reach for the remote and bypass this wildly overrated wordsmith’s idea of opening titles would be salvation indeed.) One week on from that word salad, the Conservatives suddenly don’t want to talk about football any more, as Dover MP Natalie Elphicke is found to have a lucrative second job at a watchdog for new-build houses. It was Elphicke, you might recall, who opted to react to Marcus Rashford’s penalty miss in the Euros final in July by enchanting her WhatsApp group with the inquiry: “Would it be ungenerous to suggest Rashford should have spent more time perfecting his game and less time playing politics?” Of course, being told to stick to the day job means so much more coming from someone who has a £36,000 a year side-hustle of her own. But since Elphicke brought up performance, you can’t help feeling the comparison is doubly unflattering. After all, Marcus Rashford has forced this government into a lot more policy than Natalie Elphicke has, and it’s not even his day job. I imagine Natalie’s one of those MPs who think they should be paid more, but in her case and that of many others, you have to ask why. After all, she has a job with substantial perks and expenses. That basic salary of £82,000 is always quoted, but the MP’s package of allowances and expenses adds up to a whole lot more if the member in question takes advantage of it all. And yet, for what? Natalie has not rebelled even once against the government. So what are taxpayers really funding, here? Eighty-two grand basic is great money for serving as a combination of robotic lobby fodder and what you might call a glorified social worker for one’s constituents. Or rather, you MIGHT call it that, were social workers not typically far more dedicated to their jobs than too many backbenchers, for far less pay, and far more vanishingly unlikely to have any kind of second gig at all. When would they have the time? Political parties make a lot of wanting independent-minded and experienced people, but what they really seem to value are people who do exactly what they’re told. Seems unfathomable that a system like that has left us at five minutes to midnight, climate-wise. But here we are. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistLike a lot of people my first reaction to Manu Tuilagi’s selection on the wing against Australia was one of surprise. It is easy for me to say because it’s not my job on the line, I didn’t have a deep-dive review into my performance just six months ago, but my question was, is this really going to be the backline for the first match of the 2023 World Cup? My answer would be no, so, in many ways, what is the point? Why not expose Adam Radwan against high-quality opposition? Having said that, I’m not going to try to make sense of Eddie Jones’s team selection – a lot of people have been doing that since 2016 and tied themselves in knots – but I can try to assess how the players he has chosen will try to go about things and the more I have thought about it, the more it has grown on me. First, I can only see a backline that is set up for unstructured rugby. Tuilagi is not going to play the traditional role of winger – I’d be disappointed if he forever stays out on the touchline – and I want to see him popping up as first receiver, carrying off the first phase and making dents. With Marcus Smith, Owen Farrell and Henry Slade there’s so much ball-playing ability and when you consider you have Jonny May and Freddie Steward playing on the edges, I can picture what Eddie is potentially trying to do. I think it’s also a nod to the fact Eddie loves having size and power in his side and if he can’t have it in his centres then he’ll look for it on the wing. Perhaps Eddie is thinking about the last time Australia were at Twickenham, too, in 2018, because Joe Cokanasiga was playing only his second Test for England but he excelled in a comprehensive win, one of the best in recent years. And the thing with Tuilagi is, he’s in fantastic shape. Having spoken to a few of the players about him, I know that he has dropped weight but he hasn’t lost any power because of it. He feels fitter, he looks lean, he looks durable based on minutes played and the output he’s producing regularly and in terms of repeated efforts I think he’s really in peak condition at the moment. Tuilagi brings that X factor, but with the three players inside him, England have an array of options meaning they should be able to really mix up their styles depending on how they want to play at any particular time during the match. Looking specifically at the 10-12 axis, I expect Smith to bide his time and wait for the unstructured opportunities to strike. Farrell is such a good pattern player at fly-half, so I can envisage him adopting the role for set-piece moves and for the first three or four phases. If England have managed to disrupt Australia’s defensive shape, Smith can then wreak havoc. Smith is just so instinctive and when the game breaks up, we know how good he is individually. We know how aggressive he is at attacking the line, putting defences on the back foot, applying pressure and putting teammates into space. We saw it against Tonga – this is admittedly a better calibre of opposition – but I’m relishing seeing Smith and Farrell dovetail together. Defensive questions have been asked of Smith in the past – perhaps it’s a good thing that Samu Kerevi is not playing for Australia in that sense – but I would not be surprised if Farrell defends at No 10, with Tuilagi and Slade in the centres and Smith on the wing. Against Canada over the summer Smith was defending on the wing and it may well be a ploy Eddie adopts again. He defends at 10 for Harlequins, but I do recall a time a couple of seasons ago at Northampton when Saints were five metres out and he went on to the flank and Harlequins sent Will Evans to 10. It made sense with Taqele Naiyaravoro threatening and it paid off. It actually spooked Northampton because it was a picture they hadn’t seen before and they dropped the ball. Ultimately I want this England backline to be a bit more unconventional than we are used to seeing. I don’t want to see them sticking to their numbers, I want to see them using their individual abilities in whatever shape or form that is and, in Tuilagi’s case, that does not just mean monitoring those 15-metre channels. He has to involve himself in the thick of the action and judging by his form I have every confidence he will. It’s strange because Eddie has talked a lot about this being New England, and my sense from inside the camp is that is how it feels, but personnel-wise, particularly the backs, this team selection does not necessarily reflect that. If the messaging is constant and consistent, though, you start to believe it. I do think it’s a smart move because for the new players coming in it needs to feel fresh, and the same for those who have the scars from the 2019 World Cup final. It helps them to draw a line under it and detach from the past and have this single, shared mindset. As much as I’m excited about the playing side, I’m also excited about the personality. There are some great personalities who can be themselves. The composition of that excites me more than anything about this current squad.On Friday youth campaigners, indigenous leaders and Extinction Rebellion members raised a cacophony of chants and drum beats outside Cop26, and civil society groups inside the conference complex staged a walkout to join them. Within the UN-controlled blue zone, delegates darted through the endless meeting halls or hunched around laptops as the clock counted down tense minutes to the end of the 12-day conference that is widely understood to be crucial to the future of humanity. The deals already reached The ragged final hours of Cop26 are a distinct contrast to the carefully choreographed first days, when world leaders arrived with bustling entourages to deliver a flourish of eye-catching pledges and, in the case of Boris Johnson, eye-watering analogies, as the host nation’s prime minster likened the climate crisis to a football game and then a James Bond movie in his welcome address. As locals adapted to the sound of their city being mispronounced “Glaz-cow” by visiting news anchors, Joe Biden’s first-day promise that “the United States is not only back at the table but hopefully leading by the power of our example” was a reassertion of American credibility after Donald Trump pulled out of the Paris climate agreement, but notable too were the absences of the leaders of Brazil, Saudi Arabia, Russia and China, all major contributors to the crisis. Those who endured the chaotic queues for entry into the tightly secured and Covid-regulated blue zone were boosted by India’s announcement that the country would go net zero by 2070, albeit several generations hence but one of the last remaining major economies to have held out on such a commitment. Then came the domino run of pledges: a declaration on Tuesday on ending deforestation by 2030 and a plan to coordinate the global introduction of clean technologies in order to rapidly drive down their cost; a commitment on Wednesday to reduce methane emissions by at least 30% from 2020 levels by the end of the decade; an agreement on Thursday to phase out coal-fired power between 2030 and 2040. While artfully scripted, these declarations did leave lingering questions of credibility given all were agreed outside the main UN framework, and not by all nations. The heavy spinning did not help either. The failures and sidesteps Over the past fortnight, richer countries have been repeatedly challenged on their failure to hit the longstanding $100bn (£75bn) targets for providing climate finance to the developing countries struggling with a climate crisis not of their making. That was not resolved here, and the final draft agreement published on Friday morning still grossly underestimates the necessary amounts, according to global debt campaigners. Although the former Bank of England governor Mark Carney, now UN special envoy on finance and Boris Johnson’s finance adviser for Cop26, told the summit on finance day that $130tn of private capital was waiting to be deployed for just transition in the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (Gfanz), many are sceptical of how plausible it is to rely on big business to step into the breach. Many also concluded that further analysis of that huge figure would be necessary. There were low points for individual nations. A few days after the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, refused to sign the methane pledge during his brief and grudging attendance, his government’s policy response to the climate crisis was ranked last in an assessment of 60 countries by the Climate Change Performance Index. And this week it became embarrassingly apparent that the UK hosts were not joining the Beyond Oil and Gas Alliance, founded by Denmark and Costa Rica as a club of countries committed to phasing out oil and gas production. Voice beyond the blue zone After an expletive-strewn speech on arrival in Glasgow, the Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg pledged to go “net zero on swearing”, but she made no apology for the force of her fury at the school strikes rally last Friday. “This is no longer a climate conference,” she told the crowd of 10,000 young people in George Square. “This is now a global north greenwash festival, a two-week-long celebration of business as usual and blah blah blah.” Her rage and frustration was shared by other activists who arrived over the first week, having struggled with Covid travel restrictions and overpriced accommodation. Many questioned why the green zone – where civil society, charities and campaigners meet – was set up across the river from the main conference site, and why there was so little public space directly outside the blue zone, meaning protests held there were regularly corralled by police. The “saturation” policing presence across the city – as well as reported instances of harassment of activists – had a chilling effect on protests, according to campaigners, with the anticipated disruptive direct action at a minimum during the first week. Regardless – and despite buffeting winds and heavy rain – about 100,000 took to the streets in Glasgow, joining others across the world in a global day of action. As the summit has progressed, the stunts and actions have become more inventive – a troupe of giant Pikachu protesting against Japan’s refusal to reduce coal consumption; “Emotional Rebellion” activists screaming out their climate anxiety in the drizzle by the River Clyde; and emissions campaigners deflating SUV tyres across the city. The responses became more inventive too: on Tuesday evening a guerilla protest projected slogans such as “Ban fracking now” on to the summit venue, only to find their words covered over as the official projectionist beamed “go away” across the arched roof of the Clyde auditorium. The fight to be heard The legitimacy of the entire summit was called into question at the start of the second week, as observers representing hundreds of environmental, indigenous and women’s rights organisations revealed they were being excluded from negotiating areas, given limited tickets and prevented from joining online due to technical glitches. Despite UK government boasts that this summit would be the “most inclusive ever”, a combination of Covid restrictions, travel costs and the UK’s hostile immigration system has meant about two-thirds of civil society organisations who usually send delegates did not travel to Glasgow, resulting in a summit dismissed as the “whitest and most privileged ever”. The focus on gender equality on Tuesday heard warm words acknowledging that women and girls often bear the brunt of the climate crisis, but a rally outside the summit put things more bluntly: for indigenous women “femicide is directly linked to ecocide”. The star speakers and celebrity interventions The former US president Barack Obama nearly lost the crowd when he described Scotland as “the Emerald Isle” on Monday, but recovered sufficiently to be awarded a lifetime membership of the local student union. Other celebrity visitors included the Hollywood actors Leonardo DiCaprio, who reportedly took a commercial flight to Glasgow to visit, and Idris Elba, who had the good grace to admit in his speech at the summit that he understood why “people might be a little irritated” to see celebrities weighing in on the climate crisis. The actor Emma Watson and singer Ellie Goulding detailed their meetings with campaigners on Instagram. A good week for Irn-Bru The marketing people at AG Barr, makers of Scotland’s beloved, bright orange fizzy drink Irn-Bru, may have had an inkling they were on to a good thing thanks to their sponsorship deal with the SEC convention centre where Cop26 was held. But the intense love it/loathe it debate among delegates during the first week of the summit reached stratospheric proportions when the US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez documented her first taste of the uniquely flavoured beverage on Wednesday. The verdict? “Love it.” Showing admirable restraint, Irn-Bru simply tweeted back: “We’re glad you liked it.”Whether it’s Meghan and Harry limiting themselves to two children, or Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez discussing the “legitimate” concern of parenting through climate catastrophe, the ethical question of whether to add more people to the planet has touched society. But is the world overpopulated in the way we think? I asked Heather Alberro, lecturer in global sustainable development at Nottingham Trent University. Where did the idea of overpopulation come from? It started with 19th-century economist Thomas Malthus, who argued that population growth would always outstrip available resources. That’s known as a “Malthusian argument”. “Malthusian” is one of those words I hear only at a specific sort of middle-class lefty dinner party. He’s the guy who said it’s good for humanity to have population controls, right? He’s not the only one, especially since the 70s when numbers were shooting up. The Population Bomb from Paul Ehrlich is a key text. But this debate has become a fixture in environmental activism, even though the growth is slowing, about to decline, and predicted to stabilise at 10 billion in 2100. So what is the optimum number of humans? Nobody knows. Overpopulation is defined as when a species exceeds the current capacity of its ecosystem. We’re consuming the resources of 1.6 planet Earths each day. I feel the overpopulation debate isn’t looking at the planet as a whole, but countries such as China and India. And sub-Saharan Africa, whose population is increasing. This is where population discourse has racial, coloniser undertones, often characterising women from the global south as breeding too much and focusing interventions there. Conglomerates are the big polluters. A hundred companies are responsible for over 70% of the world’s emissions. And isn’t it fair enough that other countries want to develop? People have a right to live a dignified life. The ecological footprint of somebody in the top 1% can be as high as 175 times that of somebody in the bottom 10%. So saying it’s all about population numbers is simplistic. And a bit rich, after the destruction caused by big business and colonisers on the natural world. We should be talking about redistribution of resources: putting curbs on the ultra rich – and even on us – to change our lifestyles. How do climate refugees change the calculation? Hundreds of millions are likely to have fled their homes by the middle of this century, so it’s regions such as North America that will have huge population growth from migration. Meaning millions more taking up the high-polluting lifestyle. Could the planet sustain us if we changed? I think so. We need to redefine what the good life is, instead of never-ending expansion, the latest iPhone, jetsetting. The planet can’t take another Jeff Bezos. Good thing he’s off to space! So, what about having kids? I dreamed I’d have a few, and they’d have a few, and eventually I’d have enough progeny to start a lower league football team. It’s a complicated issue. There’s always adoption alongside childbearing. Adoptees welcome at Khan FC! It’s good to have hope. It is! There is always a possibility things can be better.Most days, there is a cool breeze. The private villa is located above a secluded rocky bay and set in a tropical garden of palms and exotic fruit trees. From the balcony you can gaze at the sea below and the green humps of nearby islands – a “scattered Pleiades”, as the travel writer Patrick Leigh Fermor put it. There is an infinity pool. And a terrace, perfect for cocktails against a pink Caribbean sunset. Tavistock it isn’t. Yet the villa on the north shore of Tortola, the biggest of the British Virgin Islands, was where Sir Geoffrey Cox ended up staying earlier this year as he juggled the responsibilities of his first and second jobs. It was a circus act that put the MP for Torridge and West Devon in the midst of a Westminster sleaze scandal so all-encompassing that it led to the prime minister having to deny the UK is a corrupt country. According to local sources, Cox stayed at the luxury estate on Cooper Bay, and his commute to work would have been a pleasant one. It took 10 minutes by car: up the hill and down into Road Town, the BVI capital. His destination: a modern office block, Ritter House, built on a mangrove swamp. It overlooks a busy harbour of sailing boats and giant cruise ships. It was from there on the third floor that Cox has been taking part in a bitter dispute with London. The row has distinctly colonial overtones. It has pitted the islands’ elected premier, Andrew Fahie, against the UK’s former governor Augustus Jaspert, known as Gus. In January Jaspert appointed a senior British judge, Sir Gary Hickinbottom, to investigative longstanding corruption allegations against the BVI government. They include claims of cronyism and the alleged misuse of public cash for a doomed Miami-bound airline. A prominent barrister as well as an MP, Cox has been defending Fahie. Local people point out the ironic symmetry of the situation. Cox’s role in the commission of inquiry – taking place 4,000 miles from Westminster – has plunged the UK government into a crisis of its own. Apart from a statement issued this week on his behalf, Cox has kept quiet about his lucrative BVI side-hustle. His trip there, he insisted, had been signed off by the chief whip, and he had never made any “secret of his professional activities”. On Friday Cox’s parliamentary aide said the MP was not responsible for booking the villa, which is where he must have continued his constituency work during his stay on Tortola. “It was not done by him and was for the whole legal team, who occupied it throughout the inquiry,” Alison Ramsay told the Guardian. She added: “Sir Geoffrey has no idea how much it was rented for.” Yet the optics of a parliamentarian being in the Caribbean on paid legal work, when being an MP is supposed to be a full-time job, has been a hard one to explain this week. More so for Cox than many other MPs. Several Tories earn large sums from outside consultancies. But only Cox is set to make more than £1m in 2021 from his non-parliamentary work for the international law firm Withers. Since he became an MP in 2005 he has earned at least £5.92m, the Guardian estimates. Shrugging off the criticism, Cox said it was up to his Devon electors whether they voted for him, a “distinguished professional in his field”, as he terms himself. He said he would cooperate with an investigation by the parliamentary commissioner. This came about after Cox appeared to use his taxpayer-funded MP’s office on 14 September to beam in remotely to the BVI for an inquiry session. This week Cox’s chambers said he was abroad again. Not in the eastern Caribbean, it turned out, but in another offshore tax haven, the Indian Ocean island of Mauritius, according to the Mirror. As well as virtual appearances before the inquiry, Cox has twice visited the BVI, in April and May, and again in June this year. He took advantage of temporary Covid rules that allowed him to vote by proxy. Under Covid rules, Cox was forced to quarantine in his seaside villa for several days. He was later spotted in Road Town restaurants and cafes, meeting BVI government officers for whom he is acting, one person said. So what took Cox to the BVI? The islands’ history is colourful. European invaders have come and gone: the Italian explorer Christopher Columbus, a Spanish invasion force, buccaneers and pirates. And then the Dutch, followed by the British in the shape of English planters. Four centuries on, local people say this exploitative history of sugar plantations and slave estates looms large. Fahie heads a nationalist government at odds with a more powerful and hostile bloc: Britain. “He’s a clever wordsmith and old-time son of the soil. His roots go back a long way,” said one resident, who declined to be named, citing the fact islanders all know each other. The resident added: “Fahie knows the system inside out. He is not quite as buffoonish as the British prime minister. But he’s a gymnast with words and quite Boris-like.” Since winning election, Fahie has repeatedly attacked the governor. He accused Jaspert of arrogance and “damaging and reckless” behaviour. Giving evidence to the inquiry, he said London was in no position to lecture, given its own sleazy record under Johnson of rule-breaking and giving favours to friends. At the same time, the problems flagged up by the inquiry are real, residents concede. They include the misuse of public funds, rampant drug smuggling, and a failure to rebuild after a hurricane, with pupils still being taught in tents after their high school was flattened. Cox is due to appear next week in the wrap-up stages of the inquiry, which is due to report in January. One possible outcome is that the commission will decide to impose direct rule on the BVI, something that happened in the Turks and Caicos Islands – another British overseas territory – in 2009 after similar corruption charges. Or there may be governance changes. On Friday the Cooper Bay villa, with its glass balconies, coral stone tiles and spectacular internal boulder, was empty. Neighbours said they had seen no sign of Cox. The villa’s agent, Smiths Gore, declined to comment. Its website describes the property – which has a three-bedroom main house and a two-bedroom guest villa – in gushing terms: “Situated just above the stunning shoreline this brand new build redefines luxury and contemporary island living. There is simply nothing to compare.” It continues: “Both [villas] embrace this ocean peninsular with great elegance. They are separated by a unique and dramatic rock formation and the contrast of this natural sculpture and the modernity of the buildings is truly breathtaking.” During the April-November low season, the complex costs $7,100 (£5,300) a week to rent. The bill for Cox’s stay would have been picked up by the BVI government and taxpayers. It has put aside $5m for commission costs, $3m of which has already been spent. “I think $1,000 an hour is pretty sweet,” one Virgin Islander mused on Friday, when asked about the Cox affair. Another said the territory was a real place rather than a “paradise”. “Our reality is as dense and complex and gritty as yours. We have kids being educated since the hurricane in tents. Yes we are dirty, but we are dirty like London is dirty,” they added.On 7 June 1892, an act of bravery undertaken by a free man of color in segregated Louisiana had historic consequences. Homer Plessy, a New Orleans shoemaker of mixed heritage, purchased a first class rail ticket and boarded a train bound for Covington. He took a seat in a whites-only car and declared to the conductor that he would not move. The planned act of civil disobedience was orchestrated by a local civil rights organization to challenge the Louisiana Separate Car Act, one of a number of segregationist laws passed in the post-Reconstruction south. His case eventually ended up before the nation’s highest court and resulted in a landmark 1896 ruling that defined the Jim Crow era and legalized racial segregation in America. But now, 125 years since the Plessy v Ferguson decision, a coalition including Plessy’s descendants, ancestors of John Ferguson, the Louisiana judge who originally tried the case, and the New Orleans district attorney’s office who prosecuted him over a century ago, have commenced efforts to posthumously pardon Homer Plessy. The request for a pardon was officially made on Friday morning, at a Louisiana parole board hearing. The board voted unanimously to recommend the pardon, leaving the final decision with the state’s governor John Bel Edwards. The Guardian was given access to the application before submission. “When Homer Plessy died in 1925 everyone remembered his name as somewhat the poster child of segregation,” said Keith Plessy, a distant first cousin of Homer Plessy and a signatory to the pardon request. “And this stigma can be removed from his memory by honoring him in the right way. By recognizing that the law itself was a crime.” After the supreme court’s decision in 1896, Plessy was criminally prosecuted and changed his plea to guilty for violating the Separate Car Act. He was made to pay a $25 fine. Unlike civil rights activists who would go on to utilize the same tactic of challenging laws by direct action, he slipped away from public life. “If the pardon is granted and the governor of Louisiana signs it, it will show a willingness of our state government to recognize the devastating effect the enactment of the separate car law had on Black citizens in Louisiana,” said Phoebe Ferguson, judge John Ferguson’s great-great-granddaughter and another signatory to the application. “It will show that even 125 years later an apology for enacting those laws can have great effect and for other laws to be overturned or examined and for others to receive a pardon.” The application for Plessy’s pardon has been brought under a little-known 2006 Louisiana statute, the Avery C Alexander pardon law, named after the late civil rights leader and state politician. The law mandates that any person convicted under a local law to maintain or enforce racial separation or discrimination is eligible for pardon, with the parole board required to submit the application to the state governor within 14 days unless there are objections. Louisiana’s governor, Democrat John Bel Edwards, will then decide the matter unilaterally. The New Orleans district attorney’s office believes this is the first time the law has been used since its enactment. The pardon application is supported by the New Orleans district attorney, Jason Williams, a progressive elected last year on a campaign of sweeping criminal justice reform in a city known as one of America’s incarceration capitals. It was managed by a newly created civil rights division in his office, tasked with re-examining cases prosecuted by previous administrations. In an interview with the Guardian, Williams described the original decision to criminally pursue Plessy after the supreme court decision as an example of a “token prosecution by my predecessors”. “They didn’t have to demand a conviction, and they should not have demanded one,” Williams said. “District attorneys then and now have the discretion to decide who to prosecute and who not to.” He continued: “They wanted to make him [Plessy] a symbol of the challenge against segregation and white supremacy, to show that Jim Crow was going to be the law of the land. “There is no more glaring example that exists of that abuse of prosecutorial discretion than Homer Plessy’s prosecution.” The move to pardon Plessy follows years of advocacy work by the Plessy and Ferguson foundation, of which Keith Plessy and Phoebe Ferguson are president and executive director respectively. The foundation has previously petitioned the city of New Orleans to hold an annual Homer Plessy Day to mark the anniversary of his arrest and to rename the street near the railway tracks Homer Plessy Way. A brown historic plaque that tells the story of Plessy’s act of civil disobedience was erected at the spot of his arrest in 2009. Plessy and Ferguson met for the first time in 2004 at an event launching a book on the case. Plessy recalled the meeting, in which Ferguson apologized to him for the legacy of slavery and segregation in the state. “I had to stop her and say ‘hey you know we were not born then. It’s no longer Plessy versus Ferguson, this is Plessy and Ferguson.’” He added: “As children coming up in New Orleans we were in two different worlds, almost. But now we’re almost joined at the hip.”Donald Trump defended rioters at the Capitol on 6 January who threatened to “hang Mike Pence”, his vice-president, according to recorded remarks released on Friday. Trump said it was “common sense” when asked about the chants. Trump was speaking to the ABC chief Washington correspondent, Jonathan Karl, for his book Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show, which will be published on Tuesday. The recording was released by Axios. Karl asked Trump if he was worried about Pence during the attack on the Capitol by rioters who aimed to stop the certification of electoral college results and thereby overturn Trump’s defeat by Joe Biden. “No,” Trump said. “I thought he was well-protected, and I had heard that he was in good shape. No. Because I had heard he was in very good shape. But, but, no, I think – ” Karl interjected: “Because you heard those chants – that was terrible. I mean – ” Trump said: “He could have – well, the people were very angry.” Karl said: “They were saying ‘hang Mike Pence’.” “Because it’s common sense, Jon,” Trump said, repeating baseless claims about election fraud. “It’s common sense that you’re supposed to protect. How can you – if you know a vote is fraudulent, right? – how can you pass on a fraudulent vote to Congress? How can you do that?” The 2020 election was not subject to widespread electoral fraud, an opinion which was relayed to Trump by his own attorney general, William Barr. Trump continued: “And I’m telling you: 50/50, it’s right down the middle for the top constitutional scholars when I speak to them. Anybody I spoke to – almost all of them at least pretty much agree, and some very much agree with me – because he’s passing on a vote that he knows is fraudulent. How can you pass a vote that you know is fraudulent?” “Top constitutional scholars” do not agree the 2020 election was subject to electoral fraud. One scholar, John Eastman, provided Pence with a memo outlining how he said the vice-president might reject slates of electors from key states and thus throw the election back to the House of Representatives, where a Republican majority in state delegations would hand victory to Trump. Pence considered the memo and then, on the advice of others, including the former vice-president Dan Quayle, rejected it. Five people died in or following the attack on the Capitol. Pence and his family were hidden in an underground loading bay during the insurrection, and then duly presided over the certification of Biden’s win. In a Republican party dominated by Trump, however, anyone with ambitions of running for president in 2024 has a stark choice to make. In trips to early voting states, Pence has sought to downplay the Capitol attack. Unlike Trump, Pence is not in legal jeopardy over attempts to overturn the election. But Eastman is, as one of many subjects of subpoenas from the House select committee investigating 6 January. Trump and other aides are contesting such summonses on grounds of presidential privilege, which Biden has largely declined to invoke. This week, a judge denied Trump’s claim, writing: “Presidents are not kings, and plaintiff is not president.” Another judge issued a temporary stay. In Betrayal, his second Trump book, Karl also reports that the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, decided Trump should not attend Biden’s inauguration on 20 January. It was a grave step, given it would make Trump the first president to miss the inauguration of his successor since Andrew Johnson, the first president to be impeached, skipped ceremonies for Ulysses S Grant in 1869. Trump is the only US president to have been impeached twice. The House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, reportedly opposed the idea and told Trump what was afoot. Trump, Karl reports, quickly said he would not attend. On 20 January, Pence took his place on the inauguration stand.Since my dad died two years ago, I’ve reconnected with one of two younger sisters (I’m one of five) who abandoned our family without explanation. Our father was an alcoholic and abusive to our mother. Our older sister had to step into our mother’s shoes – a lot for her young shoulders. Through no fault of her own, she was ill-prepared to take on four sisters. My younger sister (whom I now communicate with on a regular basis) seems to have a lot of hatred towards this older sibling. Almost every conversation we have concludes with her talking about our older sister’s faults and how she made mistakes in not acting responsibly when our mother had a breakdown 40 years ago. I usually ignore her ramblings, but lately I find myself challenging her resentments. Could it be she is simply unhappy with how her own life turned out? Although she paints a picture that everything is wonderful and amazing, she and one other sibling refuse to talk to this older sister. I don’t share these memories, and though life was tough in our “strapped for cash” working-class home, I channel my energies in a different way. Surely my sister should deal with this by seeing a counsellor? If only we could get others to go to counselling, but we can’t. I think all of you could do with family counselling to help you deal with what sounds like a very traumatic upbringing. You have some good insight into your family dynamics and seem to understand that your parents’ own upbringing had an effect on the way they parented. It’s surprising how few people think about this. You’ve also touched on something else rarely recognised, which is that each sibling has their own memories of growing up. Too often one sibling will tell the other it “wasn’t like that” – because each sibling has their own personality and birth order, and these affect our experiences. So both you and your sister are entitled to your memories. That said, the blame aimed at this older sister is unfair; she did her best while still a child/very young herself, but I wonder if your younger sister is directing her anger at her sister in this way because she doesn’t know what else to do with it?. Maybe it feels safer and more productive (although it isn’t) than getting angry at your father. I contacted psychotherapist Nicola McCarry, who felt the nub of this might be “feeling seen and heard. If your little sister came to me for therapy, I’d say to her, ‘No child should ever go through the abuse and neglect you endured. But your [older] sister, who was just a child herself, couldn’t protect you, nor could she ever be enough to make up for it’.” I’m guessing you’re happy that you reconnected with your sister and want to stay in touch, so to move her out of this grumbling groove she’s got herself into, next time try saying something like: “We always end up talking about this – I wonder why that is?” McCarry pointed out that the key now is bringing the rather circular conversation into an adult arena, and about what you are both doing now. It’s very common for siblings to talk about their childhood and shared history, but sometimes this replaceså a more grown up, authentic connection, because making that new connection seems hard. I wondered what you’d be talking about if you weren’t talking about your sister. Is there anything else to talk about? “Your relationship [with your younger sister] does seem mired in the past,” McCarry observed. “Is there a foundation to build a new relationship now for an adult sibling relationship? Could you say something like, ‘I missed you when you left 20 years ago and I understand why you needed to leave. I’m so glad to have you back and I want us to be able to get to know each other better in our adult lives’.” McCarry added: “When a child grows up with neglect or abuse, they can create a story of being unlovable or of no value. So attempting to create an alliance based on complaining about ‘another’ can mask that vulnerability.” Your little sister could be doing this to mask a fear of more rejection. It’s amazing that you’ve moved on in the way you have, but your sister isn’t there yet – and she may never be. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows is facing a criminal referral to the justice department for contempt of Congress after he failed to appear for an immediate deposition on Friday morning before the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack. The move to threaten criminal prosecution for Meadows amounts to an abrupt and sharp escalation for the select committee as it seeks to enforce its subpoena against one of Donald Trump’s closest aides first issued in September. Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, said in a letter to Meadows’s attorney on Thursday that the panel had exhausted its patience with Meadows, and his failure to appear at the deposition would be viewed as an instance of willful noncompliance. The chairman said that his failure to appear would force the select committee to “consider invoking contempt of Congress procedures” that could result in a criminal referral to the justice department, as well as the possibility of a civil action to enforce the subpoena. But despite the threat of criminal prosecution, Meadows did not attend his deposition, scheduled to take place with select committee counsel in a small conference room tucked away inside a nondescript House office building on Capitol Hill. The attorney for Meadows, George Terwilliger, said in a statement on Friday that his client would not appear before the select committee until a court ruled whether he could be compelled to testify and whether, even if he could, he had to answer questions. “It would be irresponsible for Mr Meadows to prematurely resolve that dispute by voluntarily waiving privileges that are at the heart of those legal issues,” Terwilliger said. The select committee waited for Meadows until 10 minutes after his scheduled deposition time. Leaving the conference room, counsel for the select committee declined to comment when asked whether the panel would immediately move to hold Meadows in contempt. The select committee is targeting Meadows since his role as Trump’s former White House chief of staff means he may hold the key to uncovering Trump’s involvement in efforts on 6 January to stop the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. The select committee also believes that Meadows remained by Trump’s side for most of 6 January, and was therefore in a unique position to know what the former president was privately thinking and doing at the White House as the deadly attack on the Capitol unfolded. But after Trump instructed his former aides to defy the subpoenas on grounds of executive privilege, Meadows moved to negotiate with the select committee about the scope of his cooperation – which members on the panel suspect was an effort to stall the inquiry. Those suspicions among members on the select committee appeared to be bolstered on Thursday after Terwilliger, said in a statement that Meadows was “immune” from congressional testimony under justice department opinions. “Mr Meadows remains under the instructions of former President Trump to respect long-standing principles of executive privilege. It now appears the courts will have to resolve this conflict,” Terwilliger added. Thompson said in the letter that rejected the notion that Meadows was immune from testifying to the select committee, noting that every federal court has ruled that presidential aides have no such protections in spite of the justice department opinions. The chairman also noted that Meadows had not produced any materials demanded in his subpoena – including those not covered by executive privilege – though weeks had passed since Terwilliger indicated he would review which records to release. Thompson said in the letter that his patience had expired and demanded that Meadows appear with the requested documents at a deposition on Friday. Noncompliance by Meadows would force the select committee to pursue contempt proceedings, he added. The White House on Thursday backed Thompson, notifying Terwilliger in a separate letter that Biden would not assert executive privilege – a power wielded by sitting presidents – or immunity over the documents and deposition requested by the select committee. “President Biden has determined that he will not assert immunity to preclude your client from testifying before the select committee,” deputy White House counsel Jonathan Su said in an office of legal counsel letter first reported by the Washington Post. Thompson’s warning on Thursday was his third threat against a recalcitrant witness since House investigators starting issuing subpoenas to dozens of top former Trump administration officials and pro-Trump activists connected to the 6 January insurrection. The chairman last week raised the possibility of holding former Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark in contempt of Congress after he appeared for a deposition pursuant to a subpoena but refused to answer any questions, citing attorney-client privilege. Last month, the House voted to refer Trump’s former chief strategist Steve Bannon to the justice department for prosecution after the select committee unanimously recommended his referral after he ignored his September subpoena in its entirety.French prosecutors are investigating allegations that a female soldier in Emmanuel Macron’s defence staff was raped by a serviceman colleague after a farewell party at the Élysée Palace in July. The alleged assault took place this summer after a going-away reception for a general and two others that was attended by Macron, according to French daily Libération, which first reported the accusations. The paper said the farewell reception began at the Élysée Palace, where Macron said a few words and left at about 10pm. Some of those present then left the Élysée and moved on to the premises of the president’s personal military staff on Rue de l’Élysee, on an adjacent street. That is where the attack is alleged to have taken place. According to Libération, the two soldiers, the alleged victim and alleged attacker, were colleagues deployed at the high-security office at the Élysée Palace dealing with sensitive government matters, most of them classified or top secret. Libération reported that the young woman arrived at the police station nearest to the Élysée after the alleged assault and immediately reported the rape that night. The accused soldier had been questioned as an “assisted witness” by prosecutors, a status indicating he remains subject to further interrogations but has not been formally charged, a judicial source told AFP. Asked for comment, a presidential official said that “as soon as the authorities were aware of these claims, measures were immediately taken” to support the alleged victim and “the person accused was immediately transferred far from the Élysée”. Macron’s office would await judicial investigations before deciding on any further action, an official told news agencies.The family of a 10-year-old boy who was killed by a dog in south Wales have said they are “absolutely heartbroken”, as an inquest opened into his death. Newport coroner’s court heard that the injuries Jack Lis sustained were “unsurvivable” after he was mauled while entering a friend’s house near his home in Pentwyn, Caerphilly. The provisional cause of death was given as “severe injuries to the head and neck”. Caroline Saunders, a senior coroner in Gwent, said the circumstances surrounding Jack’s death were “violent and unnatural”. She adjourned the inquest for further inquiries to be made. Gwent police said on Friday that a 28-year-old woman from Caerphilly had been released on bail after being arrested on suspicion of being in charge of a dog dangerously out of control. The force said two men from the Caerphilly area had been released after voluntarily speaking to police over being in charge of a dog dangerously out of control. A statement from Jack’s family said: “We are absolutely heartbroken. Our lives will never be the same without Jack. This is not something any parent should ever have to be writing. “Our boy made us the proudest parents and family on the planet. He was the sweetest of boys. He’s for ever in our hearts. Sweet dreams, Jack, our perfect boy.” On Monday afternoon police were called to a property in Pentwyn after reports of a dog attack. Officers attended, including specially trained firearms officers, alongside paramedics from the Welsh ambulance service, who were unable to save Jack. Jack and his friend were alone when the attack happened. The friend sought the help of a neighbour who lived on the same street but the man was unable to stop the dog. The animal was shot by the firearms officers. Ch Supt Mark Hobrough said: “The work to identify the breed of dog involved this attack continues. Once this is completed, we will be able to establish if the breed features on the list of illegal dogs to own in this country. Any other criminal offences identified will be investigated fully by officers.” He appealed to the public not to name on social media those suspected of being involved. He said: “It is vital that people are considering the tone and language used in comments posted on social media about the identities of anyone involved in this matter as part of our inquiries. “It is important that people think about how their social media comments or posts could impact the ongoing investigation and Jack’s grieving family.” Hobrough said his condolences and thoughts were with Jack’s family and friends as well as anyone else affected by the incident.It could have been so much worse. At this critical juncture, talks between the world’s two carbon superpowers – together accounting for some 40% of global greenhouse-gas emissions – could easily have collapsed into a blame game, and a standoff that would have seriously set back global efforts. Instead, the surprise China-US agreement announced on Wednesday night offers renewed hope for joint leadership at last. After the bruising years of the Donald Trump presidency, and the impact of Covid-19 on the negotiations themselves and those poor countries most vulnerable to the climate crisis, trust in multilateralism hangs in the balance. The new agreement is far from perfect and doesn’t go far enough. Despite promises to cooperate on reducing methane emissions, details in the plan are patchy and need more substance. It could even risk distracting from the multilateral work needed in these crucial last moments of the UN-led Cop26 talks. But it is still important, even inspiring, to see new cooperation emerge. The US and China climate envoys, John Kerry and Xie Zhenhua, shared warm words, the latter announcing that “there is more agreement between China and the United States than divergence.” The two men have a long working relationship, and between them deserve credit for the signing of the Paris agreement, and the 2014 joint US-China announcement that helped set the diplomatic groundwork for it. Their cordiality certainly stands in contrast to the words of the US president, Joe Biden. Only a week earlier at a press conference in Glasgow, Biden referred to the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, and Russian president, Vladimir Putin, when he said, “They didn’t show up … It is a gigantic issue and they just walked away. How do you do that and claim to have any leadership mantle?” So, what’s changed? Arguably, not much. The narrative that China was “missing in action” at Cop26 was always a red herring, based on a misreading of Xi’s absence – a decision clearly motivated by concerns about coronavirus transmission (arguably well-founded ones) and likely by domestic political events – rather than any snub. Diplomatic work, evidently, was continuing behind the scenes, building on the visits Kerry made to the Chinese cities of Shanghai and Tianjin earlier in the year. Now neither side needs to go home empty-handed, and can avoid the stinging accusation that they either spoiled the talks, or failed to get their biggest rival to the negotiating table. The establishment of a joint “working group on enhancing climate action in the 2020s” is also more interesting than it sounds at first blush. In 2014, a bilateral climate announcement from Barack Obama and Xi Jinping was not only an important symbolic gesture that the world’s two largest carbon polluters were willing to work together towards a new treaty, it also kicked off a substantive programme of joint technical work on clean energy cooperation and more. This looks to have been revived here, in a statement that points to the two nations’ intentions to cooperate on critical industrial challenges, such as green design, resource reuse and direct air capture of carbon dioxide. As Kerry put it in his remarks in Glasgow, these are globally pressing issues of “math and physics”, rather than politics. But, of course, it is politics – and that’s why it matters, if only as a floor for ambition, not the ceiling. The announcement sets the right mood music ahead of Xi and Biden’s virtual meeting next week, but US-China relations will not return soon to the accord that Obama and Xi achieved. In most other arenas, from trade to cyber to Taiwan, the country’s leaders will likely find their interests and values remain at odds. New areas of conflict reflect a deep, tectonic shift in the geography of global power – not issues that can likely be resolved in the short or medium term. Yet the climate emergency requires a far greater urgency – eight years to halve global emissions, according to the UN — and acting to address it requires ambition and coordination. The announcement puts paid to claims that China only engages in climate cooperation to extract concessions in other areas, such as human rights. Rather than being “suckered” into going easy on China, the US seems to have stayed the course on its foreign policy towards China in other areas, while recognising that the two countries have a common interest in working to address the climate emergency. Tellingly, in his Cop26 press conference, Kerry invoked the critical 1986 meeting between Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev in Reykjavik that began the process of nuclear disarmament. To extend the analogy, the US and China may need to recognise that in the present geopolitical conjuncture – the cold war might be an imperfect analogy, but it’s not so far off – strategic rivalry will be a constant. But their common interests in climate security require continued trust-building, coordination and technical exchange, much as the late 1980s saw continued work on arms control even at points of high tension. In the near future, competitive and cooperative dynamics on climate will have to coexist. In fact, a race to the top, where healthy competition around the deployment of clean technology plays out in developing world markets that urgently need new investment in infrastructure, should be welcomed by all. The hope in this new agreement is that it is possible to create spaces for contention and rivalry, without taking the planet hostage. Sam Geall is CEO of China Dialogue and associate fellow at Chatham HouseTurkey has blocked citizens of Syria, Yemen and Iraq from buying flight tickets to Belarus, as the EU puts pressure on foreign governments over their role in the arrival of thousands of people from the Middle East at its eastern border. Belavia, the Belarusian state airline, said it would no longer carry citizens of those countries to Belarus, days before a planned announcement of new sanctions from the EU that could target airlines. Turkish Airlines, which is 49% state-owned, has also pledged to limit migrant flights to Belarus, European officials said on Friday. The EU has accused Belarus of encouraging people fleeing war-torn parts of the world to fly to Minsk and then facilitating their travel to the border with Poland. Hundreds of people are now living in a tent camp on the Belarus-Poland border in near-freezing temperatures. Poland, which has established a state of emergency in the border region enforced by hundreds of troops, refuses to allow them in. The Polish defence minister, Mariusz Błaszczak, said on Friday that British Royal Engineers had deployed with Polish troops at the border to reconnoitre and plan reinforcements to fencing meant to keep migrants out of the EU. The flights decision by Turkey’s aviation directorate should in effect close Istanbul as a major transit hub for people who want to reach the EU via Belarus from Iraq, Syria and elsewhere in the Middle East. Other routes, including through Damascus and Dubai, remain open. Turkish Airlines and Belavia have denied any role in trafficking people to Belarus. Belavia had previously said it could not deny a ticket-holder the right to fly if their documents were in order. Margaritis Schinas, a European Commission vice-president, welcomed the Turkish move. “Overall we are seeing progress on all fronts,” he said. “This is the moment when the EU is counting on our friends and we are very happy to see we have many.” Iraqi Airlines has also said it will not resume flights to Minsk, the commission announced. Many of the migrants are ethnic minorities from Iraq. A spokesperson for Iraq’s Kurdistan regional government said an estimated 8,000 Kurds were at the Belarusian border with Poland. The Belarusian leader Alexander Lukashenko’s decision to spark a crisis on the Polish border is seen as an act of revenge for the EU’s criticism of his brutal crackdown on the opposition, and also an attempt to move the conversation on domestically from last year’s pro-democracy protests. New EU sanctions are expected on Monday targeting 30 Belarusian individuals and organisations involved in the crisis. Lukashenko has promised to retaliate, threatening to block supplies of natural gas from a pipeline linking Russia to Europe. On Friday a Kremlin spokesperson appeared to contradict Lukashenko’s threat, saying Russia would honour its contracts regardless of Belarusian actions. “Russia’s reliability as a supplier and a partner under current and future contracts is beyond doubt,” said Dmitri Peskov. While sidestepping some of Lukashenko’s most aggressive threats, Russia continued to flex its muscles in Belarus on Friday, landing paratroopers on a training exercise in the Hrodna region just miles from the borders with Poland and Lithuania. This week Russia has sent nuclear-capable bombers on rare patrols over Belarusian airspace in a move viewed as a warning to Nato countries. Russia called the paratrooper deployment a training exercise and said they had already returned to Russia. Belarus’s defence ministry claimed it was a “readiness check” prompted by the “rise in military activity close to the border”. Poland and Lithuania have each declared a state of emergency and sent legions of troops and police to the border area owing to the arrival of thousands of people. Reports have continued on Friday of people successfully crossing into Poland. The situation in the improvised refugee camps on Belarus’ borders remains dire. In a statement on Friday, the World Health Organization said its team of experts found that 60% of people it spoke to on the Belarus-Lithuania border needed some form of medical attention. Russia clashed with western countries at the UN security council on Thursday as both sides blamed the other for the humanitarian crisis unfolding on the border. After an emergency meeting on the crisis, the western delegations at the security council in New York issued a joint statement condemning “the orchestrated instrumentalisation of human beings … with “the objective of destabilising neighbouring countries and the European Union’s external border and diverting attention away from its own increasing human rights violations”. The statement called for a strong international reaction, without mentioning any concrete measures. But the threat of EU sanctions has appeared to spur action from foreign governments and airlines. In response to a Guardian request, Belavia denied that it was involved in trafficking and claimed it had previously blocked suspicious bookings. Asked whom it had blocked from travelling and when, Belavia said: “Belavia wouldn’t like to specify the names of travel agencies, as we can’t be 100% sure that these agencies are consciously engaged in trafficking migrants.” The airline said it had blocked a number of travel agencies as a preventive measure based on their activities. “The examples include ‘hidden groups’ – several individual bookings with seven to nine passengers on the same flight who are citizens of ‘high-risk’ countries. Or in the case of bookings which were initially created for passengers with European names which afterwards, right before the ticket issuance, were changed by the agents to Arabian ones.”Boris Johnson should look Richard Ratcliffe in the eye. If he did, he would catch a reflection of himself that might prove painful but illuminating. For contained in his handling, and fateful mishandling, of the case of Richard’s wife, Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, is almost every aspect of the Johnson modus operandi. It is a parable of the prime minister’s approach to politics – and to other human beings. Ratcliffe is in the last stages of a hunger strike that has seen him camped outside the Foreign Office for 20 days and nights, weak, dizzy and shivering from cold. His wife has been detained in Iran since April 2016, and he wants her back home. There are other UK nationals held in Iran, including Anoosheh Ashoori and Morad Tahbaz, but it’s Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s case that implicates Johnson specifically – and says so much about him. Start with his most infamous involvement, four years ago this month, when as foreign secretary Johnson told a Commons committee that Zaghari-Ratcliffe was “simply teaching people journalism”, apparently oblivious to her insistence that she had been in Iran on holiday. Three days later, Zaghari-Ratcliffe was hauled before an unscheduled court hearing in Iran, where Johnson’s words were cited as proof that she had engaged in “propaganda against the regime”. In that act alone, you can see the essence of Johnsonism: carelessness, in both senses of the word. Most obvious is the slapdash failure to master his brief, to pay attention to detail. But most egregious is the lack of human care, the cavalier disregard for the impact his actions would have on others. That casualness, that lack of empathy, was a warning to his fellow Tory MPs, one they chose to ignore when they made Johnson their leader less than two years later. Had they paid attention, they could have anticipated that this would be a man who would turn up at the UN or his own climate conference with nothing more than a few warmed-up jokes and vague exhortations, rather than a willingness to put in the hard, detailed work such diplomacy demands if it is to make a breakthrough. Nor would they have been surprised that he would respond to calls for a Covid lockdown by shouting to his advisers that they should “let the bodies pile high in their thousands”. Careless and without care: the clues were already there. But the Commons gaffe was not the worst of it. Ratcliffe believes that it was the move that followed a few days later, as Johnson sought to put out the fire he had started, that cost his wife most dearly. Johnson briefed friendly papers that Britain would repay the £400m it owed Iran for an unfulfilled 1970s arms deal, a move he clearly tied to Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s release. According to Ratcliffe, setting that price for Nazanin and not meeting it is “why she is still held to this day”. Again, that one act contains multitudes. Johnson let people believe he was going to pay off the debt to Iran because he needed to get out of a hole, and that’s how he always is – telling people what they want to hear, issuing promises he won’t keep. In 2018, he assured Unionists that there would be no border down the Irish Sea; a year later he’d made a deal that would put a border down the Irish Sea. He promised “frictionless trade” after Brexit, only eventually to have a colleague admit that there would, after all, be the friction of border checks. Whether it’s £350m on the side of a bus, 40 new hospitals or a continued 0.7% on aid, a nice number thrown out by Boris Johnson should always prompt a swift counting of spoons. Richard Ratcliffe is one of many to have learned that lesson the hard way. So little in Johnson’s method has changed. Ratcliffe recalls how, straight after the then foreign secretary had made his calamitous remarks four years ago, he “didn’t apologise, but sent his mates out on the airwaves to defend him and to muddy the waters”. That could be a description of last week, when the prime minister dispatched cabinet underlings to embarrass themselves over the Owen Paterson affair. And note how, rather than devising a diplomatic channel or strategy that might reach Tehran and actually get Zaghari-Ratcliffe out, Johnson’s priority was squaring the Daily Telegraph. That remains the default even now, whether it’s the Northern Ireland protocol, the pandemic or the gravest issues of geopolitics: what matters most is keeping the base on side. All of this would be clear to Johnson if he had wandered out of Downing Street and come face to face with Richard Ratcliffe. But naturally he didn’t do that, even as a simple gesture of compassion. He wouldn’t do it, because that would have meant confronting something awkward and taking responsibility for it. That’s not Johnson’s style, as we saw again this week when he ducked the emergency Commons debate on the Tories’ rising sleaze scandal, sending out one of his human sponges to absorb the mess instead. He lacks the empathy to look properly chastened by the plight of Zaghari-Ratcliffe. Indeed, he seems unable to feel any shame at all. Any man who has to be told three times to wear a mask in a hospital obviously lacks that capacity. Even so, Johnson is clearly too frightened to face Ratcliffe, a man frail and exhausted with hunger. Perhaps he knows that in the story of that man and his imprisoned wife all his weaknesses are laid bare – and he can’t bear to look. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistStart Forest Glen car park, near Little Wenlock Distance 4 miles Time 1½ hours Total ascent 308 metres Difficulty Easy to moderate Google map of the route The Wrekin is said to have been formed when a giant called Cawr dropped a shovel of earth on the way to Shrewsbury. The name of the clumsy clod is Welsh for giant; Wales is just 30 miles away, and Shrewsbury was routinely the site of skirmishes between the Welsh and whoever happened to have invaded England at the time. The name Wrekin, like nearby Wroxeter, probably derives from Wreocensæte, an Anglo-Saxon kingdom. Though only 407 metres high, the hill is special to Shropshire because it has, since the days of the industrial revolution, been a place for workers from as far away as the Black Country to find clean air and respite. Deep inside its woods are the remains of medieval charcoal-burning platforms; iron was smelted here long before the iconic Ironbridge was constructed. The Wrekin is also the only thing for miles around that pops out of the surrounding (slightly misnamed) Cheshire Plain. Its parent peak – the closest other prominence – is Kinder Scout in Derbyshire. But British walkers know size is insignificant: this mini-mountain packs in more history, geology, birdlife and adventure than you’d guess from its girth or altitude. The clockwise walk from the car park starts with a sharp climb up a wide track, zigzagging to gain height. Here and there narrow paths, presumably used by fell runners, cut through the ferny undergrowth. The main path ascends more gently through woodlands of veteran oak, ash and beech. As it’s autumn, everything is in flux. Saproxylic and mycorrhizal fungi may not have the romantic ring of snowdrops and bluebells, but they are mysterious, almost magical presences underfoot. The former, produced by dead wood, twigs and leaf litter, provide food for insects, which in turn support birds and bats, while anything left is drawn down to the latter, which absorb and distribute nutrients to their symbiotic friends – plants and trees. It pays to walk slowly to keep an ear and eye out for small birds scuttling for grubs, berries and seeds, and for woodpeckers overhead. At the least you’ll catch a squirrel rummaging in the leaf-fall, and a raven or raptor riding the thermals that flow off the hill. After about a mile, a sign points up towards Halfway House, which is currently for sale. Long a hunting ground for bears and wolves, the Wrekin was in medieval times a royal forest, with a “hay” (deer enclosure). Halfway House was built in the 18th century as a lodge for hunters of pheasant and partridge, and in the next century was converted into a place of refreshment for walkers. Now you are higher you’ll begin to catch views of the flat fields below and the distant green hills. Off another broad path that climbs towards the first false summit are two openings known as Hell’s Gate and Heaven’s Gate. These are entrances to the lower and higher sections, respectively, of an iron age hillfort which made use of the hill’s natural outcrops. Javelin heads found nearby suggest the ramparts were occupied by the Romans in the first century AD. Where boots have worn away the ground, look out for clumps of rhyolite – a volcanic rock that’s pink and purple in colour. The Wrekin itself, though somewhat cone-shaped, is not a volcano, but the lava from the eruption of a distant fiery mountain, when Shropshire was a tropical island. Deep inside the Wrekin are far older rocks, formed at the latitude of the Falkland Islands about 600m years ago. It’s not all ancient and mystical up here. Just beneath the summit is a transmitting station for TV and radio signals, built partly underground to appease disgruntled locals. If it’s ugly, it doesn’t detract too much, as just a hop and skip away is the final summit and terrific views of the Shropshire Hills, Malvern Hills, various Welsh massifs, Shrewsbury and Telford. Depending on the haze and the weather, you can see as far as Liverpool, the Pennines and Snowdonia. A handy plaque names the nearby mountains, though I was approached by an even handier, and very friendly, local walker who pointed out Caer Caradoc and the more famous – and shapely – Long Mynd. Stepping through a cleft on the summit known as the Needle’s Eye is said to be an important rite of passage for a “true Salopian” (I’m not sure if that means a local rustic or a posh kid at Shrewsbury public school) and a good omen for marriage. The descent from the summit is steep and, on wet days, slippery; tree roots don’t help matters. Some prefer to descend the way they came but I would persevere, as the reward at the foot is a flat path through lovely oak woods. If dusk is descending, listen out for tawny owls and take a look at the skies before you leave: the Wrekin is a designated Dark Sky Discovery site with a “Milky Way rating” – which means good access and no need of binoculars to see the heavenly glories. The walk can easily be made longer (eight miles) with a loop around Ercall, a lower tump north-east of the Wrekin. It’s around half an hour’s walk to Wellington and the Pheasant pub. If you can handle 13 miles, you can walk to your room for the night on the Shropshire Way. OS Explorer maps 241 and 242 cover the area. Wellington station is 40 minutes’ walk from the foot of the Wrekin. Bus X4 from Telford goes slightly closer, to Holyhead Road. The pub There must be five foodie pubs for every old-school boozer, even in the fairly working-class Telford area. Still, within half an hour’s walk or 5-10 minutes’ drive from the Wrekin are half a dozen honest pubs. The Pheasant, on Market Street, is a tap house for Rowton Brewery, at the back, which makes quaffable session bitters, pale ales, stout and – wonders will never cease – a mild. The pub has a logburner and lots of wood furniture and panelling, which generates that warm, beer-tinted glow that suits a glass of real ale. Baps, pork pies and ploughmans’ lunches are served, and there are occasional live music gigs and fundraisers. Dogs are welcome. Where to stay The Haughmond is a former 17th-century coaching inn run by wife-and-husband team Mel and Martin Board, in the tiny village of Upton Magna. Rooms are named after deer species, a nod to nearby Attingham Park, and animal pictures adorn the walls. Stylish rooms have oak furniture, white linen, shower and bath and – from most – a great view of the Wrekin. Martin is a gifted chef: hake in beurre blanc is meaty and crisp; ox tongue hash is rich and rude; and there are tasting menus for omnivores and vegetarians. What has cemented the inn’s status as more than a local “restaurant with rooms” is the well-stocked deli-cum-store that supplies villagers, walkers and cyclists with milk, bread, fresh produce, snacks and cooked breakfasts. Doubles from £95 B&amp;B, thehaughmond.co.ukYAWN England play tonight. Did you forget? Don’t beat yourself up, The Fiver did too. But here we all are, nearly midway through what seems like the 103rd international break of the season, and all the soul-crushing tedium will finally bear sweet juicy fruit tonight when England beat Albania at Wembley and effectively secure their qualification for the World Cup next [grits teeth] winter. With a final game in San Marino, the lowest-ranked nation in Europe, to come, England are going to get over the line, right, despite making a bit of a meal of the final stretch with those recent draws against Poland and Hungary? It’s going to catapult The Fiver into a world of high amusement if not. Well, something has to. But England should make it, shouldn’t they, especially as they only need a draw tonight to secure automatic qualification, pending the I-dotting, T-crossing exercise on Monday against San Marino, for whom Davide Gualtieri no longer plays. England saw off the Albanians easily enough in Tirana in March, 2-0, admittedly during those sepia-toned halcyon days when Harry Kane was good. The other scorer that night, incidentally, was Mason Mount, a doubt for this evening’s game having been spotted earlier this week in the back of a taxi slurring his words despite it being only 2.30 in the afternoon. Still, England have enough in reserve to haul themselves over the line, with Emile Smith Rowe in the frame to make his debut, and Jack Grealish available after illness to add even more cherubic sass to Gareth Southgate’s young talent-rich squad. One last push, then, and by 10pm they will have all but booked their tickets for the World Cup next [grinds teeth to powder, phones up Mason’s pusher] winter. And if we’ve jumped the gun on this one, England crashing to shock defeat this evening, fans of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland and teams representing all current members of the EU can thank the Fiver for tempting fate by sending bouquets, chocolates, cash, trinkets, etc, to the usual address. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join John Brewin at 5pm (GMT) for minute-by-minute updates of Moldova 0-2 Scotland and then Scott will be on hand for England 3-0 Albania at 7.45pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Idiots buy football clubs. But I am an idiot” – Robbie Savage not holding back on Robbie Savage as he reveals why he bought into Macclesfield. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Football Weekly joins forces with Today in Focus to bring you Michael Safi’s interview with Josh Cavallo, the world’s only openly gay male top-tier footballer. FIVER LETTERS “Thanks for this …” – Gerard Beeby (and no other polite/sarcastic readers). “Based on David Newton’s trip to Prague in the late 90s (yesterday’s Fiver), Dukla should be grateful not to have been under the jurisdiction of the English Premier League, who would surely have frowned on them having away shirts to give away in the home changing rooms” – Peter Sadler. “I completely understand that this is ludicrously niche but if you actually listen to Half Man Half Biscuit’s festive offering it’s actually about getting a Subbuteo team in the elusive away kit. They obviously never thought about getting out their Airfix paints” – John De la Cruz. “Sticking with the footballers with names not suitable for broadcast (Fiver passim), the local language TV channel in Galicia in north west Spain felt that a certain Dutchman had too risqué a name. In Galician ‘Cocu’ means ‘with the bum’ so to avoid phrases like ‘meteu gol Cocu’ which would have a literal meaning of ‘he scored with his bum’ he was renamed and his name pronounced as ‘co key’” – Enrique Nespereira. “I remember the Norwegian player Einer Aas from my teens. He was at Nottingham Forest for a while. If I remember well it was Brian Moore on the big match that wrestled with it, changing it to something like ‘Einer Ors’” – David Cross. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Peter Sadler. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Former RAF officer David Henderson has been jailed for his role in arranging the flight on which Emiliano Sala was killed following a crash. Ron Flowers, Wolves legend and England 1966 World Cup squad member, has died aged 87. PSG’s Aminata Diallo has been released without charge as police continue to investigate a violent assault against her teammate and fellow midfielder Kheira Hamraoui. Homeless charity Shelter has criticised the Premier League over its refusal to support its Boxing Day #NoHomeKits campaign. “We are disappointed by the Premier League’s decision not to provide any flexibility to make this as big as can be,” said Shelter’s director of campaigns, Osama Bhutta. “People should have a safe home, and far too many don’t – that is the biggest rule that has been broken here.” Norwich City are not going to be Frank Lampard’s Norwich City. Gareth Southgate’s England look set to continue as such until 2024. Wales have been guaranteed a Human Rights World Cup qualification play-off place thanks to Spain’s win in Greece and various Nations League permutations that we still can’t quite get our head round, or be bothered to. While Republic O’Ireland enjoyed a 0-0 moral victory over Portugal. Steve Clarke has hinted he’s got a cob on over Ryan Fraser’s withdrawal from Scotland’s HR World Cup qualifier against Moldova, having been photographed training with his club. “I have a squad of players who want to be here. They’re all here so let’s talk about those boys,” he huffed. Brazil have qualified, as per. And there’s fresh injury mither for Jürgen Klopp after Sadio Mané was withdrawn early in Senegal’s HR World Cup qualifier with Togo. “We took him off as a precaution,” soothed Senegal boss Aliou Cissé. RECOMMENDED VOTING The FSA Awards are coming soon and various members of Big Website are up for gongs. Vote now and vote regularly. STILL WANT MORE? Port Vale: winning on the pitch, doing nice things off it. Ben Fisher goes behind the scenes at the League Two high-fliers. Paul Doyle runs the rule over $tevie MBE’s in-tray as he settles in at Aston Villa. The always-tasty USA! USA!! USA!!!-Mexico rivalry ramps up another notch as the pair face off in a Human Rights World Cup qualifier this weekend. Cesar Hernandez reports. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! AND A BETTER YAWNRebel Conservative MPs have called on the government to stop charging VAT on fire safety repairs to rescue leaseholders from a potential £2.5bn tax bill. Tory backbenchers on Friday tabled amendments to the building safety bill in an attempt to protect hundreds of thousands of households from soaring costs of fixing combustible cladding and other defects discovered after the 14 June 2017 Grenfell Tower fire, which killed 72 people. MPs have estimated that apartment owners face a combined £15bn repair bill. Leaseholders receiving bills for repairs of up to £100,000 have voiced fury at seeing that 20% of that is tax. This week Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, said the long-awaited bill would pass through parliament before Christmas. A cross-party alliance is expected to press for the zero-rating on VAT, including recouping tax paid on works already carried out, as well as measures to protect leaseholders under a “polluter pays” principle. Stephen McPartland, the Conservative MP for Stevenage, said the VAT change would correct an unfair anomaly, in that the developers of the defective blocks did not have to pay VAT because new-builds are exempt, but leaseholders have to pay 20% extra to make those defects safe, because repairs are taxed. “It’s another example of the leaseholders paying for other people’s mistakes,” said McPartland, who has enlisted 23 other Conservative MPs to support his amendments. “So far the government has offered a £5bn fund [for leaseholders in buildings taller than 18 metres with defective cladding] but it gets £1bn of that back immediately.” Other Tory backers include Royston Smith, Damian Green, Bob Blackman and Tracey Crouch. They also want VAT to be removed from the costs of fire safety patrols – known as waking watch – which are operating in about 1,000 blocks in London and more elsewhere. The average cost per household in London is almost £500 a month. Liam Spender, an affected leaseholder and cladding scandal campaigner, said: “The government should not be making a profit. Leaseholders are being forced to pick up these bills because of poor regulation and shoddy construction. For the same reason, the government should also be looking at some mechanism to refund insurance premium tax it is currently collecting on hugely inflated buildings insurance premiums. Some of these insurers seem to be ripe for a windfall tax on their profits from this.” In what some leaseholders welcomed as a change in government tone on solving the building safety crisis, Gove said on Monday: “There is an urgent need to deal with the persistence of ACM cladding on tall buildings, but there is an equally urgent need to ensure justice is done.” He told the select committee on levelling up, housing and communities: “The government has a responsibility to make buildings safe but we also have a responsibility to relieve some of the obligations faced by leaseholders at the moment who are innocent parties in this and in many circumstances are being asked to pay disproportionate sums when there are individuals in business, some of them still in business, who are guilty men and women.” A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “It is unacceptable and unfair that leaseholders are facing excessive bills” and that building owners must not pass on costs of making buildings safe. “The government is providing £5bn to remove unsafe cladding in the highest risk buildings and we have so far processed over 600 building applications, with estimated remediation costs of £2.5bn,” they said. “The new secretary of state is looking afresh at this issue to make sure everything is being done to protect and support those affected, and further details will be set out in due course.”The energy regulator has threatened to strip five suppliers of their licences after they failed to hand over more than £500,000 collected from customers’ bills to help pay for a renewable energy support scheme. Ofgem warned Orbit Energy, Simply Your Energy, Delta Gas and Power, Social Energy Supply and Whoop Energy to pay a total of £575,000 into the pot used to support small-scale renewable energy projects such as rooftop solar panels “immediately” or face enforcement action. The suppliers all missed a payment deadline of 10 November and if they fail to comply with the latest order from Ofgem “they could end up having their licences revoked or face a financial penalty”, the regulator said. A struggle to meet industry payment obligations is often viewed by industry experts as an early sign of financial distress, which could ultimately lead a company to collapsing out of the market. The UK’s energy market faces an unprecedented spate of company collapses this winter after a global surge in gas market prices that has caused the wholesale cost of gas and electricity to climb to record highs in recent months. Since the beginning of September, 19 energy suppliers have gone bust, leaving more than 2m households in need of a new supplier. The bulk of the outstanding cash earmarked to support the government’s renewable energy feed-in tariff scheme, more than £450,000, is owed by Orbit. The company was told last week by the electricity system administrator, Elexon, that it had defaulted and would not be allowed to register new customers on the system’s IT infrastructure. Delta Gas and Power and Whoop Energy owe the energy regulator £46,701 and £19,013 respectively towards the feed-in tariff scheme. The pair were also late paying the regulator to support the government’s support scheme for large-scale renewable energy projects such as offshore wind and solar farms. They were given until the end of last month to pay their outstanding balances, plus interest, or face the possibility that the regulator may choose to revoke their supply licenses. The final warnings come less than a fortnight after Ofgem promised to reform the energy market, and begin “raising the bar” on its standards for supplier finances to ensure they offer “a sustainable business model” that minimises risks to consumers. Simply Your Energy and Social Energy Supply owe the regulator £28,353 and £28,735 respectively under the feed-in tariff.Stephen Colbert On Thursday’s Late Show, Stephen Colbert decried warnings from health experts that the US could face a fifth wave of the coronavirus. “No! No more waves, science. I was promised a normal holiday season,” the host said. “The family dinners on Thanksgiving, the carolers on Christmas, the fights on Black Friday, as God intended. “That’s how god destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah – he told everyone in Gomorrah there were half-off TVs at the Sodom Best Buy,” he added. A fifth wave would not sweep the country equally, as the hardest-hit areas also have the lowest vaccination rates. “Well, yeah – at this point, staying unvaccinated is like wearing a Yankees hat to a Red Sox game,” Colbert observed. “You’re probably going to end up in a hospital and it’s your own damn fault.” In a crossover of pandemic/environmental despair news, the National Academy of Sciences journal published a study that found the world created about 8m tons of plastic pandemic waste, much of which is now in the ocean. “That is shocking and that is wrong,” said Colbert. “In New York, we don’t throw our trash in the ocean! We put it where it belongs: piled on the sidewalk, where it stays forever, slowly turning into a rat palace.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers blasted Republicans and Fox News pundits for misleading Americans on the state of the economy. “These people are willing to lie so brazenly and shamelessly about anything,” he said. “There’s no doubt that there are serious issues, between inflation and the supply chain crisis, but last night Fox host Laura Ingraham tried to compare the economic records of Trump and Biden in the most deceptive way possible” with a graphic that blamed Biden for the fact that 3 million fewer Americans were working in October 2021 compared with when Trump was president in December 2019. “Huh, I can’t remember, did anything major happen between those two numbers?” Meyers deadpanned. “I’m sorry if I was a little foggy, I was trapped in an attic for a few months wiping down doorknobs with Lysol and hoarding the last scraps of toilet paper I could buy off the black market while slowly descending into a madness so fully encompassing that for long stretches of time, I could only hear my own thoughts in the voice of MyPillow CEO Mike Lindell. “Not only are Republicans and Fox News lying about the economy,” he continued, “they’re also so fundamentally opposed to addressing those issues or even having a functioning government that they’re now threatening to purge any members from their ranks who voted for Biden’s infrastructure bill.” Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene, for example, called the 13 representatives who voted for the bill “traitors”, while the former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows said they should be stripped of their committee assignments. “That’s where we’re at now,” said Meyers. “Keeping roads and bridges from falling apart is considered giving Democrats a win, instead of something good for the country.” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah asked a question on many people’s minds: when is the pandemic finally going to be over? “It is looking more and more likely that Covid may stay with us forever, like that uncle who said he was ‘just passing through town’ and then 20 years later still has your room,” he answered. Luckily, “America has more than enough vaccines for every man, woman and child who doesn’t listen to Joe Rogan” – so many doses that the US has announced plans to deliver doses of the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine to people living in conflict zones such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and Yemen. “America is sending the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine into conflict zones? Hasn’t Yemen been through enough?” Noah joked. “I mean, it’s bad enough that poor countries get T-shirts from the losing Super Bowl team, but now they have to get the third-place vaccine? “I know there are a lot of reasons why it’s better to send J&amp;J to conflict zones than Moderna or Pfizer – it’s easier to transport, and you don’t need to depend on people being able to come back for a second shot,” he added. “But I wouldn’t be surprised if there were some American officials who were like, ‘well we’re not gonna waste the good vaccines on someone who’s just going to step on a landmine tomorrow, right fellas?’” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel checked in on one of the most distinctive faces of the 6 January Capitol attack, the so-called “QAnon Shaman”, Jake Angeli. Earlier this week, prosecutors recommended 51 months in prison for Angeli, “after which he will be remanded into the custody of Dancing with the Stars”, Kimmel joked. “Weird to think the QAnon Shaman could get four years in prison while the guy who encouraged him to do it could get four more years in the White House. “And also, can we stop calling him a shaman now?” he added. “I mean, that would make half the fans at the Buffalo Bills game shamans, too.” Kimmel counted more “incarcer-rections” – a former MMA fighter who punched a Capitol police officer got a 41-month sentence, for example. “It’s rare that a headline that starts with ‘ex-MMA fighter’ ends on a positive note,” Kimmel noted. “It’s never ‘ex-MMA fighter finds happiness running a daycare for underprivileged kids. It’s always like ‘ex-MMA fighter puts his mom in coma,’ or something.”Frank Lampard has pulled out of the race to become Norwich City’s manager. The former Chelsea manager held talks on Thursday about replacing Daniel Farke but has decided that the role is not for him. Norwich, who could switch their focus to Dean Smith, are bottom of the Premier League after 11 games and had identified Lampard as a potential successor to Farke. The 43-year-old has been out of management since being fired by Chelsea last January and he is keen to find a job. It is understood that talks between Norwich and Lampard went well. The club had not decided whether to offer Lampard the job before he informed them that he no longer wished to be considered. The former England midfielder, who missed out on the Crystal Palace post last summer, knows that he needs to pick his next role carefully and is aware that rescuing Norwich from relegation would be extremely difficult. They have toiled since winning promotion and are unlikely to have much to spend during the January transfer window. Norwich, who sacked Farke after their victory over Brentford last Saturday, will continue to speak to other candidates. Lampard’s withdrawal could increase Smith’s chances of landing the job. Smith was sacked by Aston Villa last Sunday and has admirers at Carrow Road, although it is understood that he needs a few days to decide whether he wants to return to management so quickly. Norwich have also been linked with Ralph Hasenhüttl but they are unlikely to be able to lure the Austrian from Southampton. Kjetil Knutsen, the manager of Norwegian side Bodø/Glimt, is another name in the frame.Corporate sponsors of the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics have been accused of “squandering the opportunity” to pressure China to address its “appalling human rights record”. The Games’ top level sponsors, including Coca-Cola, Airbnb, Procter &amp; Gamble, Intel and Visa, were on Friday accused of ignoring China’s alleged “crimes against humanity against Uyghurs” and other Turkic Muslims in Xinjiang as well the repression of free speech in Hong Kong. The New York-based campaign group Human Rights Watch (HWR) said it had written to all 13 of the Olympics’ top corporate partners questioning their involvement in the Beijing Games. But only one sponsor, German financial services firm Allianz, replied. “There are just three months until the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics, but corporate sponsors remain silent over how they are using their influence to address China’s appalling human rights record,” Sophie Richardson, China director at HRW, said. “They are squandering the opportunity to show their commitment to human rights standards and risk instead being associated with an Olympics tainted by censorship and repression.” United Nations human rights experts have said that at least 1 million Muslims were detained in camps in Xinjiang since 2017. China denies all accusations of abuse of Uyghurs and describes the camps as vocational training facilities to combat religious extremism. HRW’s letters asked sponsors to confirm whether they had “conducted human rights due diligence for the 2022 Beijing Olympics”, and to detail what work they had done to ensure their supply chain does not “contribute to human rights violations”. The so-called Top sponsors, which also include Panasonic, Toyota, Omega and Bridgestone, collectively paid more than $1bn (£750m) to sponsor the Olympics in the 2013-16 Olympic cycle. That figure is expected to double when details of the 2017-20 cycle are released. Minky Worden, director of global initiatives at HRW, said: “The time for quiet diplomacy is over. It’s time for the Top sponsors to urge the International Olympic Committee to adopt human rights. It’s time for them to disclose their own supply chains in China, particularly any products that have the five rings of the Olympics.” China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, accused HRW of lying in order to undermine the Chinese games. “To politicise sports by fabricating lies and rumours and undermining the Olympic cause is unpopular and will never succeed,” he said at a daily briefing on Friday. Allianz, the only sponsor to reply to the HRW letter sent six months ago, said: “We stand behind the Olympic movement and our longstanding support for its ideals will not waver.” A US congressional committee has previously accused the US-based sponsors of putting profits ahead of accusations of genocide in China. Chris Smith, a Republican representing New Jersey, told the congressional executive commission on China in July that the sponsors needed to reconcile their “ostensible commitment to human rights” with subsidising an Olympics where the host country is “actively committing human rights abuses”. When asked whether the games should be moved away from China, Paul Lalli, Coca-Cola’s global vice-president for human rights, said: “We do not make decisions on these host locations. We support and follow the athletes wherever they compete.”In the 1980s, Private Eye published a “Thatchcard” stating: “In the event of an accident, the holder of this card wishes it to be known that he/she does not wish to be visited by Mrs Thatcher in any circumstances whatsoever.” Perhaps a similar card could be created for Boris Johnson in light of his photo opportunities at hospitals (Letters, 10 November)? Dave Taylor Purbrook, Hampshire • I expected young Boris’s announcement that the UK is not a corrupt country (Boris Johnson says the UK is not ‘remotely a corrupt country’. Is it?, 11 November) to be followed by China announcing that it is not a dictatorship and Biden announcing that Americans do not chew gum. Derek McMillan Worthing, West Sussex • I was luckier than Jill Hughes (Letters, 11 November), I got a Pink Witch for my 13th birthday and used it joyfully until I left home at 18. An added advantage was that my brother wouldn’t have been seen dead riding it. Dr Brigid Purcell Norwich • Surely your editorial (11 November) about Bain Capital’s intentions to buy LV contains a typo in its spelling of Bain? Tony Vinicombe Shoreham, West Sussex • Cats don’t have owners, they have servants (Cats track their owners’ movements, research finds, 10 November). Richard Wood Toddington, Bedfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your letters page has allowed the renewal of a friendship begun in the 1960s when, as students of Nottingham Regional College of Technology, the two of us formed the Students’ Liberation Front for a Free Press to express our outrage at the censorship of our student newspaper, Iota, for publishing a pregnancy test advert. So powerful was our leafleting campaign that the college authorities began an investigation into the Trotskyist infiltration of the student body and called in the police. Now in our mid-70s, we still find plenty to protest against. By having occasional letters published in your paper, we have rediscovered in each other our undimmed political passion, as reflected in the words of Antonio Gramsci: “Pessimism of the intellect, optimism of the will.” David Evans Exeter; Kevin Donovan Birkenhead, Merseyside • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Elderly and vulnerable people must get their booster jabs if a rise in Covid cases in the UK is to be prevented, the prime minister has said, as he warned of “storm clouds” forming over parts of Europe. Germany, Austria, Slovakia and Croatia are among countries that have recently seen a surge in Covid cases, with the former recording its highest coronavirus case numbers since the start of the pandemic. Speaking in a broadcast clip, Boris Johnson said the situation was of concern. “I’m seeing the storm clouds gathering over parts of the European continent. And I’ve got to be absolutely frank with people: we’ve been here before. We remember what happens when the wave starts rolling in,” he said. The World Health Organization’s Europe head, Hans Kluge, has said a lack of uptake of Covid vaccines is behind the increase. While Johnson noted that cases in the UK had been “drifting down for a while”, he said it was unclear if the trend was set to continue. “I’m looking at what’s happening overseas, and I’m simply saying to the British people … this is the moment to get your booster,” he said. After coronavirus restrictions were lifted in England over the summer, infection levels rose: by October the UK was experiencing one of the highest case rates in Europe. While figures still remain high, daily case data and the latest figures for infection levels from the Office for National Statistics suggest there has been a fall, with the latter revealing an estimated one in 60 people in the community in England had Covid in the week ending 6 November – about 925,400 people. That is a decline since late October, when one in 50 people in England were thought to have a Covid infection. A drop has also been recorded in Wales, although in Scotland the rate of people testing positive has remained level and the trend is unclear in Northern Ireland. While the decline in England was seen in all age groups and in most regions of the country, it appears the trend is strongest among older children. However, the question remains whether infection levels will rise again now schools have returned from recent half-terms, or whether – as some have argued – growing levels of immunity in children could mean a peak has been reached. “With a marked decrease in infections among secondary school children in England, the half-term break may have played a part, though infections were decreasing prior to this time,” said Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the Covid-19 infection survey. “Over the next few weeks we will see if this decline continues.” The situation is far from clearcut. The ONS survey records existing and new infections, whether symptomatic or not. However, people can test positive for some time, meaning changes in the ONS data lag behind the daily reported cases – which are based on those who have come forward for testing – by about two weeks. The latter suggests cases may be showing signs of rebounding, at least to some degree. While daily reported cases in the UK showed a decline during the second half of October and early November, they had risen for four consecutive days, reaching 42,408 on Thursday. On Friday 40,375 new Covid cases were reported in the UK. Prof Rowland Kao, an epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh, said the recent rise in cases tied in well with a return to schools, but the situation remained in the balance. “Whether or not the [rise] represents a sustained increase, is of course difficult to tell. Vaccinations and boosters continue to be rolled out and with ever-increasing levels of natural immunity as well, it could still go either way,” he said. Prof John Edmunds, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, who sits on Sage, said half-term was always going to have a big effect, adding that cases were now at roughly the same level, or a little lower, in most regions and nations of the UK than two weeks or so ago – before the half-terms. However, there are exceptions, such as Scotland where cases still appear to be climbing. Edmunds said such a pattern would be expected if the epidemic was left to peak naturally, as has largely been the case. “It should be stressed, though, that a natural peak will be much more drawn out than a lockdown-induced peak, so I would expect to see high rates of infection, hospitalisations and deaths for many weeks – or even months – yet,” he said. Dr Vishal Sharma, the British Medical Association’s consultants committee chair, said the NHS was already overwhelmed. “There’s no doubt that patients are not receiving the standard of care they should be from a fully functioning health service and if more isn’t done to protect the NHS, we risk taking an already fragile recovery backwards,” he said. “The government says it will only act when the NHS is at risk of being overwhelmed. Our members – doctors working on the frontline – are clear that this is not just a risk, but it is happening right now”It’s impossible not to wonder at the bravery of Richard Ratcliffe during his hunger strike outside the Foreign Office (After 17 days of hunger strike, I’m still trying to save Nazanin, 9 November). Nothing wonderful, though, about the cowardice and cruelty of Boris Johnson and his advisers over the £400m acknowledged British debt to Iran, which remains unpaid. Of the debt, a motion from the opposition benches to have this paid immediately could and should be moved, and a vote duly taken in the expectation that a majority of MPs would vote for payment. Meanwhile, arrangements for Nazanin to be returned to the UK should be made without delay, so that a family can be reunited. A much-discredited House of Commons could, in this way, show some hint of integrity and decency. As Richard Ratcliffe notes, the “debt is a bilateral issue between the UK and Iran” and should be dealt with accordingly. Bruce Ross-Smith Headington, Oxford • Richard Ratcliffe’s article is desperate, and very moving. A government that refuses to pay an acknowledged debt is shameful, even more so when paying it could lead to Nazanin’s release. Ratcliffe is gracious enough not to refer to Boris Johnson’s remarks in 2017 when he was foreign secretary, which, to say the least, were not helpful. J Peter Greaves Blackheath, London • For goodness sake, the government just needs to cough up the debt due to Iran and enable Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe to return to her family (Letters, 10 November). The cost is piddling compared with other expenses. Perhaps those with more money than sense might help – a space trip or two might be sacrificed in order to release her. Catherine Roome Staplehurst, Kent • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Aditya Chakrabortty is right: there isn’t one green new deal, there are many versions – and that’s a strength, not a weakness (Muddled, top-down, technocratic: why the green new deal should be scrapped, 11 November). What underpins them all is the understanding that a plan of action to avert the worst of the climate crisis won’t work unless it also addresses a broken economic model that is not only trashing our planet but failing to deliver for millions of people, increasing inequality and eroding the fabric of our communities. Aditya draws a false dichotomy between state-led action and a bottom-up approach. The truth is, neither can succeed alone. There are some things that only the state can do, while others are best led locally. Both are required. We need the state to properly fund our NHS, invest in green technologies and the transformation of our infrastructure. And we need the government to bring an end to fossil fuel burning – it’s shameful that Boris Johnson has not signed up to the Beyond Oil and Gas Alliance, launched this week at Cop26. Aditya urges us to get real: you don’t get much more real than the climate assembly process or the Reset Inquiry we ran last year. Both found that the public were well ahead of politicians in their demands for a greener, fairer Britain. Unless we act, the future may well be a version of business-as-usual, with all the damage it’s doing to our society and planet. That is a political choice. Alternatively, we can choose to manage the transition so that it addresses deep-seated inequalities and transforms our broken economy, brings life back to our communities and reduces our damaging impact on the planet. Let’s all work together to bring that version of the future into being. Caroline Lucas MP for Brighton Pavilion; Clive Lewis MP for Norwich South • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The luxury villa where Boris Johnson stayed on holiday last month is linked to Costa del Sol property businesses owned by Zac Goldsmith’s family that engaged in a multimillion-pound tax evasion scheme, according to Spanish courts. Court papers obtained by the Guardian show tax inspectors ordered two property companies owned by the Goldsmith family to pay €24m (£20m) in unpaid taxes and fines after investigating what they said was a suspicious property deal. The tax authority’s findings have been upheld by one of Spain’s highest courts, with judges agreeing the companies effectively engaged in a deliberate effort to evade tax and committed “serious” violations of the law. Documents indicate Spanish authorities are still seeking to recover the funds and could even seize parts of the family’s land, which is spread across more than 600 hectares (1,480 acres) of private woodland about 10 miles from the Marbella coastline. A Swiss lawyer for one of the companies denied the case amounted to a “tax evasion” issue, describing it as a dispute that resulted from a mistaken land valuation by Spanish tax authorities. She said the finding against her client was “extremely hard to understand, to put it mildly”. Court papers indicate there will be a further appeal. However, the revelation raises difficult questions for the prime minister, who has already faced criticism for refusing to declare his use of the luxury property in the MPs’ register of interests, which would require him to disclose the monetary value of the gift from the Goldsmith family. Downing Street has insisted the holiday at the villa, which costs £25,000 a week to rent, was “unconnected with the PM’s parliamentary and political activities”. Zac Goldsmith, a Conservative minister, is a longstanding friend of Johnson and his wife, Carrie. In 2019, Johnson personally appointed Goldsmith to the House of Lords after his friend lost his seat as an MP. Johnson is now likely to be asked how much he knew of the Spanish tax investigation into companies owned by the Tory minister’s family before staying at their villa, which is in a secluded corner of an estate beside swimming pools, a tennis court and an organic farm. The revelations raise questions for both Goldsmith, a senior minister, and his brother Ben, a non-executive director at the environment department, about the extent to which they were aware of or involved in the property deal . Neither brother responded in detail to questions about the extent of their knowledge or involvement in the transactions at the heart of the tax investigation. In an email, Ben Goldsmith said: “This whole thing serves as a warning to any Brit thinking of owning a property in Spain.” The Goldsmith brothers inherited their wealth from their father, Sir James Goldsmith, who died in 1997 with a £1.2bn fortune. Goldsmith senior’s wealth now resides in a discretionary trust run for the benefit of his children. It is understood that not all of the children have an interest in the Spanish property portfolio. The family first acquired the Tramores estate, the site of the villa where Johnson stayed, in the 1980s. By 1999, the Goldsmiths are understood to have used a company linked to a Cayman Islands structure to acquire additional land bordering the villa, effectively expanding their estate. More recently, separate Goldsmith-owned offshore companies have been used to own the patchwork of land and properties, which are all situated in the same hills surrounding the quiet mountain village of Benahavís. The Swiss lawyer, who represents one of the companies accused of evading tax, Guadalmansa Administraciones, said the villa where Johnson stayed was “entirely separate” from the property ensnared in the tax dispute. However, while the villa Johnson stayed in was not owned by a company involved in the tax investigation, public records suggest it forms part of the Goldsmiths’ wider sprawling property holdings in Benahavís. It is unclear why Zac Goldsmith has only declared one of at least three companies that own parts of his family’s land outside the village. The Lords register of interests lists only a Spanish and Maltese company as holding an interest in land in Andalucía. But documents suggest a more complex trust structure has been used to hold land in the area and generate income from holiday rentals, including companies that have not been declared. A spokesperson for the peer insisted: “All reportable interests have been correctly and transparently declared.” Spain’s tax agency first began investigating the Goldsmith family’s companies in 2012. Inspectors homed in on an unusual property deal when one of the companies transferred land on a large estate to a related company. According to court papers, in 2008 – two years before Goldsmith became an MP – the minister’s family segregated parts of its land near Benahavís village and transferred it from one of their companies – Guadalmansa Administraciones – to another called Benaltos Inversiones in exchange for satisfying a €5m debt owed to the company. However, inspectors alleged the debt was in fact “fictitious” and the companies should have treated the transaction as a “profitable transfer” rather than a debt repayment. They alleged the transaction significantly undervalued the land, which they estimated was in fact worth €23.2m. After a year-long investigation, the agency ordered the companies to pay a combined €24m in unpaid taxes, interest and penalties. It alleged the companies had violated a law requiring the transfer of assets between related parties to be valued at their normal market value. Crucially, inspectors alleged the companies failed to properly declare the financial gains arising from the transfer by filing inaccurate tax returns. In 2016, Spain’s central economic-administrative court (CEAT) rejected an appeal by the companies against the agency’s decision. Lawyers for the companies had argued the €5m debt owed by Guadalmansa to Benaltos was genuine and a valuation of the property commissioned by the tax agency was flawed. They claimed the fines were disproportionate. The court, however, accepted the debt was artificial and not a normal commercial arrangement, noting that “several companies domiciled in tax havens” were involved “for no apparent economic reason”. The court also accepted the tax agency’s valuation of the property and noted that just eight months after the transfer the land was used as security for a loan and valued at €23m. According to the ruling, there was “no doubt” Benaltos was guilty and its improper actions had “resulted in a loss to the public treasury”. Two years later, one of Spain’s highest courts, the audiencia nacional, upheld the tax court’s ruling. Documents suggest a further appeal has been filed before Spain’s supreme court, but the companies can only appeal against the 2018 ruling on a point of law rather than on the facts of the case. The Swiss lawyer representing Guadalmansa maintains the Spanish tax agency significantly overvalued the property. It said the assessment was “based entirely on one wildly aberrant valuation” by an agency-appointed valuation company which has since acknowledged they “made a mistake”. It added: “The purchase was proper, and all taxes associated with the property have always been paid in full.” Meanwhile, the two Goldsmith companies investigated by tax authorities appear to be in financial jeopardy. Both were placed into voluntary insolvency in 2019. Documents suggest that by April last year, as a result of the dispute, they owed more than €20m to their biggest creditor: the Spanish state.John Harris is surely right to scorn the grotesque sums being spent on “transhumanism” (If the super-rich want to live for ever our planet is truly doomed, 7 November), but not all of us can afford, or want to move into, co-housing or a retirement village. Fortunately, a more practical solution is at hand. Research demonstrates consistently that the three most reliable strategies to live longer and well are learning new things, social interaction and physical exercise. All three are readily available from the u3a, a self-help learning organisation for people who have left full-time work. Paul Martinez Gedling, Nottinghamshire • John Harris has neglected rather an important consideration: if the super-rich expect to live for, say, 500 years, then they will want the planet to be habitable in 500 years’ time. Long-term problems require long-term agencies to address them, like the foresters of New College Oxford, who grow oaks centuries in advance as replacement roof beams for hall and chapel. If I were a wealthy potential quinquecentenarian, I would be investing in nuclear fusion and rewilding, and promoting negative population growth – including for my own brats (currently none). Luce Gilmore Cambridge • John Harris does well exposing the ridiculous ambitions of billionaire would-be immortals or long-livers. They should read Gulliver’s Travels (Part III, chapter 10). Visiting Luggnagg, Gulliver is “struck with inexpressible delight” on hearing of the immortal Struldbrugs, “living like foreigners in their own country”. But “I afterwards saw five or six of different ages, the youngest not above two hundred years old … They are despised and hated by all sorts of people. When one of them is born, it is reckoned ominous. “They were the most mortifying sight I ever beheld; and the women more horrible than the men. Besides the usual deformities in extreme old age, they acquired an additional ghastliness, in proportion to their number of years, which is not to be described…” Among later writers, John Wyndham perceptively linked age-slowing research to power-seeking in Trouble with Lichen. George Baugh Much Wenlock, Shropshire • The desire of super-rich persons to live forever is either a disease or a delusion, but I am sure there is counselling available for both. Geoff Reid Bradford • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Frances Ryan is correct in focusing on the potential risks to vulnerable patients from unvaccinated NHS staff (Mandatory Covid jabs shouldn’t be controversial – NHS staff have a duty to do no harm, 10 November), but there is another, equally compelling argument why unvaccinated staff should not be employed by the NHS. Vaccinations are a vital part of the NHS strategy to contain the spread of a debilitating, and sometimes deadly, virus. To refuse to be vaccinated (hiding behind the more reasonable sounding “exercising my freedom of choice”) is effectively joining the anti-vaxxers, who use the same arguments as those by the NHS vaccine refusers (along the lines of “it’s untested”, “my own immune system works perfectly well”, or “this is the state telling me what to do”). It seems extremely hypocritical of people to want to be employed and paid by the NHS, yet are happy to actively subvert a crucial plank of dealing with Covid. People are of course allowed their own views about vaccinations, but not then to treat them as more important or valid than those advocated by their employer. A simple question would be, if a patient asked for your advice about getting vaccinated, would you offer the NHS guidance or would you give your own “personal choice” advice that it is entirely optional? If the former, it would be a gross hypocrisy to refuse a jab; if the latter, it would be a betrayal of the NHS’s fight against Covid. Chris Talbot Hastings, East Sussex • After the debacle when committed and experienced carers must either have the vaccine or face losing their job, 1 April 2022 is the date (very apposite) when NHS staff might have to leave. Thousands may potentially have to walk away from the career they love. Is this the final attempt to destroy an already damaged NHS? Successive governments have chipped away at the service for decades, reducing it to being barely able to cope with normal demand, never mind winter pressures and Covid. In my career as a nurse and nurse lecturer, I have seen bed numbers reduced, community hospitals closed and numbers of people in training across all professions decimated, with understaffing being the norm. When the NHS does become untenable, is that the point at which it will be wholly sold off to the private sector? If the vaccine rollout has been such a success, why are people who choose not to be vaccinated treated like pariahs? When the NHS is sold off, will our taxes be reduced? Of course not. The previously most efficient and cost-effective health service in the world is not, and never has been, safe in Conservative hands. Karen Jacob Retired nurse/nurse lecturer, Okehampton, Devon • Why does the discussion of mandatory vaccines always revolve around the individual’s rights? All rights, by definition, come with responsibilities and we seem to have forgotten, as a nation, that they are two-sided. We are equally responsible to ourselves and to others. In this pandemic, it is incumbent upon us to practise both social and personal responsibility in our actions, and that will require compromise. Brian Lawrence High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire • It seems that health services in Wales and Scotland can get by without sacking unvaccinated staff, but not in England. I think an accurate reaction to the need to protect people is to push vaccination. However, do I want to extend to my employer (the NHS) that has treated so many people so badly over a decade the right to arbitrary control of my body? I think not. So let them find a way other than compulsion. If they won’t, I think NHS staff should resist as a point of principle, even though I myself was glad to queue for a jab. Ben Ashford Shrewsbury, Shropshire • If healthcare workers don’t have confidence in medical science, why are they working for the NHS? Dr Simon Roberts Associate professor of public and social policy, Nottingham University • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.What is LV=? LV= is a pensions and life insurance mutual originally known as Liverpool Victoria. It was founded in 1843 with the original aim of allowing Liverpool’s poor to cover burial costs. It has roughly 1.2 million members, 297,000 of which are “with-profits” policyholders, meaning they tend to receive payouts based on the performance of the business, and legally own LV= collectively. Why does Bain Capital’s proposed £530m takeover matter? The deal will mean abandoning its status as a mutual owned by its member-customers, and handing ownership to the private equity firm Bain Capital. Campaigners are concerned that the takeover will result in worse payouts for customers and poorer customer service. MPs also fear that private equity firms’ focus on profits could result in stripping the company of its assets and loading it with debt before selling it to another bidder in a few years’ time. Bain has said it will not saddle LV with debt. Furthermore, some members believe they have been left in the dark about a rival bid by mutual Royal London – which they say could have maintained the company’s mutual status – as well as what LV=’s chief executive and chair may gain from choosing Bain over rival suitors. However, LV= has denied that either of the men stand to personally benefit. What is Bain Capital? Bain Capital is an American private equity firm co-founded by Republican party member Mitt Romney in the mid-1980s. In the US, Bain is known for helping create the American office supplies chain Staples, but specialises in turning around struggling companies. Private equity firms such as Bain – which has $150bn (£112bn) in assets under management – often target struggling businesses with strong cashflows. They often borrow heavily to buy those companies, and then sell them for a profit after an overhaul, which can sometimes result in job cuts or selling off assets. In the UK, Bain took over listed insurer esure in a £1.2bn deal in 2018, ending two years of speculation over a potential private equity buyout. Its founder Peter Wood said at the time that the offer from Bain had “come out of the blue”. Wood, who agreed to stay on as chair after the deal, was in line to receive £371m from the deal, according to reports. What happens next? The Bain deal will now be put to LV= members on 10 December. Voters will be asked to cast ballots on two issues: whether or not to approve the deal, and how such a transaction should be executed, either fully transferring the business to Bain, or ring-fencing the old business and allowing Bain to conduct new business under the LV= name. The deal will only require approval from 75% of members who vote, with no quorum – meaning there is not a minimum threshold on the number of members who are required to cast their ballot to ensure it is valid. The Financial Conduct Authority said last month it did not intend to block the takeover or plans to demutualise the firm.A glimmer of hope of a solution to the dispute over the Northern Ireland Brexit arrangements has emerged after a fourth week of talks ended on Friday. After a week of recriminations and the threat of a trade war, the European Commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič said there had been a change in tone from the UK’s Brexit minister, David Frost, confirming the UK had stepped back from the brink of triggering article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol. He confirmed talks would continue for a fifth week but said serious headway was still needed with the UK’s red line over the European court of justice was still an obstacle. “I acknowledge and welcome the change in tone of discussion with David Frost today, and I hope this will lead to tangible results for the people in Northern Ireland,” he told reporters at news conference in London after the talks. In a statement, Lord Frost’s office said “significant gaps remain to be bridged” and that the threat of article 16 remained on the table. But it noted that Frost’s preference was “to find a consensual way forward”. Šefčovič told reporters at a news conference that the people of Northern Ireland deserved a solution from politicians. “That is why I raised forcefully that we need to make serious headway in the course of next week,” he said. “This is particularly important as regards the issue of medicines. An uninterrupted long-term supply of medicines from Great Britain to Northern Ireland is the protocol-related issue on everyone’s mind in Northern Ireland.” However, he added: “On the European court, on our side definitely nothing has changed.” A UK government spokesperson said the “talks had so far been conducted in a constructive spirit” and that it had been “underlined that in order to make progress, it was important to bring new energy and impetus to discussions”. “Accordingly, intensified talks will take place between teams in Brussels next week on all issues, giving particular attention to medicines and customs issues,” said the spokesperson. After a week of brinkmanship involving threats to trigger article 16 and a retaliatory trade war, Šefčovič appeared more upbeat about the chance of a rapprochement. He also revealed he had a mandate from member states to “look for solutions”. He said the chance of a deal on clearing barriers for medicine supplies was “quite low-hanging fruit” and could “create momentum in talks”. Earlier on Friday, Boris Johnson’s former special adviser Dominic Cummings suggested that the prime minister had a poor grasp of the meaning of the Brexit withdrawal agreement he had signed in January 2020, questioning what the departure from the EU’s customs union meant at a meeting 10 months later with Frost. “It wasn’t until October 2020 that [Boris Johnson] even vaguely realised what the customs union is,” Cummings tweeted, a reference to a key part of the withdrawal agreement through which the UK would get a clean break from the EU outside the single market and its special customs club. He wrote that the PM’s “face was priceless” when Frost explained. “I will never forget the look on his face when, after listening to Frost in a meeting on the final stage of the [trade deal] negotiation, he said, ‘No no no Frosty, fuck this, what happens with a deal?’ and Frost looked from his paper and said, PM this is what happens with a deal, that’s what leaving the customs union means.” As the EU and the UK appeared to step back from the brink of a trade war, Šefčovič said he and Frost agreed that “we should focus like a laser beam” next week on the issues relating to medicines and customs. “I’ve done a lot of this type of negotiations and my experience tells me that if you want to have success at the end of the negotiations, we need a stocktaking of what the problems are, we should try to solve them one by one,” he said. “We should take away problems from the table and not bring new ones to an already very complicated stack of issues.”“I think … when I look back … I can’t …” Imagine being Joe Root right now. For the past two summers you’ve engaged sincerely with the need to broaden your sport. You’ve taken the knee. You’ve stood for the cameras in a T-shirt covered in uplifting slogans. You’ve engaged with issues beyond the remit of any previous England captain. You’ve spoken proudly of the diversity in your team, in a way that does make a difference, and not only to the optics-panic of your employers at the ECB. And now this. In the past two weeks the county club Root calls “my family”, his sporting home from the age of 12, has been exposed as a muster point for day-to-day racism. Root’s former housemate and close banter-buddy has admitted routinely using a racist insult. Azeem Rafiq, who called this out, who had to crawl to get this far, was Root’s teammate in the Yorkshire age groups. In the aftershocks, people Root has known since childhood – coaches, club staff, mentors – are feeling the ground beneath them dissolve. The place he grew up in has become a haunted house. Careers, lives, friendships and the basic mental wellbeing of people on all sides are at stake. How do you walk this line? Where do you feel it most in your gut? Which truth are you prepared to tell? Root has had a year and a half to arrange his feelings on this. Perhaps there was a sense it would simply fade away. But Rafiq is tenacious. He will be heard. Eighteen months, then, for Root to prepare himself for the question he was asked on Sky Sports on Thursday morning, the obvious one about culture, principles and the will to stand against the tide. “Was there ever an occasion where you could have called out racism?” “I think … when I look back … I can’t …” Ah, Joe. Say it isn’t so. Are we really going down that route? And yes, there is past pressure, friend pressure, social pressure. But there is also a time for standing up and speaking out. Instead, what we got in that moment came over as an evasion. Nobody expects Root to snitch or name names. But really? You never heard anything? For Rafiq and others who have been through a similar experience, this will feel like a denial. At the same time, England’s captain released an official statement composed almost entirely of platitudes and T-shirt slogans. Harnessing a diverse environment. Reaching out. Moving forward. Making a big difference. Celebrating our diversity. Pressed to speak from his own experience, to support a former teammate who at one point considered suicide over these issues, Root spoke in words seemingly written by a comms team. This is not leadership. It’s damage limitation, a position to be taken four days before a parliamentary committee hearing. If nothing else, it’s a terrible comms strategy. Use your own words. Speak freely. Trust your instincts. And yes, it is hard to say it. I like Joe Root. You like Joe Root. He’s a phenomenal cricketer and a good person. Rafiq has named him previously as a supportive presence, one of the good guys. Some will say Root shouldn’t even have to express opinions about this stuff at all, that asking him to negotiate these complex societal issues is like asking Camille Paglia to build a match winning third-innings partnership on a slow turner in Galle. Root has a habit of dismissing difficult questions as “above my pay grade”. In reality, nothing is above his pay grade. Root is the highest-paid employee at the ECB. His employers are keepers of the national sport, regulators with a duty – both moral and funding-related – to spread the game, to create a happy and successful culture. And the captain really doesn’t get to duck this issue, not when it speaks so directly to his own experience. “It hurts knowing this has happened at YCCC so close to home,” Root suggested in his statement. In which case this is some seriously longstanding pain. Rafiq’s experiences date back 15 shared years. And this really was close to home. Root and Ballance, chief user of the P-word, were housemates as junior pros, subjects of a 2014 BBC interview that gushed over their domestic palliness. “Rooty did a bit more of the cooking than me. I would do the dishes and the housework.” “That’s not true. He’s the messy one.” “He says I’m messy but he’s a bit OCD when it comes to cleaning.” Which is all great. But in the middle of all that you never heard a thing? Never picked up a vibe? It would not have been hard to come up with a more noble statement, one that mentioned Rafiq by name, which acknowledged having been in those spaces. Perhaps even a statement that didn’t end on “with the Ashes approaching”. Really? This seems like a good moment to … talk about the Ashes? We’re selling product here? That slight note of impatience speaks to a wider sadness. Because, yeah, everyone feels it too. This isn’t why people come to sport, the great glorious distraction. The best thing I’ve seen all week wasn’t a penitent England captain. It was Shaheen Shah Afridi’s opening over in the World Cup semi-final, an outrageous display of craft and cartwheeling athleticism, the ball released with a flick of the wrist, seam surgically erect, dipping and veering into Mitchell Marsh’s front pad as Shaheen turned and bellowed, arms outstretched, possessor in that moment of the perfect ball, the perfect jawline. This kind of stuff: this is why people love sport. Not the painful parts, the fight for resources and opportunity. Nobody likes those bits, least of all the people who can’t just slip this stuff off like a well-meaning T-shirt at the end of the day. And this is the point about how people such as Root respond. The real danger at this stage is more evasion, more puff and pretence, more reputation management, more useful guilt-washing. I don’t believe these are Root’s own instincts. He doesn’t need to protect his position, doesn’t need the money or the power, isn’t clinging to his job like the administrators around him. He is free to speak in his own words, to use his platform for good. There is still time to get on the right side of this.The wildly unorthodox set-up of 1990 Christmas staple Home Alone – parents so consumed with making a flight on time that they would somehow leave their bloodthirsty eight-year-old son behind – was at odds with its shock success, a hit so big (its $476m gross would now be around $1bn with inflation) that a sequel was therefore inevitable rather than in any way logical. So Home Alone 2 soon followed, a film that imagined even more unforgivable parental negligence, and then somehow a franchise too, with three more overcalculated misadventures on top, the genuine festive sparkle of the original fading into dusk. The prospect of yet another one, this time with some vague same universe ties to the first, has created more ire than these things usually do since the trailer dropped last month, a sign of both the original’s enduring fandom and an increased fatigue with revisiting and repeating well-worn property. But dropping on Disney+ in time for its younger target audience to watch, rewatch and then watch again by the big day, Home Sweet Home Alone is a surprisingly entertaining, if wholly unnecessary, sequel, a tangerine where we expected to find a lump of coal. What prevents the film from being just another limp bot-written recital is a surprisingly sharp sense of humour, with a script from the Saturday Night Live duo Mikey Day and Streeter Seidell and direction from Borat’s Dan Mazer, a more comically adept behind-the-camera team than one would expect from a Home Alone sequel. Their combined involvement has also attracted a funnier cast than anticipated, with This Way Up’s Aisling Bea, Kimmy Schmidt’s Ellie Kemper, Crashing’s Pete Holmes, Veep’s Timothy Simons and Catastrophe’s Rob Delaney alongside SNL favourites Kenan Thompson and Chris Parnell. Reviews have thus far been mostly disdainful but there’s an admirable sense of pluck to the film, as if those involved know very well they’re making something that doesn’t need to exist but they’re making the most of it anyway. Archie Yates, one of the least awful things about Taika Waititi’s mostly awful Jojo Rabbit, is the latest Kevin replacement, Max, undervalued and underappreciated by his family, headed up by Bea’s beleaguered mother. Through the standard set of far-fetched circumstances, he’s left behind as the family head to Tokyo but initial bliss soon turns (a little too quickly this time) into crushing loneliness. His blandly anonymous show home house is set upon not by burglars but by a cash-strapped married couple, played by Delaney and Kemper, who believe that Max has stolen a vintage doll of theirs worth $200,000. Violence ensues. There’s a flat and familiar cheapness to Home Sweet Home Alone that quickly reminds us that we’re no longer in the 90s and no longer in the cinema but very much streaming at home in a world of low budgets and low expectations. Chris Columbus’s original popped with colour, the McAllister house styled in aggressive reds and greens, a film that screamed Christmas in every frame. Visually Mazer’s follow-up is far blander in every conceivable way but no attempt to revisit the franchise was ever going to come close and going in thinking as such is a fool’s errand. Instead, there’s enough pleasure from watching the enthusiastic cast go through the motions with a wink, committed to the silliness and pointlessness of the entire endeavour. Day and Seidell’s script has a fun, freewheeling SNL vibe to it, aided by one of the show’s funniest MVPs Thompson in a too-small role and especially Kemper, whose brand of manic ebullience works so well here, especially when sentimentality arrives, her faux-earnestness cutting through the saccharine (unlike in the first film, the emotional kick never really comes). When the last act mayhem arrives, there’s a slightly knowing edge to the carnage, with both invaders commenting on the serious medical damage they’re facing (a note that could have been played a little more, in my opinion) but the traps are a little unimaginative and Yates’s line delivery a little mechanical in comparison to Macaulay Culkin, the slapstick becoming repetitive and ineffective. There’s also a predictable cop-out twist that softens what could have been the film’s more ingeniously dark addition to the formula. It’s easy to understand the wearied baggage many come to the film with but Home Sweet Home Alone is a perfectly fine and at times genuinely funny sequel that’s as good as it needs to be. Will we be rewatching it in 20 years time? I don’t think so. Home Sweet Home Alone is now available on Disney+Tim Davie has a problem. When the BBC director general was appointed a year ago, he said restoring trust in the BBC’s impartiality was his first policy objective. With one eye on securing a future licence fee funding settlement with a hostile government, he suggested the corporation needed to be “free from political bias” and shed the idea that its output represented a narrow viewpoint. But now he’s implementing the policy, he’s finding the devil is in the detail. Who exactly gets to define what impartiality means? Which topics – such as the climate crisis – no longer require dissenting voices, in the eyes of the BBC? And what happens when some of your own staff believe that certain topics simply should not be up for debate? This week the BBC quit Stonewall’s staff diversity scheme, even though the broadcaster insisted its payments to the LGBTQ+ charity had not affected the impartiality of its journalism. Instead, the BBC said, the issue was the external perception that membership could theoretically affect the impartiality of its journalism on topics such as trans rights. “Read the press and listen to the newspapers,” said Rhodri Talfan Davies, the BBC’s director of nations, explaining the decision on Woman’s Hour. “We believe that our involvement in Stonewall’s diversity champions programme had raised questions with some groups, with some individuals, and in the media about whether the BBC could be impartial in covering public policy debate. It’s about the perception of risk.” In effect, Davies confirmed that the BBC’s decisions on what topics are subject to impartiality concerns within the corporation were shaped by external debate in the public sphere. And when that public sphere is still substantially defined by a national newspaper industry where most titles support the government – and Tory ministers are pushing culture war topics while negotiating a licence fee settlement – exactly who gets to choose topics where impartiality matters remains a live issue. Ensuring impartiality is undoubtedly tricky, with the BBC often forced to defend itself. Many supporters of Jeremy Corbyn still feel the BBC gave him an unfair hearing during his time as Labour leader, but the corporation largely stood by its journalism on the topic. During the Brexit referendum, parts of the BBC’s broadcast output were measured with stopwatches, with impartiality taken to mean representatives for both sides receiving equivalent airtime. This approach is unusual outside elections. In common with other UK broadcast outlets, the BBC is usually guided by the subtly different concept of “due impartiality” – a term at risk of being misunderstood by the general public, partly because it is so difficult to define and is shaped as much by cultural norms as a strict set of guidelines. Due impartiality does not require that the same airtime is given to all sides of a debate. Instead, it takes into account context, audience expectations and the ability of presenters to provide robust challenges to views. Within this interpretation of due impartiality, the BBC now feels comfortable stating that climate crisis deniers are not needed to balance an on-air debate. Its editorial guidelines also say that the “BBC is not impartial on racism”. But other topics – such as whether staff can support active anti-racism campaigns or transgender rights – are pushing Davie’s approach to the limit. On Friday the director general took part in an uncomfortable Zoom call with the BBC Pride group where he defended the decision to withdraw from Stonewall’s scheme and also a contentious article published last month about some lesbians feeling pressured into sex with trans women. He insisted these editorial choices did not contradict the BBC’s commitment to be a welcoming employer. Yet he will soon receive an open letter, signed by BBC staff in support of trans rights and seen by the Guardian, which argues the corporation is breaching its impartiality guidelines if it hosts a debate on the legitimacy of gender reassignment. Citing the 2010 Equality Act, the staff called on Davie to stop offering a platform to the LGB Alliance organisation, which has denied accusations of transphobia, and argue that for the BBC to “encourage debate about who is and who is not a woman is a total denial of scientific fact”. “The BBC prides itself on impartiality, and we are all proud of that being one of the main pillars of the organisation we work for. However, recently there has been a false dichotomy between the rights of the transgender community and cis women,” the staff wrote. At the same time, some gender-critical staff members at the BBC do not believe it is possible for a person to change sex. At the moment this viewpoint is seen internally as being in the ascendancy within the organisation. The other major issue is anti-racism campaigning. On Tuesday the former BBC executive Marcus Ryder met Davie to discuss diversity in the media. This followed claims – denied by the BBC – that Ryder’s application to be the editor of Radio 1 Newsbeat and the Asian Network’s news output was blocked due to his public support for anti-racism groups. Speaking at a parliamentary event on Tuesday to mark his MBE for work on media diversity, Ryder said journalists of colour were scared of being blacklisted if they spoke up on racism. “They are scared of being exposed as one of the millions of people who went on a Black Lives Matter protest in the summer of 2020. They are scared that they liked a picture of an England footballer taking the knee during the Euros. They are scared that they did not delete their black square in memory of George Floyd on Instagram quickly enough. These are all real and specific examples. “They are worried that doing any of these things will bring their impartiality into question and by extension be used against them when they go for promotion or worse be used as ammunition against them in a disciplinary hearing.” Ryder said he was committed to impartiality in broadcasting but believed anti-racism should be considered a basic news value. He said: “Championing the need for a more representative, diverse and equitable media is not an impartiality issue, it is why Ofcom – the media regulator who passes judgment on matters of broadcasters’ impartiality – also champions these ideals. It is why the BBC and ITN can state them as core values without compromising their ability to deliver impartial objective news.” A BBC spokesperson said: “Impartiality is at the heart of the BBC’s mission and public purposes, and one of our top priorities which is why last month we published a 10-point plan to further strengthen this commitment and why independent research consistently shows BBC News is the most trusted news source in the UK.”Why will I love it? A fast-growing, easy-care statement plant, this non-spiky cactus lookalike is, in fact, a succulent (the difference is that cacti have virtually no leaves; all cacti are succulents but not all succulents are cacti). It has a vivid green, chunky stem and upward-branching arms like many cacti, but grows faster than cacti and can reach up to two metres indoors. Best of all, it lacks the high price tag of many cacti. Light or shade? It loves bright, direct sunlight. Where should I put it? By a south-facing window, on the floor, a plant stand or a side table. How do I keep it alive? Water and feed in spring and summer, allowing the compost to dry out between waterings. Reduce watering and stop feeding from early autumn to early spring. It needs dry air and warm temperatures, so avoid rooms below 10C, which can cause brown scarring and eventually kill the plant. Did you know… Euphorbias contain a white sap that was used to purge, or cleanse, the system, hence the plant’s common name: spurge. It is toxic to animals and humans when ingested, and irritating to skin and, especially, eyes. So if you get any on your hands, wash them immediately with soap and water.Refugees living in northern France say Brexit has made it easier for them to reach the UK in small boats, as it emerged that record numbers of people crossed the Channel in one day. Despite the worsening weather conditions and the UK government’s attempts to deter them, 1,185 people made the crossing on Thursday, according to the Home Office. Refugees who have fled a variety of conflict zones including Sudan, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq and Eritrea told the Guardian they believed the fact the UK was no longer part of the EU made it more appealing to risk the dangerous crossings because they could no longer be sent back to other European countries under EU legislation. In October 2020 Boris Johnson said Brexit would enable Britain to take back “full control of our money, our borders and our laws”. Nevertheless, while the overall number of people fleeing conflict and claiming asylum in the UK has fallen to 31,115 in the last 12 months, the number crossing from France to the UK in small boats has risen sharply since the UK parted company from the EU. Previously, when the UK was part of the EU, under a mechanism known as Dublin the UK could ask other EU countries to take back people they could prove had passed through safe European countries before reaching the UK. The UK could make “take charge” requests and officials were often able to prove that asylum seekers had passed through other countries thanks to the Eurodac fingerprint database. But since Brexit the UK no longer has access to that database, so it is harder to prove definitively which other European countries small boat arrivals to the UK have previously passed through. The UK has not so far struck any bilateral agreements with other EU countries to enable it to replicate the Dublin arrangement. Instead officials have labelled many claims where they suspect people have passed through other European countries before reaching the UK as “inadmissible”. In practice this means many asylum seekers are languishing in the system for extended periods but are not being sent to other countries. Even before the UK left the EU, only a few hundred people were sent to other European countries in 2020. The Guardian recently interviewed dozens of asylum seekers in northern France. Many were malnourished, bedraggled and in a desperate state and had fled a variety of conflict zones. Some had travelled through Libya where they had been detained and trafficked. One 19-year-old man from Sudan who is currently in Calais said: “We believe we will not be safe unless we can reach the UK. Here the French police beat us and evict us every day from the places where we are sleeping outside. It brings back bad memories from Libya where I was locked up and beaten many times by traffickers. Because of Brexit I believe that once I reach the UK I will be safe at last. No Dublin, no fingerprints any more.” He said he had no money to pay smugglers and would try to find a way to cross with a small group of friends in an abandoned kayak. “Every night we go to the beach to look for small boats that have been abandoned and we will try to cross that way.” One Kurdish man who gave his name as Navid, and is sleeping in a tent in Dunkirk, said his family had made an arrangement with smugglers to pay for him to cross in a small boat. “Everyone here is saying to me that because of Brexit it is much easier to find safety in the UK,” he said. “I hope I will manage to cross without losing my life and find a safe future in the UK.” A Home Office spokesperson said:“The British public have had enough of seeing people die in the Channel while ruthless criminal gangs profit from their misery and our new plan for immigration will fix the broken system which encourages migrants to make this lethal journey. People should claim asylum in the first safe country they reach – rather than making dangerous journeys to the UK. That is why we will have rules in place to make asylum claims inadmissible where people have travelled through or have a connection to safe countries. “There is a global and European migration crisis and countries have a moral responsibility to tackle the issue of illegal migration. We expect our international partners to engage with us to stop people making perilous crossings.”A loophole that allows MPs to rent out a London property they own while billing taxpayers for living at another address in the capital should be closed, Tory MPs have said, in an effort to avoid sleaze scandals dragging parliament’s reputation down further. Senior politicians, including the longest-serving member of the House of Commons, Sir Peter Bottomley, told the Guardian the system was in urgent need of reform to make it fairer for taxpayers and MPs. The call came after the former attorney general Geoffrey Cox was discovered to have rented out his three-bedroom flat in south London for up to £4,000 a month while claiming £1,900 a month in rent for a separate residential property. He was not breaking any rules. Reportedly about a dozen MPs rent out a private property in London while claiming for rent at another location so they have somewhere to stay during the week. Changes made after the expenses scandal in 2010 mean MPs are unable to claim mortgage repayments on a property they own in London, meaning those who already had a home in the capital had to rent elsewhere if they wanted to claim expenses for the cost of having somewhere to live near Westminster. Some MPs who do just that are among the system’s harshest critics, and argue that the bill to taxpayers from having to rent out another property is higher than if they had just remained living in the original one they owned and billed the mortgage repayments instead. Bottomley said he was not personally affected by the loophole, but that the rule change that created the loophole was “arbitrary” and the issue thrust into the spotlight by Cox’s situation “has been building for 10 years”. “I think they should adapt it,” he said, pointing to other changes the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (IPSA) made to the conditions on how MPs could claim for accommodation since the original rules came into force. “IPSA should consult with the parliamentary Labour party, the 1922 Committee [the Conservative parliamentary grouping], and other opposition parties to create a system that is fair to the taxpayer [and] MPs.” A minister said it would “help show we’re genuinely trying to save taxpayers money”. And other Tory MPs said it would make the system fairer, with one suggesting they be allowed to claim for mortgage interest payments and then share any profits on the resale of a property to ensure fairness for taxpayers. Sir Alistair Graham, a former chair of the committee on standards in public life, said: “The loophole needs to be closed. MPs have got a personal responsibility to only use public funds where really necessary. If they have flats in London then they shouldn’t call on public funds, simple as that.” In a statement, IPSA said: “After public consultation in 2017 it was decided that an MP’s personal financial situation is not a relevant test for whether they should receive support for their parliamentary duties. Our statutory responsibility is to ensure that MPs have the appropriate support they need, including suitable accommodation. IPSA keeps the rules, and compliance with them, under constant review.” Boris Johnson continues to face the fallout from a scandal that began with him trying to save a Tory MP from suspension for breaching lobbying rules, and has now snowballed to place scrutiny on other Conservatives’ business interests. In an attempt to improve relations with Tory backbenchers, all those elected in 2019 have been invited to a reception at No 10 next Tuesday. The deputy chief whip wrote to them all on Friday demanding an end to negative briefing against the government to the media, adding: “It is rarely helpful to provide commentary.” The chief whip, Mark Spencer, has not cleared his weekend diary to ring round MPs and smooth over tensions, as some MPs had expected. He is instead due to attend a charity shooting event.Gareth Bale has said the heartbreak of near-misses drives him on in his determination to lead Wales to a first World Cup in more than 60 years as he prepares to reach 100 caps. Bale said the hurt of being edged out by the Republic of Ireland in a game that denied them a play-off spot four years ago would fuel them when they prepare for a March semi-final play-off to qualify for Qatar 2022. Wales are guaranteed a play-off, but must finish second in Group E to earn a home draw. Bale is set to start against Belarus in Cardiff on Saturday and victory plus at least a point against Belgium, the group leaders, on Tuesday would secure second spot. Bale has worked hard to be available after suffering a grade-four hamstring tear in September, with the interim Wales manager, Robert Page, saying the Real Madrid forward is “a couple of weeks ahead of schedule … because he has pushed himself”. Bale will become the second Welshman, after Chris Gunter, to reach a century of caps and the 32-year-old said it would be an incredible occasion. At the same time, Bale said he would not allow emotion to get in the way of what he described as a “must-win game” if Wales are to give themselves the best chance of reaching a World Cup for the first time since 1958. “The way you learn is by heartbreak in football and by things you haven’t achieved,” he said. “The World Cup is top of everyone’s list. We have had down moments like against Ireland [in 2017, when they lost their final Group D qualifier 1-0 in Cardiff] and other situations so hopefully we can lean on that experience and that hurt to drive us on further and have that bit more knowhow on how to do things. We’ll definitely be diving back into a bit of experience to try and help us and hopefully the youngsters can give us that little advantage.” In September Bale’s first competitive hat-trick for his country helped Wales to a last-minute comeback battling victory over Belarus, but he missed the October double-header through injury. “I still feel like a little kid when I am not playing now watching Wales,” he said. “I have worked as hard as ever to try to get back. In terms of my fitness I am as fit as I can be. I need to be wary that I have not played for two months. But, like I always do no matter, when I go on the pitch I will give 100%.” Bale said his winner against Belgium on his 50th cap was among his favourite moments in a Wales shirt. “When a fan plays for your own national team you bring that passion with you. It is hard to describe the feeling of playing for Wales. It is such a special country. It’s such a special bond between the players, the staff, the fans, and even the media are a little bit nicer to us … it is just a special country to be a part of. I’m very proud and honoured to be a Welshman.” This week Bale’s best friend in the squad, Wayne Hennessey, said they were plotting a golf-related gift for reaching a century. In March, the Football Association of Wales presented Gunter with an oil painting by his former Wales teammate Owain Fon Williams of the iconic chin-up gesture he made following defeat by England at Euro 2016. “I don’t know of any gifts,” said Bale. Asked what would be the best gift, he replied: “I want them to give me three points! That would be the perfect gift because we need them.” Page also paid tribute to Bale as the best Welsh footballer of all time. “I think a lot of boys and girls will look up to him, how he lives his life as well as what he does on the football pitch,” Page said. “The way he takes care of himself now, I think he’s gone to another level with that. He has been an inspiration to a lot of young children over the years. He leads by example.”My father, Ken Lawson, who has died aged 81 of pancreatitis, had a long career as a teacher and lecturer. Born in Liverpool, the son of Tommy, a machine setter for Meccano, and Alice (nee Yates), a shop assistant, Ken enjoyed a loving childhood surrounded by extended family. He attended the Liverpool Institute high school for boys, leaving after his O-levels to work as an apprentice engineer in a telephone factory. Around this time he met Gill Jones, a teacher, whom he married in 1964. She encouraged him to return to education and he studied for his A-levels at night school, sparking a love of learning that was to remain with him throughout his life. Ken subsequently studied at Didsbury Teacher Training College in Manchester (1961-64), before moving to east London, where he taught by day, at Sebright junior school, Hackney, and took a history degree at Birkbeck, University of London, in the evenings. Teaching in a deprived part of inner London, he found the first term challenging, but when he returned to school after Christmas, his class were thrilled – apparently, no teacher had ever stayed with them that long before. A real bond was born, as was Ken’s love of teaching. In 1966 came a move to Bristol, where Ken taught for eight years at Knowle Park junior school, and where I and my brother, Peter, were born. There was more nocturnal studying (this time a master’s in education at Bristol University), then came moves to Dorset, where Ken became deputy head of Hillbourne middle school in Poole, and Devon, as he was made headmaster at Bradley Rowe middle school in Exeter. In 1985, Ken realised a long-held ambition to work in teacher education when he was appointed principal lecturer in charge of the PGCE course at Rolle College, Exmouth (later part of the University of Plymouth). He relished the chance to steer the next generation of teachers and made many enduring friendships among the students and staff. A highlight came when he helped to lead the college’s student exchange programme to the State University of New York at Fredonia, a trip that inspired many later adventures as he and Gill frequently visited the US, travelling and hiking in more than 20 states. From 2001 Ken enjoyed a happy retirement, full of friends, books, coastal walks, visiting his grandchildren and following the fortunes of Liverpool FC. The warmth, intelligence, kindness and sense of fun for which he was well known remained with him until the end. He is survived by Gill, Peter and me, and by four grandchildren, Honor, Esme, Jacob and Rose.Government delegations staying at the five-star Gleneagles hotel for Cop26 were guarded by security personnel who slept on camping cots in a 40-person dormitory set up in a lounge at the venue, raising concerns about Covid safety at the climate summit. The team of men were recruited and housed by a security company under a Foreign Office contract just days before the world leaders summit opened at the Glasgow climate talks. Three individuals have now come forward to raise their concerns about the cramped and unsanitary conditions in which they were housed at the luxury hotel. One worker claimed: “We were treated like animals. We would have to take our food back to the same room – extremely stuffy from the warmth and the body odour – we’d have to eat in that same room. The showers were filthy. No cleaners were hired because we weren’t important enough for that.” Delegates entering the Cop26 conference were asked to provide daily proof of a negative Covid-19 test. It is understood that security staff were instructed to follow similar rules, but the staff recruited to patrol Gleneagles claim this was not enforced by their team leaders who they say did not require daily proof of a negative test. “We weren’t tested for even one of those days as we shared beds with the day shift and slept right next to each other,” the worker claimed to the Guardian. “[The delegates] weren’t safe from Covid-19 because we weren’t tested once.” Members of the security team have also claimed that personnel were not properly vetted, because not all identities were checked on arrival when they started the job. Workers say they were asked on the job application form to provide details of their identity, immigration status and show their Security Industry Authority (SIA) licences. However, sources within the team claim that when they turned up for work not everyone was asked for ID or required to show their SIA cards. Gleneagles hosted more than 30 international delegations including South Korea, Switzerland, Norway and Spain. The company that employed the men was Optima Group. It was contracted by the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office to provide security at Gleneagles and a number of other Cop26 sites throughout the duration of the conference. The firm, which also provided security at the recent G7 summit in Cornwall, accepted its crew were housed in a 40-bed dormitory, but rejected the allegations about security and Covid checks. In a statement, Optima said: “Optima takes very seriously any claims in relation to its behaviour or performance. Having undertaken an initial investigation, we have found no evidence to support the claims made. At no point prior to being contacted by the Guardian were we aware of any unresolved issues connected with this task. All obligations under our contract regarding the Gleneagles Hotel security task have been met in full, including Covid testing and ID checks.” The firm said all officers involved held valid and current SIA licences as required by law and that these had to be displayed during shifts and were checked daily. It said criminal records checks were made, and each officer was further vetted under a Foreign Office system, and that individuals were monitored throughout the duration of Cop26. Passes were supplied to officers as soon as they were received, and in the meantime interim arrangements were put in place. Staff were instructed to bring Covid tests to complete daily and Optima received no reports of non-compliance. Additional tests were supplied if requested. If staff did not complete tests, they would have been in breach of contracts. One worker, speaking on condition of anonymity, claimed the security team was “extremely poorly vetted, or not vetted at all” and that the contractor “couldn’t know that the people that turned up to work were the same people who filled out the application”. “We didn’t know who those people were. No one checked,” claimed one worker, on condition of anonymity. The makeshift dormitory, with staff sleeping on folding cot beds and in sleeping bags, was set up in a lounge area of a conference and sporting facility on the Gleneagles estate. Gleneagles was contracted by the Foreign Office to provide secure parking and a lounge space where staff could eat and relax between shifts. However, on 12 October, during a pre-event site inspection, organisers for Optima are understood to have proposed using the lounge also as sleeping accommodation. A Gleneagles spokesperson said: “During the event, the organisers were self-sufficient and responsible for outsourcing their own amenities and services. The Gleneagles team had no access nor operational oversight of the contracted space.” Members of the security team raised concerns over the accommodation conditions soon after arrival and were offered an extra £25 a day on top of the £200 a day rate in compensation, according to an email sent last week by a member of security staff and seen by the Guardian. However, the duration of the security contracts – initially advertised to run from 28 October to 4 November – was later reduced by two days at short notice, ending on 2 November. A Cop26 spokesperson said: “The safety and security of delegates, local residents, and staff is at the core of our operational planning for Cop26.”Healthcare giant Johnson &amp; Johnson is to spin off its consumer arm, known for its Band-Aid plasters, baby shampoo and Listerine mouthwash, to focus on developing medicines and medical devices. The New Jersey-headquartered firm, which employs 136,000 people worldwide, said it would remain the world’s largest healthcare company even after the shake-up, the biggest in its 135-year history. The consumer division, which is expected to generate $15bn (£11bn) in sales this year and employs 19,000 people, will be split off in 18 to 24 months’ time, probably through a stock offering, following similar moves from rivals such as GSK. J&amp;J will be left with its pharmaceutical and medical devices businesses, which make drugs for prostate cancer and other diseases, vaccines and surgical tools and are forecast to generate revenues of $77bn this year. It is the only major pharma company to have developed a single-shot vaccine for Covid-19, sold on a not-for-profit basis; all the other vaccines require two jabs. The new publicly traded consumer health company will have four megabrands with $1bn annual sales – Tylenol, Band-Aid, Johnson’s (baby products) and Listerine – and make a host of other well-known products ranging from Neutrogena and Aveeno creams to Zyrtec allergy pills. It has leading positions in over-the-counter products such as cold and flu remedies and painkillers; skin health and beauty products; baby and feminine products; wound care treatments; and oral health products. J&amp;J is following other large healthcare companies that have spun off their consumer divisions to create slimmed-down pharmaceutical businesses focused on developing lucrative specialty drugs. GSK and New York-based Pfizer teamed up in 2018 to form a £10bn joint venture from their consumer health arms and plan to spin off the venture next summer. Meanwhile, the German drugmaker Merck sold its consumer health division to the consumer products group Procter &amp; Gamble in 2018. Andrew Duncan, senior equity analyst at the investment house Killik &amp; Co, said: “I don’t expect the J&amp;J shake-up – or GSK’s for that matter – to have a significant impact on underlying operations, and certainly consumers shouldn’t see much difference. After all, it’s not clear how creating a standalone consumer entity will help J&amp;J to sell more Listerine. “What is more obvious perhaps is the rationale for J&amp;J management to separate the lower-growth consumer unit from the high-margin pharmaceutical and medical devices units. It will be hoped that this will encourage investors to place a higher valuation on the individual pieces compared to the current conglomerate valuation, eventually creating more value for shareholders.” J&amp;J’s move is the third big corporate break-up announced globally this week. Outside the healthcare sector, the 129-year-old industrial conglomerate General Electric is breaking itself up into three public companies; and the Japanese conglomerate Toshiba announced on Friday that it is splitting into three businesses after years of scandals. J&amp;J employs 4,030 people across the UK, at its HQ and manufacturing, research and development sites in High Wycombe, Pinewood, Blackpool, Leeds and London. This includes 590 people at its consumer health division in High Wycombe. J&amp;J’s consumer arm faces an avalanche of lawsuits alleging its baby powder was contaminated with cancer-causing asbestos, which the company has denied. It stopped selling baby powder in the US and Canada last year. Alex Gorsky, J&amp;J’s chief executive, said the decision to split off the consumer division was not related to the lawsuits. The pharmaceuticals and medical division has also faced lawsuits. J&amp;J has settled most of the lawsuits filed by thousands of men who claim the anti-psychotic drug Risperdal caused them to grow breasts. The company also faces a spate of lawsuits over the role its painkillers have played in the US opioid crisis. Gorsky said: “The planned separation of the consumer health business is the best way to accelerate our efforts to serve patients, consumers, and healthcare professionals, create opportunities for our talented global team, drive profitable growth, and – most importantly – improve healthcare outcomes for people around the world.” He kicked off the process before he becomes executive chairman of J&amp;J on 3 January and hands the chief executive role on to Joaquin Duato, who is currently vice-chairman of the firm’s executive committee. Duato will continue to lead the new J&amp;J after the shake-up. Nicholas Hyett, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “J&amp;J has been a bit of a black box healthcare conglomerate for years. There are businesses that are individually attractive, but all together in a big wrapper where investors stakes in the businesses they like are diluted by exposure to others they may not have found so attractive. Splitting up deals with that problem.”The Conservative party’s new treasurer could make millions of pounds from the controversial takeover of the pensions and insurance mutual LV= by an American private equity firm. The proposed buyout has enraged some Conservative MPs – and could put them at odds with Malik Karim, an investment banker, who was named Tory treasurer in September, responsible for building the party’s election war chest. Conservatives see the takeover as another sale of a cherished British mutual institution, and it has drawn the wrath of former Conservative deputy prime minister Michael Heseltine. Karim is the founder and chief executive of City investment bank Fenchurch Advisory Partners, LV=’s longstanding financial adviser. Fenchurch is believed to have made millions of pounds of fees by advising the member-owned firm on its gradual dismemberment in recent years. Karim, a Tory donor who earns the lion’s share of Fenchurch’s profits, stands to make one last payday by advising LV= on its £530m sale to Bain Capital – the US private equity giant that was co-founded by Republican politician Mitt Romney. But the deal has provoked outrage because it will end LV=’s status as a member-owned firm after 178 years, hand a paltry payout of about £100 to each of its 1.2m members, and has led to fears over asset stripping. It has whipped up a political storm among MPs, by placing another British institution into US private equity hands. Karim’s involvement is likely to further anger Tory MPs, who are reeling after a string of revelations about standards in public life. LV= refused to say what it will pay Fenchurch. Advisers on other insurance buyouts have made millions of pounds in fees. Karim said there is “absolutely no conflict between Fenchurch’s role as LV=’s adviser and my personal political activities”. “Our appointment to advise LV= on its strategic review significantly predated my appointment as Conservative party treasurer,” he said. “As a regulated business, we have a process to approve any new mandates and this appointment was approved by our new business committee in the normal way. Fenchurch continually monitors any potential conflicts of interest extremely carefully and the firm is clear that we have none in relation to this mandate.” “We have acted for LV= on several matters since Fenchurch was established. Importantly there is no way that I would – or could – influence government in any way in this matter, or indeed in any matter.” City regulator the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) last month said that it did not intend to block the takeover or plans to demutualise the firm. The FCA does not consider ownership structures when assessing takeovers, meaning the decision is now in members’ hands. It can also be revealed that Karim was a member of a controversial film investment scheme for five years, which has long been accused by HMRC as a means of avoiding tax. Companies House filings show that Karim was a member of Ingenious Film Partners 2 Llp between 2006 and 2011. It and other Ingenious schemes were used by wealthy individuals, including footballers David Beckham and Wayne Rooney, persuading them to invest in films and video games. A former HMRC boss described Ingenious’s schemes as “scams for scumbags” and the taxman has estimated they could cost it up to £1bn. The schemes were marketed as a means of enabling higher-rate UK taxpayers to shelter income that would otherwise have been subject to higher rate income tax, allowing them to claim “sideways” loss relief. However, the scheme and other Ingenious partnerships have been embroiled in a long-running row with the taxman, and recently scored a high court victory when judges ruled in the schemes’ favour. Ingenious said that the judgment backed its stance that its film partnerships were always trading with a view to make a profit, adding it was considering what further options are available to it. Karim said he was advised to join the Ingenious scheme by his financial adviser at the time. “I have made all interim payments to HMRC as requested and will settle any remaining outstanding amounts once the matter is resolved,” he said. “I am a UK resident and my success has meant that I pay significant sums to the exchequer each year in taxes as well as making substantial donations to charity and other deserving causes.” The chairman of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Mutuals, Gareth Thomas, who has been campaigning against the deal with Bain, said: “Given that it is a no doubt very, very generous sum of LV= members’ money that Mr Karim is now enjoying, I hope that he will now do what LV= should have done a long time ago and publish not only what he has been paid, but also the full details of the bids, including the one from fellow mutual Royal London, so that LV= members will have all the facts at their disposal when they vote on the future of the business they own.” Karim spent the first 12 years of his life in Uganda, where his father ran a cafe in a bus station. The family fled dictator Idi Amin’s purge of Asians in 1972, and after spending a year in refugee camps settled in Leicester where Karim excelled at his secondary modern. He qualified as an accountant before working in banking, and set up Fenchurch in 2003 after being sacked by Swiss banking giant Credit Suisse. The firm has gone on to build a formidable reputation advising on financial services deals, including the £11bn merger of Standard Life and Aberdeen Asset Management. Fenchurch also advised the former Liverpool Victoria Friendly Society on the £1bn sale of its home and car insurance business in tranches between 2017 and 2019 to German insurer Allianz. In the year to the end of March 2020, Fenchurch’s profit for discretionary distribution among members was £21m, up from £17.7m the previous year and £27.7m in 2018. Karim reportedly received £17.5m of the 2018 payout – implying a 63% share. Karim is well connected in Tory and business circles. He has been a significant donor in recent years, handing the party £50,000 in February, donating £5,000 to Jeremy Hunt in July 2019 and a further £25,000 to the Tories in 2014. He was one of the donors chancellor Rishi Sunak and Boris Johnson chose to hobnob with in September after pushing their controversial social care tax hike through the Commons. Karim is close to Sir Gerry Grimstone, the former chairman of Barclays and Standard Life, who was named minister for trade in March last year. In an interview in the Evening Standard in 2016, Grimstone, who has used Fenchurch on numerous deals over the past decade, described him as a man of integrity. “Financial services companies do not want other financial services companies poking their noses into their affairs,” he said. “But with Malik, there’s no conflict of interest. You don’t need to worry about him sticking his nose in.” Karim said: “I am a Conservative and I believe that a Conservative government is best for Britain and the British people. Successive Conservative governments have helped me and my family to achieve what we have. “I was recently honoured to accept the role of Conservative party treasurer and for the coming years will be focused on raising significant funds for the party to enable it to fight and win the next election. I have been a donor to the party in the past and have known many senior party and political people over many years through my interest in business and politics.” LV= was founded with the original aim of helping Liverpool’s poor to cover burial costs. One of the UK’s last large mutuals, it attracted around a dozen bids last year, including from fellow mutual Royal London, before executives backed Bain’s offer. Nearly a year after the bid was made public, LV= will put the deal to the vote on 10 December. However, campaigners are concerned that it only require approval from 75% of members who vote, with no quorum – meaning there is not a minimum threshold on the number of members who are required to cast their ballot to ensure it is valid. Some also believe they have been left in the dark about a rival bid by mutual Royal London as well as what LV=’s chief executive and chairman may gain from choosing Bain over rival suitors, though the company has denied that either men stand to personally benefit. The move to a private equity owner has additional raised the hackles of unions and politicians, who worry private equity firms’ focus on profits could result in asset stripping and additional debt that would harm the existing business before it is sold off to another bidder. Bain has insisted it will not saddle LV= with debt. Bain Capital said the takeover offer was “based on our conviction that there is a tremendous opportunity to grow the company further over the long term, which would result in better choices for members, jobs and a strengthened market position”. LV= said: “Fenchurch have been our corporate advisers for a number of years. The strategic review that ultimately led to the proposed transaction with Bain Capital was subject to an open tender and benchmarking of fees. “We are satisfied that there is no conflict. Fenchurch was used during the strategic review and bidding process that resulted in the board recommending a transaction with Bain Capital in December 2020.” The Conservative party said: “Mr Karim was appointed treasurer in September. We are completely confident that there is no conflict of interest.”A much-anticipated Christmas spending spree is unlikely to materialise despite consumers having around £150bn of savings on deposit to splash on toys, food and festive parties, economists have warned. According to a study by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, much of the savings built up during the pandemic will remain in household bank accounts until the economic outlook is more upbeat. A survey that formed part of the analysis for the report found that when people were asked what they would do with an extra £500, they said on average that only £55 would be spent over the next three months. Richer households were more likely than poorer households to report they would use the extra funds to add to their savings, the IFS said. Poorer households were more likely than richer households to report they would use them to reduce their debts. With only two weeks until shoppers seek online bargains on Black Friday, the IFS said shoppers would keep the spending taps open, but would be more circumspect about running down savings. In the latest figures from the Bank of England, deposit savings increased in September at the same time credit card balances also rose, indicating that better-off households were saving unspent wages while more vulnerable households needed to borrow to fund the purchase of essential items. Households deposited an additional £9.4bn with banks and building societies in September compared with an average of £8.9bn between April and August. To capitalise on the expected surge in spending, companies have ramped up their Christmas advertising on social media, TV, newspapers and magazines to record levels. ITV said this week it was on track to enjoy the best year for advertising revenues in its 66-year history following a year-on-year increase in the first nine months of 30%, to £1.3bn. Policymakers at the central bank have forecast a rise in inflation to 5% by next spring and a slowdown in GDP growth linked to supply chain issues, such as the hold-ups of vital components for industry from abroad and labour shortages. The IFS, which was funded by the Nuffield Foundation to carry out the research, said the composition of spending was also crucial after a bounce back in the sale of goods to levels higher than before the pandemic. It said the sharp increase meant there was little room for any more explosive growth. Meanwhile, the purchase of services – from hairdressing to financial advice – had recovered more slowly from a 30% drop following last year’s recession. The thinktank said the slow recovery was likely to continue while wealthy households remained reticent and the incomes of the poorest were squeezed by a mix of high inflation and extra costs related to the pandemic. Mark Franks, director of welfare at the Nuffield Foundation, said he was concerned that the poorest households were the least likely to increase their spending after suffering a large proportionate drop in their overall wealth, “especially given the high levels of household poverty that already existed before the pandemic”.When Steve Smith dies, he wants to be at home, in the arms of his beloved wife. He wants it to be a moment he chooses, before the aggressive tumour in his brain takes hold. He may get his wish. Smith, who was diagnosed with glioblastoma in May, might be the first New Zealander to become eligible for a medically assisted death, after the country’s End of Life Choice law came into force this week. The legalisation of assisted dying in New Zealand has been the culmination of years of activism. Perhaps most prominent of the campaigners was Lecretia Seales, a lawyer diagnosed with a terminal brain tumour who, alongside her husband, Matt Vickers, began a legal battle for her own assisted dying in 2015. Seales died that year, before the legal challenge was settled and before the act brought before parliament, but she became one of the key public figureheads of the campaign, which pushed on for another five years and gradually shifted public sentiment. The bill was voted in in 2019, with the proviso that it be approved by referendum. In the referendum last year, 65% of voting-age New Zealanders voted in favour of legalising assisted dying, joining a handful of countries that allow it. To qualify for the procedure, a person must have a terminal illness expected to be fatal within six months, be in an advanced state of irreversible decline, be undergoing “unbearable” suffering, be mentally able enough to make an informed decision and be aged 18 or over, while two doctors need to sign it off. Speaking from his home in Raumati, north of Wellington, Smith, 66, said his diagnosis came as an enormous shock, but when he reflects back to the end of last year, there were little signs something was off – dropping his keys; writing nonsense in emails. When the migraines became unbearable, he sought medical advice. Glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive form of malignant brain tumour. Smith’s doctors told him that without treatment, he would have roughly five to eight months to live. It is difficult to know how the tumour will affect an individual, he says, but he understands the last weeks of life can be extremely painful and, in some cases, intensive medication is not enough to dull the pain. Opponents to the law have pushed for better resourcing of palliative care for this period, and are worried the law opens up vulnerable people to abuse. But the ability to choose a medically assisted death before the disease becomes unbearable is a choice Smith is glad to have. “I think it’s a good choice for people to have because it is a choice. It’s not something you have to do or need to do. It’s just something that you can do. “The jobs I’ve had in my world are all about providing solutions. And here’s another solution that I can add to my current choices. Really, it is about being in control of my autonomy.” Smith supported the referendum, not knowing then that it would become a part of his own reality so soon. His latest brain scan results are due back soon and will indicate whether he can apply for a medically assisted death. He can change his mind at any point in the process. Smith sounds remarkably upbeat as he discusses his future, a state of being he credits to his relationship with his wife, Kate Reilly. “From my perspective, we’re doing very well working with it at the moment,” he says with a laugh. “For us, it’s our relationship, the thing that holds it together. We’ve got a very strong relationship, and we’ve got a very good way of communicating with each other when things aren’t going right.” Having the conversations about his death with his family and those close to him has been a tough process, he says, but people have been incredibly supportive. None more so than Kate. “It’s heartbreaking,” Reilly says. “It’s been very tough. But my love for Steven means that I will support him and what he needs, not what I think should happen or what I need.” Their three adult children have been part of the conversations and also support their father. Reilly says the children are still unsure whether they will be there for the moment he dies. “But I know for me, he will die in my arms, and that’s my choice.”The world’s approach to the Amazon rainforest must be transformed to avoid an irreversible, catastrophic tipping point, according to the most comprehensive study of the region ever carried out. More than 200 scientists collaborated on the new report, which finds that more than a third of the world’s biggest tropical forest is degraded or deforested, rainfall is declining and dry seasons are growing longer. In recognition of the critical situation, the authors have formed a new Science Panel for the Amazon (SPA), which released its first report on the final scheduled day of Cop26 in Glasgow. The group aims to serve a similar synthesising function for research on the Amazon rainforest as the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) does for studies on the climate. One of the founders, Jos Barlow of Lancaster University, said the urgency of the Amazon crisis necessitated a change of outlook. “At the start of the century, large-scale forest dieback was seen as a remote possibility, predicted by oversensitive models. However, there is now irrefutable evidence that parts of the Amazon have reached a tipping point, with megafires, increased temperatures, reductions in rainfall. The severe social and ecological changes mean that a rethink is urgently needed. We cannot continue business as usual. The report is a first step in encouraging that rethink.” What jumps out among the many hundreds of pages in the initial study is the extraordinary capacity of the Amazon to support life in and beyond the borders of the rainforest. It says new species in the region are being discovered every other day. The diversity of plants, insects and animals confers stability and resilience to local ecosystems, plays a critical role in global water cycles and regulates climate variability. The basin produces the largest river discharge on Earth, accounting for 16% to 22% of the world’s river input to the oceans. Other chapters describe how these globally important functions are weakening as a result of land conversion for cattle ranches and soy plantations, and disruptions of river systems by dams and hydroelectric dams. About 17% of the Amazon has been cleared and more than 17% degraded. The authors say tipping points may already have been passed in some areas, such as the south-east Amazon and on the border between northern Brazilian states Maranhão and Pará, where more than 70% of the rainforest has gone and once-abundant species are endangered. The report says this problem is likely to widen unless the current destructive model of development, which only benefits a small minority, is replaced by a more holistic and inclusive approach. “If the Amazon is to survive, we must show how it can be transformed to generate economic and environmental benefits that would be the result of collaborations between scientists, Indigenous knowledge holders and their leaders, local communities, private sector and governments,” said Carlos Nobre, a Brazilian Earth System scientist and one of the co-chairs of the SPA. More direct forms of human destruction are emerging so quickly that there has not been time to include them all in this study. In the past week, forest has been cleared in Ecuador’s Yasuni national park for an oil road and pipelines. In the Volta Grande stretch of the Xingu River in Brazil, the Canadian mining company Belo Sun is closing in on a deal for an open cast pit that would scar the Amazon landscape and could contaminate water supplies that have already been disrupted by the nearby Belo Monte hydroelectric dam. Brazil, Ecuador and Canada were among the signatories to a Cop26 declaration last week that promised to halt deforestation by 2030. Conservationists are sceptical, especially in Brazil where protections have weakened and deforestation rates have surged under the president, Jair Bolsonaro, to their highest levels in a decade. Regardless of who is in power, the SPA participants say it is essential for scientists to examine what is happening on the ground and share the evidence with anyone willing to listen. “We must keep pushing, mobilising and informing people as much as possible,” said Marina Hirota of the Federal University of Santa Catarina in Florianópolis, Brazil. The scientists are collaborating with a wider group of actors than the IPCC, including Indigenous leaders, in the search for solutions. One of the lead authors, Erika Berenguer, of the University of Oxford, was optimistic this could bring positive change. “This is a message of hope,” she said. “I don’t want to sound naive given what we have seen over the past three years, but this report gives clear pathways for a different future. We don’t need a forest based on destruction; we can have a future with a healthy ecosystem where people are thriving. This comes from scientists who are a cynical and sceptical bunch. We deal with evidence and we see evidence that the future can be different.” Countries outside South America also need to be part of the solution instead of the problem, the authors and Indigenous activists say. Juma Xipaya, an Indigenous activist from the Xipaya people, who live in the Volta Grande near Altamira in Brazil, said citizens of wealthy nations needed to ask whether they were implicated in the ecocide of the Amazon through investments or trade with polluting companies. Speaking at an event in Glasgow this week, she said that although Cop26 had committed more than a billion dollars to Indigenous communities, the solutions to the crisis in the Amazon needed more than money. “We don’t just need funds, we need your respect, your commitments, because providing financial resources does not exempt you from your responsibilities to the climate and to the Earth,” she said.Time to wrap up... Britain’s ongoing labour squeeze is continuing in the run up to Christmas, as firms continue to struggle to fill vacancies. The number of active job postings at UK firms hit 2.68 million in the first week of November, a record high, with another 221,000 ads were added during the week. Roles being advertised for driving instructors, prison officers, fork-lift truck drivers, secondary school teachers, care workers and goods packers all saw big increases, while vacancies for painters, roofers and carpenters fell as builders were hit by supply shortages. In the US, consumer confidence has slumped to its lowest level in a decade, as rising inflation hit confidence. But workers are also quitting their jobs at a record pace, at a time when firms are competing for staff. Pressure is mounting over Bain Capital’s proposed £530m takeover of LV=. Campaigners are concerned that the deal for the pensions and life insurance mutual will mean worse payouts for customers and poorer customer service. MPs fear another private equity asset-stripping. And this evening, we’ve reported that the Conservative party’s new treasurer could make millions of pounds from the controversial takeover of the pensions and insurance mutual LV= by an American private equity firm. AstraZeneca has started signing commercial contracts to supply its Covid-19 vaccine next year as the pandemic moves to an “endemic phase” – in a major shift away from the drugmaker’s not-for-profit pricing. Britain’s blue-chip FTSE 100 index fell around 0.5%, dragged down by AstraZeneca which missed earnings forecasts, hospitality firms, and a stronger pound today. European markets closed at fresh record highs, despite new lockdowns measures being announced in Austria and the Netherlands. Eurozone industrial output fell again, down 0.2% in September. With supply chain problems still intense, the EU’s competition chief has warned that Europe and the US must avoid being dragged into a ‘subsidy race’ in the struggle to get hold of computer chips Johnson &amp; Johnson has become the latest major company to announce it will split. It will spin off its consumer products division into a new company as it focuses on pharmaceuticals and medical devices. Elon Musk has continued to cut his stake in Tesla, selling almost $700m of shares yesterday. Logistics workers are processing mountains of parcels after Chinese e-commerce titan Alibaba has enjoyed record sales during its Singles Day shopping extravaganza. The energy regulator has threatened to strip five suppliers of their licences after they failed to hand over more than £500,000 collected from customers’ bills to help pay for a renewable energy support scheme. Women who work mostly from home have been warned they risk hurting their careers and getting caught in a “she-cession” as more men return to office working post-pandemic . And Bake Off’s coming back again, after Channel 4 struck a new deal to keep the hit show for three more years. Goodnight, and have a lovely weekend. GW The Conservative party’s new treasurer could make millions of pounds from the controversial takeover of the pensions and insurance mutual LV= by an American private equity firm. The proposed buyout has enraged some Conservative MPs – and could put them at odds with Malik Karim, an investment banker, who was named Tory treasurer in September, responsible for building the party’s election war chest. Conservatives see the takeover as another sale of a cherished British mutual institution, and it has drawn the wrath of former Conservative deputy prime minister Michael Heseltine. Karim is the founder and chief executive of City investment bank Fenchurch Advisory Partners, LV=’s longstanding financial adviser. Fenchurch is believed to have made millions of pounds of fees by advising the member-owned firm on its gradual dismemberment in recent years. Karim, a Tory donor who earns the lion’s share of Fenchurch’s profits, stands to make one last payday by advising LV= on its £530m sale to Bain Capital – the US private equity giant that was co-founded by Republican Mitt Romney. But the deal has provoked outrage because it will end LV=’s status as a member-owned firm after 178 years, hand a paltry payout of about £100 to each of its 1.2m members, and has led to fears over asset stripping. It has whipped up a political storm among MPs, by placing another British institution into US private equity hands. Karim’s involvement is likely to further anger Tory MPs, who are reeling after a string of revelations about standards in public life. LV= refused to say what it will pay Fenchurch. Advisers on other insurance buyouts have made millions of pounds in fees. Here’s the full story: Oxfam has accused AstraZeneca of breaking its promises over its Covid-19 vaccine, after deciding to start making a profit on it. Anna Marriott, Oxfam’s Health Policy Manager and spokesperson for the People’s Vaccine Alliance, said: “AstraZeneca is breaking its repeated and celebrated public promises of a non-profit vaccine for all countries for the duration of this pandemic and to never to make a profit in any low- and middle-income country from this publicly funded vaccine. It is turning its back on these commitments at a time when the pandemic still rages and 98 per cent of people in the poorest countries are not yet fully vaccinated. “While AstraZeneca has said the vaccine will remain non-profit for developing nations, we understand that 75 middle-income countries including Indonesia, The Philippines, South Africa and Zimbabwe are excluded from their commitment. AstraZeneca must immediately and unequivocally confirm that it will not profit from any sales of the vaccine for any low or middle-income country whether via bilateral deals or COVAX. Earlier today, AstraZeneca CEO Pascal Soriot explained that the virus is becoming endemic, saying: “We are moving to an endemic phase and next year is the target for these commercial contracts.” Soriot also insisted that it was offering affordable and tiered pricing, depending on countries’ ability to pay. He said the vaccine, developed with Oxford University, would not become “a huge profit earner”. Here’s the full story: European shares closed their sixth straight week of gains at a new high on Friday, as strong results from Cartier owner Richemont rounded off a robust earnings season, reports Reuters: The pan-European STOXX 600 index rose 0.3% to a new peak of 486.75 points, and added 0.7% for the week. It has finished at record highs in four of the five sessions this week. Richemont surged 10.9% and was the best-performing European stock for the day, after it beat six-month profit estimates and said it was seeking investors for its loss-making Yoox business. The luxury sector also got a boost from France’s LVMH, which gained 2.5% on news that Louis Vuitton was planning to open its first duty-free store in China. In the City, the FTSE 100 has ended the day down 36 points or 0.5% at 7348 points. After hitting a 20-month high yesterday, the blue-chip index couldn’t repeat the feat. AstraZeneca pulled it down, closing 6.8% lower after missing earnings expectations this morning. Travel and hospitality shares also had a weak day, after Austria announced a lockdown for unvaccinated people in two of Europe’s worst-hit coronavirus regions, and the Netherlands announced a partial lockdown will begin tomorrow. Airline group IAG fell 2.8%, hotel operator Whitbread lost 2.3% and catering group Compass lost 2.1%. On the smaller FTSE 250, cruise operator Carnival fell 3.9% and package holiday group TUI lost 3.3%. France’s CAC had a stronger day, though, hitting an all-time high, while Germany’s DAX was flat. The University of Michigan confidence survey also showed a stark difference on party lines between Americans. While the headline index of Consumer Sentiment fell to a ten-year low of 66.8 this month, it was a relatively upbeat 87.0 for Democrats, and an extremely gloomy 37.2 for Republicans (details here) Surveys of Consumers chief economist, Richard Curtin, says: Consumer sentiment fell in early November to its lowest level in a decade due to an escalating inflation rate and the growing belief among consumers that no effective policies have yet been developed to reduce the damage from surging inflation. One-in-four consumers cited inflationary reductions in their living standards in November, with lower income and older consumers voicing the greatest impact. Nominal income gains were widely reported but when asked about inflation-adjusted gains, half of all families anticipated reduced real incomes next year. Rising prices for homes, vehicles, and durables were reported more frequently than any other time in more than half a century. The reactions of consumers to surging inflation should be no surprise, as it has been reported during the past several months. The description that inflation would be “transient” has the undertone that consumers could “grin and bear it” as economic policies counted on a quick and automatic self-correction to supply and labor shortages. Instead, the pandemic caused economic dislocation unlike any prior recession, and has been intertwined with partisan interpretations of economic developments. That partisan split makes it harder to assess exactly what’s going on in the economy. Curtin explains: Partisans aligned with the President’s party have adopted very positive moods, and those in the opposing camp very negative moods. As a result, partisan supporters of one or the other presidents either mentioned or ignored rising home and stock values, inflation and income growth rates, or mentioned or ignored employment or unemployment rates, and so forth. The unexpectedly large drop in the University of Michigan consumer confidence index in early November reflects the impact of broadening inflation fears, says Michael Pearce, senior US economist at Capital Economics. It suggests any rebound in real consumption over the coming quarters will be relatively muted, he warns: The plunge in the consumer confidence index to 66.8 in November, from 71.7, took it to levels last seen in the immediate aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. The drop reflected declines in both the current conditions index to 73.2, from 77.7, and the expectations index to 62.8, from 67.9. We don’t have the full breakdown, but the U. Mich index is partly based on a question asking about buying conditions for durable goods, which the press release said were at their worst levels in more than half a century, reflecting widespread shortages and sharp price increases. Consumers’ expectations for inflation over the next five years were stable at 2.9%, but expectations for inflation over the coming year ticked higher to 4.9%, from 4.8%. U.S. consumer sentiment has plunged to the lowest level in a decade this month, as surging inflation cut into households’ living standards. The University of Michigan’s Consumer Sentiment Index has tumbled to 66.8 in its preliminary November reading from October’s final reading of 71.7. That was the lowest level since November 2011, and weaker than expected It shows that the jump in prices this year, which has driven US inflation to a 31-year high of 6.2%, is worrying consumers. Marketwatch explains: Americans’ sentiment worsened due to escalating inflation and the growing belief that no effective policies have yet been developed to reduce the damage from it, said Richard Curtin, the survey’s chief economist. Rising prices for homes, vehicles and durables were reported more frequently than any other time in more than half a century, he said. Consumer confidence hints at Americans’ willingness to spend on goods and services, which is a major driver of the U.S. economy. However, although confidence has remained at subdued levels in the last few months, U.S. consumers haven’t shown signs of a severe retreat in spending. Here’s some reaction: Workers in the US quit their jobs at a record pace in September. Around 4.4m people voluntarily left their jobs during the month, the Labor Department reports, lifting the quits rate to 3.0% -- which are record levels since the survey began. There were 10.4m job openings during the month, close to the record highs seen this summer, as firms continue to struggle to hire workers (as we’ve seen in the UK today too) The report says: The number of quits increased in September to a series high of 4.4 million (+164,000). The quits rate also increased to a series high 3.0 percent. Quits increased in several industries with the largest increases in arts, entertainment, and recreation (+56,000); other services (+47,000); and state and local government education (+30,000). Quits decreased in wholesale trade (-30,000). The number of quits increased in the West region. Nick Bunker, economist at jobs site indeed.com, has more rapid analysis: Inflation expectations have picked up in Germany, which may concern central bankers.... On Wednesday, Germany’s inflation rate jumped to 4.5%, the highest in almost 30 years. With energy prices soaring, and supply chain problems driving up costs, people may now be anticipating that prices will keep rising, despite hopes that it’s a transitory problem. Wall Street has opened higher, lifted by Johnson &amp; Johnson and some tech stock gains. The S&amp;P 500 is up 6.7 points, or 0.15%, at 4,656 points, while the Nasdaq Composite has risen 0.3%. Shares in Johnson &amp; Johnson have moved higher, after it announced its split, reports Victoria Scholar of interactive investor: Johnson &amp; Johnson plans to split into two companies, separating its consumer health division that sells Band-Aids and Baby Powder from its pharmaceuticals and medical devices business. It’s the biggest shake-up in the company’s 135-year history, just days after another US titan, General Electric, announced it would split in three. Johnson &amp; Johnson plans to separate its consumer health business into a new publicly traded company, and will focus on pharmaceuticals and medical devices. J&amp;J says the new consumer health company would be “a global leader with iconic brands and products that touch over one billion lives every day”, such as Neutrogena, AVEENO, Tylenol, Listerine, JOHNSON’s, and BAND-AID. Alex Gorsky, J&amp;J’s chief executive, said: Following a comprehensive review, the Board and management team believe that the planned separation of the Consumer Health business is the best way to accelerate our efforts to serve patients, consumers, and healthcare professionals, create opportunities for our talented global team, drive profitable growth, and – most importantly – improve healthcare outcomes for people around the world.” Gorsky adds that splitting the businesses makes sense -- rather than keeping two diversified entities within one corporation. We believe that the new Johnson &amp; Johnson and the New Consumer Health Company would each be able to more effectively allocate resources to deliver for patients and consumers, drive growth and unlock significant value. J&amp;J’s consumer arm has faced tens of thousands of claims that its baby powder and other talc-containing products caused mesothelioma and ovarian cancer. It put thousands of those claims into a newly created subsidiary this autumn, which it then placed into bankruptcy in a controversial legal strategy known as the Texas Two Step. TV news: Channel 4 has struck a new deal to keep The Great British Bake Off, the broadcaster’s biggest hit, for three more years. The show, which brings in audiences of up to 9 million, is crucial to Channel 4’s offering to advertisers and forms the backbone of its commercial strategy. While the value of the new deal with the Bake Off maker, Love Productions, has not been disclosed, Channel 4 paid £75m for its first three-year deal when it poached the show from the BBC in 2016. “We are thrilled that Channel 4 will continue to serve up Bake Off’s unique combination of warmth, humour and soggy bottoms for years to come,” said Ian Katz, Channel 4’s chief content officer. “Bake Off is all about optimism, celebrating eccentricity and bringing the nation together, precisely what a publicly owned Channel 4 is here to do.” Here’s our news story on fears that women who work mostly from home risk hurting their careers and getting caught in a “she-cession”: Elon Musk has sold more of his stake in Tesla. New SEC filings (here and here) show that the Tesca CEO’s trust sold 639,737 shares on Thursday. That’s on top of the 4.5m share sales, worth $5bn, reported on Wednesday which lowered his stake by around 3%. These latest shares were sold in a series of transactions at between $1,056 and $1,104, which I think has raised roughly $687m (based on the reported transaction sizes and prices). This follows Musk’s poll last weekend, in which Twitter users voted that he should sell 10% of his Tesla stake. This latest sale leaves Musk’s trust owning nearly 167.5m shares in the company, the filing says. That suggests the 639,737 shares sale cuts his stake by under 0.5%, meaning Musk would need to sell more shares to hit the 10% target Tesla’s shares have fallen around 13% so far this week, from $1,221 last Friday night to $1,063 by Thursday’s close. The Chinese e-commerce titan Alibaba enjoyed record sales during its Singles Day shopping extravaganza, giving a much-needed boost to the firm after a torrid year in which it became the symbol of a government crackdown that hammered the country’s tech sector. The firm said 540.3bn yuan (£63bn) was spent as China’s army of consumers went on a splurge despite a more low-key sales campaign after pressure from the government to tone down the aggressive promotions and rampant consumerism. Combined sales with its industry rival JD.com came in at 889bn yuan, which was also a record and up about a fifth from last year. Alibaba and JD.com reported strong sales of items such as electric appliances, electronics, pet supplies, and cosmetics and other personal-care goods. JD.com shares rose more than 4% in Hong Kong on Friday, although Alibaba was down more than 1%. Singles Day – so-called for the 11.11 date – began more than a decade ago and for years was a one-day, 24-hour event on 11 November. However, industry players expanded it recently into an extended promotion from 1-11 November, with many retailers and platforms offering discounts and pre-sales even earlier... More here: This surge of orders has meant delivery workers have been sorting through masses of packages.... Industry output across the eurozone has fallen for the second month running, despite a jump in production of consumer goods. Industrial production across the euro area dipped by 0.2% in September, as the jump in output earlier this year faded. Production of capital goods, such as heavy duty machinery, fell by 0.7%, which may show that businesses are more cautious. Intermediate goods (used to make final products) dropped by 0.2%. But factories producing goods for consumers were busier - durable consumer goods output rose by 0.5% and non-durable consumer goods by 1.0%. Factories are also having to cope with the surge in rising costs, and passing them onto customers - as Victoria Scholar of Interactive Investor flags: Oil prices are under pressure this morning, with Brent crude falling by around one dollar to $81.94 per barrel, and US crude down 1.5% at $80.40. Oil weakened earlier this week after the surge in US inflation raised the prospect of higher interest rates, which would dent growth and demand for energy. With high gasoline prices a growing problem, traders are also wary in case US authorities release some oil reserves to drive down prices. Marios Hadjikyriacos, senior investment analyst at XM, says: There’s growing speculation that the White House could release the ‘kraken’ soon, or in other words the Strategic Petroleum Reserves, to cool oil prices and by extension inflation. Making a deal with Iran is another alternative. The EU’s competition chief has warned that Europe and the US must avoid being dragged into a ‘subsidy race’ in the struggle to get hold of computer chips. In a speech to Belgium’s Katholieke Universiteit Leuven this morning, EU Competition Commissioner Margrethe Vestager warned that the serious shortage of semiconductors is threatening to destroy company profits and undermine their recovery. Vestager said there were several causes of the shortage (according to a copy of her speech on the Commission’s website): From the increase in demand coming from home-stay during the pandemic; to the geopolitical tensions leading to hoarding of supplies, notably in China; to the business decisions of some companies to cancel supply contracts, only to find themselves at the back of the queue when demand picked up. And she cautions against a subsidy race, saying it would leave everyone worse off. In the current circumstances, it becomes tempting for companies to try to play out governments against each other, scanning the landscape to see who would be willing to pay more. This risks letting taxpayers – whether European or American – pick up the bill, and get little from it. Those chip shortages have hit car production around the world, with UK output hitting its lowest since the 1950s in July. Even Apple, with its huge financial muscle, has warned that supply chain shortages are hitting its output. The strong UK housing market means homebuilder Redrow expects to hit pre-pandemic results this year, despite the jump in raw material costs. Redrow told shareholders this morning that its order book is at record levels. Prices are up too; the average selling price of private reservations in the last 19 weeks has risen 14% year-on year, as demand for larger properties in the shift to remote working remains strong. Redrow also flagged that costs have risen this year due to ‘well-publicised’ supply chain problems. Richard Akers, chairman, will tell Redrow’s AGM today that: Despite the well publicised material shortages and supply interruptions facing the industry we are working successfully with our longstanding supply partners to ensure build output remains at normal levels. We estimate that overall build cost inflation will be c5% for the current financial year. And looking ahead, Akers adds: As a result of our strategy to grow the business outside London, with a strong focus on our industry leading product and placemaking, we expect to deliver results in the 2022 financial year approaching those achieved in 2019. AstraZeneca has sold more than $2.2bn (£1.64bn) of its Covid-19 vaccine in the first nine months of this year, as the drugmaker said it is set to move to “modest profitability” as new orders are received. Britain’s biggest drugmaker has so far promised to provide the jab, which it developed with Oxford University, on a not-for-profit basis through the pandemic. “The company is now expecting to progressively transition the vaccine to modest profitability,” it said in its third-quarter results this morning. “Covid‑19 vaccine sales in the fourth quarter are expected to be a blend of the original pandemic agreements and new orders, with the large majority coming from pandemic agreements.” Earlier this week the Anglo-Swedish drugmaker confirmed it will create a vaccines unit as it plans for the future of its coronavirus shot beyond the pandemic. The company said the reorganisation would bring together people who had previously been based in different parts of the business, and will be dedicated to the Covid-19 vaccine and tweaked versions to deal with new variants of Sars-CoV-2. AstraZeneca said it intends to start including the revenue and profit of sales of the pandemic vaccine in its future financial guidance and in results on Friday there would be a “limited profit contribution” in the final three months of the year. The company said the contribution would offset costs relating to its long-acting antibody combination AZD7442, and has not changed its earnings guidance for investors. AstraZeneca’s third-quarter revenue rose by 50% to $9.8bn, boosted by the addition of Alexion, the US drugmaker for rare disease acquired earlier this year, and were up 32% excluding the vaccine. But adjusted earnings per share came in at $1.08, below average analyst estimate of $1.24. In London, the FTSE 100 has dipped from last night’s 20-month high, down around 0.3% at 7360 points. Pharmaceuticals group AstraZeneca are the top faller, down 2.6%, despite laying out a plan to progressively transition its Covid-19 vaccine to “modest profitability” as new orders are received (more on that in a moment). Luxury fashion maker Burberry are the top riser, up 3%, recovering some of yesterday’s fall after it reported a slowdown in sales growth. Richard Hunter, head of markets at interactive investor, says markets have moved into a holding pattern, as investors weigh up the conflicting signals from higher inflation and strong company earnings. The US inflation shock from earlier in the week subsided somewhat, although slightly disappointing earnings from Disney dampened the mood. Even so, the third quarter reporting season has, on the whole, been a roaring success which has confounded the bears. It appears that the effects of supply chain bottlenecks, rising raw material prices and a tightening labour market have done little to derail the recovery of companies on the ground, although those concerns are likely to persist over the coming months. Indeed, inflation remains the major concern after the surprisingly high number earlier in the week, and this in turn has put further pressure on the Federal Reserve to reconsider its stance on the need for interest rate hikes. Currently, two hikes are being priced into markets for next year, with the worst scenario being that the Fed alters its outlook and raises rates faster and further than is currently anticipated. European stock markets have hit a fresh record high in early trading. Luxury goods maker Richemont has surged 7.8% after beating profit estimates in the first half of the fiscal year. It is also seeking investors for its loss-making Yoox business, in a move widely expected to appease shareholders [Reuters has more details here]. France’s CAC index has hit a new record high of 7,097.46 points. It’s now rallied by 27% this year, in a rapid recovery from its pandemic losses. Despite the UK’s tight labour market, there are concerns that women who work mostly from home risk seeing their careers suffer. Bank of England policymaker Catherine Mann warned that with significant numbers of workers returning to the office, those who stay away risk their careers suffering -- as a ‘two track’ workplace develops. While online communication is much better than before the pandemic, it still can’t replace the spontaneous office conversations which can lead to recognition and advancement in many workplaces, argued Mann, a member of the BoE’s Monetary Policy Committee. Yesterday she told an event for women in finance hosted by the newspaper Financial News that: “Virtual platforms are way better than they than they were even five years ago. But the extemporaneous, spontaneity - those are hard to replicate in a virtual setting. And with difficulties accessing childcare and Covid-related disruption to schooling continuing, Mann fears that this means many women will continue to work from home, while men returned to the office: “There is the potential for two tracks. There’s the people who are on the virtual track and people who are on a physical track. And I do worry that we will see those two tracks develop, and we will pretty much know who’s going to be on which track, unfortunately.” There was a notable drop in construction vacancies last week -- from carpenters and joiners to plasters, painters and roofers. The REC’s Neil Carberry says this is because shortages of key materials are hitting building sites, telling Today: The area which is maybe a bit slower at the moment is actually construction. We think that’s about some of the supply chain challenges which construction has had on materials just slowing down what’s happening on sites. The latest Construction PMI, released last week, showed that a “severe shortages of staff and materials” was hitting the sector. Carberry also plays down reports that Britain faces a Great Resignation, as workers quit in favour of a better job elsewhere. People are less worried about moving employers than earlier in the year, when there was more uncertainty, he explains, but... I don’t think it’s about people walking out on employers they’re dissatisfied with. It’s just that nobody moved jobs for about a year and we’re getting all that activity at once as people try to move their career on, and get that pay rise they want. Recruiters are seeing “really significant delays to getting jobs filled at the moment”, Neil Carberry, CEO of the Recruitment &amp; Employment Confederation, warns. REC members say it’s taking at least a month longer to fill vacancies than normal, due to the tight labour market, Carberry told Radio 4’s Today programme. The 221,000 new job adverts posted last week shows there’s high demand for workers, he explained. And with a record 2.7m job openings, some vacancies are taking longer to fill. Are people being lured way to higher pay and bonuses? Carberry says this does happen over time. The increase in care home vacancies may be partly due to care workers being tempted to other sectors as the economy opens up. There’s also been “a big bounceback” in hospitality vacancies this year, as lockdown restrictions have lifted. We’re now in the key hiring season, with November and December particularly busy for the sector. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Britain’s ongoing labour squeeze is continuing in the run up to Christmas, as firms continue to struggle to fill vacancies. The number of active job postings at UK firms hit 2.68 million in the first week of November, a record high, according to the Recruitment and Employment Confederation (REC) this morning. Growth in job adverts shows “no signs of slowing down in the build up to Christmas”, REC says, despite concerns about increases in the cost of living and the persistent presence of COVID-19. Another 221,000 ads were added during the week - the fourth highest weekly figure since the start of 2020. It highlights that the worker shortages that have hampered the UK’s recovery have not eased, as growth slows over the summer. Driving instructors saw the biggest jump in adverts, up over 32% week-on-week, followed by prison officers (+13.0%), and fork-lift truck drivers (+9.1%). Adverts for secondary school teachers rose 9.1% with fitness instructors (+7.7%) and care workers and home carers (+7.1%), also in demand. Hospitality firms are also struggling to hire, with ads for bar staff (+3.2%), chefs (+3.1%) and waiters and waitresses (+2.7%) up again. These vacancies could give workers the upper hand in pay negotiations -- at a time when the cost of living squeeze is hitting families. But there were “notable fall in adverts for construction sector roles”, where shortages of raw materials have been hitting the sector. Ads for painters and decorators fell 17.8%, along with roofers (-13.4%), and bricklayers (-11.3%). Neil Carberry, chief executive of the REC, says: “The latest job advert numbers show recruitment activity staying strong in the run-up to Christmas. The general positive trend varies by region and sector, however. London has been affected more than other areas by the rise of hybrid working, and its jobs market continues to grow at a slower pace than the rest of the UK. And while roles in logistics and care are in high demand, the construction sector saw a drop-off last week as supply issues constrained the industry’s ability to work to capacity. UK’s top hiring hotspot last week was Telford and Wrekin (+19.4%) followed by South Teesside (+13.9%). But the East of England lagged - with three of the bottom ten local areas for growth: Breckland and South Norfolk (-3.6%), North and West Norfolk (-2.4%), and Bedford (-2.2%). European stock markets are set for a flat open. Yesterday, the FTSE 100 closed at a 20-month high, after strong results from AutoTrader, with mining giants lifted by relief that property developer China Evergrande averted a default. The US dollar is on track for its best week in almost five months, after America’s inflation rate hit a three-decade high this week, raising pressure for the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates. Gold could post its best week in six months. The agenda 10am GMT: Eurozone industrial production for September 3pm GMT: University of Michigan consumer sentiment index 3pm GMT: JOLTS survey of US job openingsMy mother, Betty Maggs, known professionally as Dr Betty Wright, who has died aged 95, was a third-generation doctor who worked in the family practice in north-west London for much of her career. Born in the Little Venice area, she was the daughter of Edward Wright, a general practitioner, and Dorothy (nee Templeton), a nurse until her marriage. Betty attended South Hampstead high school for girls and, as a result of wartime evacuation, a school in the US. On her return to London, she studied medicine at the Royal Free Medical School, graduating in 1951. After an internship in Jamaica, she went straight into the busy family practice, where she used to joke about being known as Dr Somebody, as in “Somebody will come round to see you.” In 1955 she married John Maggs, an antiquarian bookseller; their families were close, and they had known each other since childhood. As a doctor she was conscientious and serious about treating underlying causes of health conditions. She was courageous, independent, generous and selfless: she was also deeply unconventional. Once she hunted down a patient’s absent husband to make him pay his maintenance, a treatment probably not in the textbooks but which the patient’s family believed helped to cure their mother. Betty combined work and intellectual interests – theology and psychiatry, plus a smattering of whatever came along – with the chaos of family life and also helping John. For his business, she was in the foreground catering for social events, and in the background as adviser, as well as helping to run the family’s caravan site (an idyllic old-fashioned place) on Hayling Island, Hampshire, where her father had built a fine art deco house. She also found time with John to buy and restore a farmhouse in Pembrokeshire. In 1972 Betty retired from full-time work in the practice and became a specialist family planning practitioner in various clinics, finally retiring fully in 1996. She loved gardening, nature and the sea. A skilled and competitive sailor, she was sailing into her 90s, commanding the vessel from her wheelchair on her last trip. When asked for her boat’s handicap, she would reply: “A male crew.” John died in 2013. Betty is survived by their four children, Christine, Alison, Elizabeth and me, and by four grandchildren.The Duchess of Sussex chose to write a letter to her estranged father, Thomas Markle, to protect Prince Harry from “constant berating” from the royal family to do something to stop him talking to the media, texts have revealed. Meghan also believed a letter was better than an email or text as it “does not open the door for a conversation”. Texts between Meghan and her then communications chief, Jason Knauf, were released by the court of appeal after being submitted by Knauf in evidence during an appeal by Associated Newspapers Ltd (ANL) against a high court ruling that publication of extracts from the letter by the Mail on Sunday and Mail Online were unlawful. In one, dated 22 August 2018, Meghan sent Knauf a draft of the letter she proposed to send to her father. “My thinking behind this is unlike a text or email it can’t be forwarded or cut and pasted to only share one small portion. It also does not open the door for a conversation.” She added: “The catalyst for my doing this is seeing how much pain this is causing H. Even after a week with his dad and endlessly explaining the situation, his family seem to forget the context – and revert to, ‘can’t she just go and see him and make this stop?’ They fundamentally don’t understand, so at least by writing H will be able to say to his family … ‘she wrote him a letter and he’s still doing it’. “By taking this form of action I protect my husband from this constant berating and, while unlikely, perhaps it will give my father a moment to pause.” Meghan said she had drafted everything “with the understanding that it could be leaked” so was “meticulous” in word choice, including using the word “Daddy”, which, if it was leaked, would “pull at the heartstrings”. Knauf texted back: “The draft letter is very strong – enough emotion to be authentic, but all in resigned sadness rather than anger.” He suggested there were a “few tweaks” to the order of events that “could be a bit stronger – I think it’s slightly even worse than you remember”. He added: “The only thing I think is essential to address in some way is the ‘heart attack’. That is his best opening for criticism and sympathy. “The truth is you tried desperately to find out about the medical treatment he said he was receiving and he stopped communicating with you. You begged him to accept help to drive him to the hospital, etc, and instead of speaking to you to arrange this he stopped answering his phone and only spoke to [the celebrity news website] TMZ.” He asked if she was OK after writing it. She replied: “Honestly Jason I feel fantastic. Cathartic and real and honest and factual.” ANL has argued the case should go to trial, claiming the duchess forfeited any automatic right to privacy over the letter, alleging she collaborated in sharing details of her life with the authors of the Sussexes’ biography, Finding Freedom, which she denies. Emails released by the court of appeal include details of Knauf’s planned meeting with the authors. On 10 December 2018, Knauf advised the duchess not to ask her friends to engage with the authors directly so they can say “hand on heart they had no access”. He added: “Of course if you still think you would like to have one or two people speak to them on your behalf we will arrange it.” Knauf later emailed to say he spent “close to two hours” with the authors. “I took them through everything.”An 11th-hour intervention, an admission of forgetfulness, and an apology to the court; the potentially explosive developments in the Duchess of Sussex’s privacy case against the Mail on Sunday offered much drama this week. And it may be far from over. Associated Newspapers Ltd (ANL) wants the court of appeal to overturn a judge’s ruling that the Mail on Sunday and Mail Online breached the duchess’s privacy in publishing extracts of her letter to her estranged father Thomas Markle, 77, and for the issues to go to trial. It is a nightmare scenario the royal couple would, undoubtedly, be keen to avoid. “The toll of a trial must be a more daunting prospect for the duchess than for Associated Newspapers. A public trial for the duchess would mean she (and possibly Prince Harry) would almost certainly have to give evidence and be cross-examined on aspects of her private life, as would her father and friends,” said Persephone Bridgman Baker, a senior associate at leading law firm Carter-Ruck. “No doubt this is one of the possibilities that is driving Associated to so belligerently defend the claims: the press coverage of any trial would be akin to that which we saw in the recent Johnny Depp case.” Meghan would have been warned of the risks by her legal team at the outset, she said. “Given what is at stake, and the costs already expended in reaching this stage of proceedings, it seems inevitable that Associated would at least seek permission to appeal to the supreme court in the event that the court of appeal find in the duchess’s favour.” Meghan won her privacy case in February when Lord Justice Warby, ruled in the high court that ANL’s publication was unlawful in a summary judgment – which avoided the need for trial – based on the grounds the publisher had no real prospect of success. In the court of appeal, ANL has challenged that ruling, arguing the case should go to trial. They claim Meghan had forfeited any automatic right to privacy over the letter, alleging she collaborated in sharing details of her life with the authors of the Sussex’s biography, Finding Freedom, and that she had written the five-page letter with the possibility it might be leaked in mind. ANL argues it was prevented from exploring these issues at trial by the summary judgment. Enter Jason Knauf, 39, erstwhile “trusted adviser” to the Sussexes and their former communications chief. For a year he resisted ANL’s attempts to draw him, and other former senior staff of the Sussexes known as the “Palace Four”, into proceedings, insisting on a position of “neutrality”. Knauf, currently head of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge’s royal foundation but due to stand down in December, is the aide who filed bullying complaints made by two staff members against the duchess. The allegations, which she denies, came to light a month after the summary judgment and a week before the couple’s Oprah Winfrey interview. Knauf’s September 2021 witness statement to the court of appeal was made after he told a “source” he “regretted” not previously providing a statement, according to evidence by Keith Mathieson, a lawyer representing ANL. The evidence unleashed emails and texts showing Meghan told Knauf she addressed her letter “Daddy” as “in the unfortunate event that it leaked it would pull at the heartstrings”, and “everything I’ve drafted is with the understanding that it could be leaked”. Of writing the letter, she said: “Honestly Jason, I feel fantastic. Cathartic and real and honest and factual. If he leaks it, that’s on his conscious [sic] but at least the world will know the truth. Words I could never voice publicly.” In another she wrote: “Trust me, toiled over every detail of the letter which could be manipulated.” In texts, released by the court, Meghan explained she chose to write a letter to her estranged father to protect Prince Harry from “constant berating” from the royal family to do something to stop Thomas Markle talking to the press. A letter was better than an email or text as it “does not open the door for a conversation,” she texted Knauf. Knauf also said she sent him briefing notes ahead of him meeting with the authors of Finding Freedom, with details including on her relations with her half-siblings. This appeared to contradict a 17 November 2020 statement by the duchess’s lawyers that “the claimant [Meghan] does not know if, and to what extent, the communications team were involved in providing information for the book …” In response, Meghan made a witness statement in which she apologised for not remembering those exchanges, stressing she had “absolutely no wish or intention” to mislead, and felt the exchanges “strongly support” her case. The briefing notes were “reminders” only of information Knauf already had, a “timeline” of her family so he would answer media inquiries. They were not “special or exclusive”, just “general background factual information”, and “a far cry from the very detailed personal information” ANL alleged she “wanted or permitted” to be put into the public domain. Elliot Fry, managing associate, at Cripps Pemberton Greenish said that the fact that it would merely result in the case going back to the lower court made the prospect of the appeal succeeding more likely. But, he said, the evidence Meghan expected her letter to be leaked did not forfeit her privacy rights. “That doesn’t mean that you want that letter to be leaked or that you don’t have a reasonable expectation that it wouldn’t be leaked.” Mark Stephens, a partner at Howard Kennedy, said he believed there was a 60-65% chance of the court of appeal saying “there’s more to this than meets the eye and it should go to a trial so the judge can make a careful evaluation of the evidence to conclude where the truth lies.” But Sailesh Mehta, a human rights barrister, said the revelations about Meghan’s briefings to the authors or an unauthorised biography through her aide were likely to be seen as a “sideshow” by the court of appeal justices. “Over the last 40 years, the pendulum has swung sometimes in favour of the press and sometimes in favour of the private individual. The current state of play is that it is on the side of the right to privacy and is unlikely to swing back in favour of the press with this case. The court of appeal will announce its ruling at a later date.The grand, historic but occasionally lampooned sport of chess believes its moment has come, after lockdown encouraged a rapid rise in the number of online players worldwide. Go on a site such as chess.com at any time of the day or night and you will find tens of thousands of players from around the world doing battle in blitz (very short) games, swearing at each other via the comments box in a variety of languages. The success of the Netflix series The Queen’s Gambit was the icing on the cake. Chess has finally become cool. TV presenter Tilly Ramsay even featured in a chess-based dance routine in Strictly Come Dancing last week – one of the game’s rare outings on British terrestrial television since the 1980s. The coolness of chess is now an accepted fact among pundits, and much of the credit is given to the Norwegian world champion, Magnus Carlsen – young, presentable, self-confident, and not someone to be seen at a dowdy chess venue with a plastic bag filled with three-day-old ham sandwiches. “Starting with his stint as a fashion model for G-Star Raw, he has been the catalyst and driver for a most remarkable, and frankly incredible, transformation [in the sport],” says grandmaster Jonathan Tisdall. The Simpsons even invited him to mentor Homer. Carlsen puts his title on the line later this month in a world championship match in Dubai against the Russian Ian Nepomniachtchi – headline writers needn’t panic; everyone calls him Nepo. The match will be absorbing – Carlsen has struggled against Nepo in the past – without having the allure of Fischer v Spassky or Karpov v Korchnoi. Chess misses the Soviet Union and its capacity for intrigue, even if no one else does. Although the match might not dominate the news agenda in the way Fischer’s victory in Reykjavik in 1972 did, World Chess, which holds online gaming rights linked to the event, is considering a stock market flotation based on the current surge of interest. In 2019, Ilya Merenzon, World Chess’s chief executive, floated the notion of launching chess clubs in major cities that would sell cocktails and cater to “hipster” chess lovers. In the UK at least, the curling-sandwiches-in-plastic-bags brigade, the game’s traditional demographic at club level, have been amazed to find themselves described as hipsters. It all seems too good to be true, and perhaps it is. The alleged coolness of chess has been a trope ever since Madonna was rumoured to be learning the game from her then husband, Guy Ritchie, 20 years ago. Madonna never seems quite to have mastered the intricacies of the Modern Benoni. It has proved very difficult for international corporations, and indeed the world governing body, Fide, to make megabucks out of chess because the essence of the sport is moves, and repeated attempts by rights-holders to copyright the broadcasting of moves have failed. Chess evangelists always claim there are 600 million active players worldwide, but the assertion is unproven. That number may know the moves, may even have played as children, but do they play now? The number of registered tournament players is a tiny fraction of that figure. The success of The Queen’s Gambit was spectacular, but what did it portend for this wonderful, complex, infinitely (until computers solve it anyway) fascinating human endeavour? The game is still in the balance.“Tories at war in cabinet showdown” reported the Daily Mail on Friday. “Sleaze row boils over” said the Times. “Court of chaos” proclaimed the Spectator, surveying the disarray in 10 Downing Street. And these are just the headlines from the Conservatives’ own Fleet Street cheerleaders. Nevertheless, at the end of one of the prime minister’s worst political weeks, they tell a true story. There is a sea change in Britain’s political mood taking shape. Boris Johnson’s once-triumphalist government is rattled. Sleaze has been the undoubted trigger for the fractious midterm mood coursing through the Conservative party. But it is not the whole cause, and therein lies the prime minister’s deeper problem. His press this week on the second jobs furore has been terrible, but there may be worse to come on other issues, not least on the economy, where Britain’s recovery lags behind the rest of the G7, and the cost of living, where fuel costs are set to spike again in the new year. This is one reason why Mr Johnson is desperately trying to ring the Brexit tocsin again over the Northern Ireland protocol that he signed but now wishes to disown. The cabinet spent five hours on Thursday arguing about strategy, a sure sign that Mr Johnson, who hates sitting in long meetings, is under pressure. A minister who dared to suggest the sleaze row is damaging the party – which is obviously true – was publicly berated for disloyalty by the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries. MPs from the 2019 intake are meanwhile nervously eyeing their majorities as Labour edges ahead in the polls. Rishi Sunak’s superficially anodyne observation that the government “must do better” is being read as a reminder to Tories that a different kind of leadership is available. It never takes much to rouse the Tory party to succession speculation. Mr Johnson may have hoped the final days of the Cop26 conference would allow him to change the subject. But the sleaze accusations are not going to disappear and, in any case, as the Glasgow conference headed into added time on Friday evening, a Cop26 to crow about had not yet been agreed. The prime minister will doubtless claim a triumph, whatever the final outcome, but the legacy of the Owen Paterson debacle is a party less ready to trust its leader and perhaps a country less ready to indulge him. In any case, the Tories are not as fully united behind Mr Johnson’s net zero pledges and timetable as he would wish. Though there are few outright climate crisis deniers in the party ranks these days, there is no shortage of very politicised delayers. It is a fair bet that the more vulnerable Mr Johnson appears on other fronts, the less committed much of the party will become on the environmental policies he apparently sees as his legacy. The biggest political threat to Mr Johnson this winter may nevertheless come from his and Mr Sunak’s stewardship of Britain’s sluggish economy. Figures this week show the recovery slowed in the third quarter due to Covid spikes and supply chain problems, which had a worse impact in the UK than elsewhere. A winter combination of low growth, increased inflation, higher fuel costs and tax and interest rate rises is very much on the cards. If that happens, and if the government is blamed, it could quickly take this week’s Westminster anger and seed it deep into every community in the country.Kamala Harris, the US vice-president, has thrown her support behind a plan to stage risky and unprecedented parliamentary and presidential elections in Libya next month, even though human rights groups have warned the conditions for fair elections may not exist. Harris attended a conference in Paris on the future of Libya attended by more than 30 countries and hosted by the French president, Emmanuel Macron; the German chancellor, Angela Merkel; and the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi. Human Rights Watch said elections were a much-needed chance for a reset in the country but warned “free and fair elections will hardly be possible without rule of law, justice, and accountability that are currently sorely lacking”. The US – and the bulk of the international community at the Paris summit – took the view that Libya was more likely to slide into chaos if the elections were not held, starting on 24 December. At present there is no agreed constitution, a timetable exists only for the withdrawal of 300 mercenaries, disputes proliferate about entitlement to stand and there is a strong chance that militia will seek to intimidate voters. There are also unresolved disputes about whether the parliamentary and presidential elections are to be held on the same day, or the presidential election first. In a pragmatic attempt to create more momentum behind the elections, the UN appears to be willing to allow the acting prime minister, Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh, to stand, even though an unreleased report may suggest his supporters offered bribes to some members of a UN body to elect him into office. It was also a condition of office that he did not stand in the December elections, a rule he now wishes to set aside. Tarek Megerisi, north Africa specialist at the European Council on Foreign Relations, said the international community “are wanting to let Dbeibeh run because they believe it gives the elections the greatest chance of actually being held”. “The international community has long prized the holding of the elections over the integrity of the process – for instance by validating the laws passed through decree by the speaker of the parliament, Aquileh Saleh. Letting Dbeibeh stand may be seen as a small concession compared to what has already been sacrificed to make these elections happen,” he said. The Paris summit communique put strong emphasis on an inclusive election process open to all, suggesting the election rules should be rewritten to allow Dbeibeh to stand. The summit also tried to build momentum behind repeated calls for the withdrawal of foreign forces. Turkey wishes to keep its troops in the country, insisting they are present at the invitation of the previous Tripoli-based government. Turkey, close to Dbeibeh, sent a low-level delegation to Paris to underline their opposition to the pressure on them to leave the country. In his speech to the summit, Dbeibeh made reference only to foreign fighters and mercenaries leaving Libya, but not foreign forces – a phrase that would apply to the Turkish army. France has said it wants elections to be irreversible and indisputable, a tall order in a country so divided over the distribution of resources between its east and west. But the communique calls on all candidates to respect one another during the campaign and to respect the result. The communique makes no practical proposals on how to pursue elections to bodies with no agreed constitutional basis, leaving the issue to the electoral commission. With candidates now coming forward, the backing of foreign powers confirmed and the registration process under way, it is still possible elections will happen. The communique also warned that “individuals or entities, inside or outside of Libya, who might attempt to obstruct, undermine, manipulate or falsify the electoral process and the political transition” could face sanctions.JCB, the British tractor firm, has been found by a UK government watchdog to have failed to carry out due diligence human rights checks over the potential use of its equipment to demolish homes in the occupied Palestinian territories (OPT). The watchdog ruled: “It is unfortunate that JCB, which is a leading British manufacturer of world-class products, did not take any steps to conduct human rights due diligence of any kind despite being aware of alleged adverse human rights impacts and that its products are potentially contributing to those impacts.” But the watchdog dismissed claims that JCB failed to use its leverage to persuade its exclusive Israeli distributor, Comasco, not to allow its equipment to be used to bulldoze homes. It said there was no conclusive evidence that the JCB equipment used in the bulldozing had been supplied by the distributor, or how JCB could influence the distributor. The findings were published by the UK National Contact Point (UK NCP), which is charged with assessing whether firms are meeting OECD guidelines for multinational enterprises on human rights. The UK NCP is staffed by officials from the Department for International Trade, and is independent of the OECD. The case marks an interesting test of the human rights duties of UK firms. It was brought by Lawyers for Palestinian Human Rights in December 2019 so has taken nearly two years to reach a judgment point. The lawyers claim they have a record of JCB products being involved in “at least 60 out of the 266 demolitions” in one year. In its ruling, the UK NCP said: “The scale of alleged adverse human rights impact and the evidence of JCB products used in demolition of houses in OPT are sufficient reasons to carry out an assessment of actual and potential human rights risks and impacts, even if JCB believed that those human rights impacts cannot be linked to the company.” The UK NCP said JCB should “carry out human rights due diligence to assess actual and potential human rights impacts”. It also urged JCB “to set out a plan on how it will integrate and act upon the findings of its due diligence – including how impacts will be addressed – if adverse human rights impacts are identified in its supply chain. This process should go beyond simply identifying and managing material risks to the enterprise. As the human rights risks may change over time, due diligence should be a regular, ongoing exercise, which should be part of JCB’s policy statement on human rights.” It also called for a human rights policy to drawn up by the firm. The Foreign Office, consulted by the UK NCP, has frequently said demolitions amount to a breach of international humanitarian law in all but the most exceptional of circumstances. At issue in the case is a dispute about the extent of the obligations that the OECD guidelines place on firms to ensure their products are not used in breach of international humanitarian law. JCB argued that Comasco was not the only supplier of JCB excavators and it did not have any direct management or financial control over the firm. It told the inquiry that the machines could have been “purchased secondhand from sellers within Israel, from neighbouring countries via the internet or international auctions or brought in by sea”. The inquiry accepted that the products could have been secondhand, and due to the complex supply chain, JCB could not directly influence their use. But it urged JCB “to engage with companies with whom it has a business relationship on their human rights policies, uncover any potential human rights issues and ensure there is no risk of adverse human rights impacts in its supply chain”. It added: “JCB’s response that as it has no control over its products once they have been sold to Comasco and that they are not responsible for the adverse human rights impact caused by their products does not reflect the spirit of the OECD guidelines on responsible business conduct.” The report pointed out that since February 2020, JCB had been aware of the UN office of the high commissioner for human rights’ database, which has put JCB on the list of business enterprises involved in listed activities in the occupied Palestinian territories that may have “raised particular human rights impacts”. JCB says it is challenging its inclusion on that list. JCB said: “We are very pleased that the UK NCP has firmly rejected the various allegations made by the Lawyers for Palestinian Human Rights that JCB either contributes to, is responsible for, or is otherwise linked in any way to adverse human rights abuses in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, either directly or indirectly, and/or that JCB has failed to mitigate or prevent such adverse human rights impacts. In particular, the NCP conclusively found that the alleged human rights impacts cannot be linked to JCB’s business operations or contractual arrangements. The process has now concluded.” The firm said it welcomed and would consider the NCP recommendation that JCB regularly conducts human rights due diligence and prepares a separate policy affirming its commitment to human rights. The director of Lawyers for Palestinian Human Rights, Tareq Shrourou, said: “JCB’s board of directors and senior management must consider the real-life repercussions of its noncompliance with core human rights provisions of the OECD guidelines. A 14-year-old Palestinian girl told Save the Children in a vivid quote: ‘My old home was a dream come true as I always dreamt of living in a house with my own bedroom. But this dream was shattered the day that the yellow bulldozers arrived. I see [those bulldozers] in my nightmares. I felt like all hope went down with my home.’” The UK NCP says it will seek an update from both sides in a year’s time to see how its recommendations have been followed. • The headline of this article was amended on 12 November 2021 to more accurately reflect the watchdog’s findings.