Workers at two Weetabix factories will launch four-day strikes from Monday in a dispute over pay and conditions. Members of Unite at the company’s Kettering and Corby factories have been on strike every Tuesday and Wednesday since September over proposed changes to working practices that they claim could leave them up to £5,000 a year worse off. The union claims engineers face cuts to their pay, terms and conditions, describing it as an example of a “fire and rehire” policy and Weetbix’s “corporate greed”, which the company denies. In an escalation of the dispute, strikes are to take place every Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. “Weetabix is making bumper profits, so there is no justification for these ‘fire and rehire’ attacks on our members’ wages and conditions,” Unite’s general secretary, Sharon Graham, said. “They are just not swallowing what in reality is a serving of corporate greed. “Unite will not accept attacks on our members’ jobs, pay and conditions, and Weetabix should expect this dispute to continue escalating until fire and rehire is dropped.” About 80 engineers have been taking part in the Tuesday and Wednesday strike action since September at the Weetabix Mills factory in Burton Latimer and at its plant on the Earlstrees industrial estate in Corby. The two factories also produce Alpen, Weetos and Oatibix. Stuart Branch, the group people and IT director at Weetabix Food Company, said: “For 90 years we’ve maintained a strong and productive relationship with our workforce across Northamptonshire to create a world-leading cereal manufacturing capability. We’re concerned to see that our reputation is being damaged in service of Unite’s national campaign on ‘fire and rehire’, which is irrelevant to the current industrial action at Weetabix. “We have repeatedly reassured our engineering team and their union representatives that no individual is at risk of dismissal, and that roles exist for all, thanks to our ongoing investment in our UK factories. The current discussions with our team focus on a request for compensation for a change in shift patterns. “As these changes are permitted under their existing contracts, we will not be paying for them as it would be unfair to our other employees. We are extremely proud of the efforts of our 1,000-strong British workforce, and have paid two additional bonuses over the last year to reflect their hard work throughout the pandemic.” The breakfast cereal, which accounts for 7% of UK cereal sales, was family owned until 2004, when it was bought by a Texas private equity firm. It was subsequently sold to China’s Bright Food before being sold again to the US company Post Holdings Inc for £1.4bn in 2017. Weetabix is exported to more than 80 countries, employs almost 2,000 people and generates annual sales of more than £420m. • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to remove text stating that “Britons eat an average of 336 Weetabix a year” as the statistic could not be verified.The forces’ sweetheart, Vera Lynn, was ordered to perform at Princess Elizabeth’s 16th birthday celebrations at Windsor Castle in 1942, even though the entertainer was meant to appear in a London variety show the same day. A letter, headed “secret” and signed by the BBC’s variety booking manager, informed Lynn that her services were “required for a private command performance” laid on by Elizabeth’s father, King George VI. It was addressed to Lynn at the Empire, a variety theatre in Finsbury Park, north London. The previously unseen document forms part of an exhibition of Lynn’s personal memorabilia, outfits and paintings that opens in January at the Ditchling Museum of Art and Craft in East Sussex. The letter said: “I am asked to impress upon you the necessity for keeping this matter strictly secret, and that it would be regarded as a grave breach of etiquette for it to be talked about, or to receive publicity in the press or elsewhere before the actual event.” She would receive no fee for the performance, in the presence of the King, Queen, members of the royal household and a “battalion or so” of Grenadier Guards, the letter said, but expenses on the “usual BBC scale” would be paid. Lynn, best known for her wartime song We’ll Meet Again and her BBC radio show Sincerely Yours, appeared in the afternoon concert at Windsor Castle alongside Jack Warner – later famous as Dixon of Dock Green – and the comedian Tommy Handley. When Lynn died last year, aged 103, the Queen was said to be deeply upset. She sent a private message of condolence to Lynn’s family. The exhibition also includes 20 paintings chosen from about 300 of Lynn’s artworks and a selection of outfits from her public appearances from the age of 11, including the military-style shorts she wore while touring British forces in Burma. The top tier of Lynn’s wartime cardboard wedding cake has been preserved. “It was a fake cake at a time of austerity, when there was rationing, and to assemble the ingredients for a big cake would be almost impossible,” said Steph Fuller, the museum’s director. Lynn lived in Ditchling for most of her life and was a patron of the museum. “After she died, we were invited to the house to see what was potentially available for a small display. We found a huge, wonderful collection of memorabilia, awards, correspondence, garments – most of it never seen by anyone outside the family,” said Fuller.The UK’s long-haul airlines will put the worst of the pandemic – as well as old rivalries – behind them on Monday morning, when British Airways and Virgin Atlantic take off simultaneously at Heathrow for the first transatlantic flights carrying leisure travellers to the US since Covid-19 closed borders in March 2020. The bosses of Virgin and BA said it was a “pivotal moment” for the battered industry, with both airlines having registered enormous losses and shed thousands of staff during 20 months of restricted travel. BA flight BA001 – a number previously reserved for Concorde – and Virgin flight VS3 will take off from London Heathrow on parallel runways for New York’s JFK airport at 8.30am, more than 600 days since the US travel ban was introduced. The transatlantic corridor has in recent years accounted for the majority of Virgin and BA profits, and the airlines said the reopening of the US borders to foreign travellers, announced in late September by the Biden administration, would be a significant boost for the industry. Before the pandemic, 22 million people a year travelled between the two countries, along with 900,000 tonnes of cargo. Vaccinated US visitors have been able to travel to Britain since the summer, when the UK lifted quarantine restrictions, boosting passenger numbers, but the airlines are now increasing schedules and there are full planes this week for the first time. With both airlines deeply damaged by the pandemic – BA’s owner, IAG, is expecting losses of €7.3bn over 2020 and 2021, and Virgin has been on the brink of collapse – the pair will put on a rare show of unity after decades of bitter rivalry. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said it was a “historic event” and “marks a significant moment for the aviation sector”. Sean Doyle, BA’s chief executive, said it was a moment to celebrate: “We’re setting aside rivalry and for the first time ever, British Airways and Virgin Atlantic aircraft will be seen taking off together to mark the vital importance of the transatlantic corridor. “Transatlantic connectivity is vital for the UK’s economic recovery, which is why we’ve been calling for the safe reopening of the UK-US travel corridor for such a long time. We must now look forward with optimism, get trade and tourism back on track, and allow friends and families to connect once again.” Shai Weiss, Virgin Atlantic’s chief executive, said: “Today is a time for celebration, not rivalry. The US has been our heartland for more than 37 years and we are simply not Virgin without the Atlantic.” Both will fly A350 planes after retiring their least fuel-efficient jumbos, the Boeing 747s, as the pandemic hit, and Virgin will have a significantly smaller fleet. Weiss said the airline’s battle for survival was “still with us, and cost discipline remains. But with the opening of the US market, we’re at 60% of our capacity, and we feel more confident than in a long time about the prospects.”British businesses’ output has slowed for the sixth month in a row amid a supply chain crisis, energy price rises and a shortages of workers, according to a closely watched survey of big employers. UK business output growth hit its lowest level since March during the last national coronavirus lockdown, according to the accountancy firm BDO. Its measure fell from 105.23 points in September to 103.35 points in October. Businesses across the economy have been trying to keep up with rising demand after the ending of coronavirus restrictions but persistent supply problems have prevented them from taking full advantage of the opening up of society. Rising costs, including the increase in the price of energy, have also slowed growth. The manufacturing industry is struggling particularly with finding the right materials, after months of disruption to production and delivery schedules caused by pandemic lockdowns. One persistent problem has been a shortage of computer chips, which has affected car manufacturers in the UK and worldwide. BDO’s manufacturing index dropped two points to 97, nearing the 95 mark, which indicates declining output, while staff shortages prompted a slowdown in growth in the services sector, which dominates the UK economy. “Businesses are facing an increasingly difficult winter,” said Kaley Crossthwaite, a BDO partner. “Between rising inflation and a lack of staff, 2022 could be a difficult year for companies who have been forced to prioritise short-term problems over long-term growth. At the same time, consumers are beginning to see the impact of these shortages, with rising fuel and energy prices, which may in turn lead to cutbacks in discretionary spending. “In the final months of the year, businesses and consumers alike will be hoping that the economy can find some Christmas spirit over November and December and help take us into the new year on a high.” Alongside the supply difficulties, Britain is also facing rising inflation, causing a headache for the Bank of England as it tries to balance a desire to keep prices stable without choking off the economy’s recovery. The official consumer prices index, at 3.1% in September, is well above the Bank’s 2% target. BDO’s measure of the inflationary pressures felt by businesses also rose to its highest level since April 2017, while separate data from the bank NatWest showed record input cost inflation in every region of the UK barring the West Midlands. Some City traders appeared to have been taken by surprise last week when only two of the Bank’s nine monetary policy committee members voted in favour of raising interest rates, even as it raised its forecasts for inflation to 5% in early 2022. The Bank’s governor, Andrew Bailey, was forced on Friday to explicitly say interest rates were likely to rise in the coming year. “We expect interest rates to rise and we are very clear,” he said, adding that they paused only to wait for more definite signs of inflationary wage demands. Sebastian Burnside, NatWest’s chief economist, said there were some positive signs from the UK economy, including rising economic activity in every region. However, he warned that the inflation outlook was damaging business confidence. “Signs of a pickup in activity and employment growth across many areas have been somewhat overshadowed by skyrocketing costs faced by businesses in all parts,” he said. “Businesses are having difficulty filling vacancies due to a tightening jobs market, which is not only holding back activity in some cases and contributing to rising backlogs of work but also pushing up wages. “When factoring in the surging prices of energy, raw materials and transportation, this has resulted in a cost environment unlike anything we’ve seen for at least two decades. Firms in almost every region and nation recorded unprecedented increases in their operating expenses in October.” However, the data from NatWest and BDO suggested that businesses still remain optimistic about their prospects for the coming year overall. • This article was amended on 8 November 2021. An earlier version incorrectly referred in the text and headline to business output having fallen, rather than the rate of output growth having slowed.New South Wales residents can now welcome even more guests into their homes, after Covid restrictions were further eased for fully vaccinated people in the state. From Monday, with the state’s double-dose vaccination coverage set to pass 90% for people aged 16 and over, the density rule dictating gathering limits increased to one person per 2 sq metres, up from one person per 4 sq metres, for indoor settings. Here are all the new changes that take effect on 8 November. Visitors There is now no limit on the number of visitors to a home, which had previously been capped. However, visitors must be fully vaccinated, and be visiting a household where everyone over 16 is fully vaccinated. Retail, hospitality and nightclubs Retail stores, gyms and personal services businesses can all operate without caps, as these settings also move to the new density rule. For pubs, bars and restaurants, in addition to moving to the one person per 2 sq metres density rules, limits on the number of people per booking at a hospitality venue have been scrapped entirely. Patrons can consume alcohol indoors or outdoors while standing or sitting, while singing and dancing is permitted indoors or outdoors, including at nightclubs. Entertainment People will also be able to gather in greater numbers outdoors, with a new limit of 1,000. Events with more than 1,000 people will require a Covid-safe plan. Entertainment venues such as stadiums, cinemas, theatres and theme parks can now operate at 100% seated capacity. Community sport is also now permitted for all fully vaccinated residents. Schools Music classes and assemblies can now resume at schools, with all year groups having returned for face to face learning. Excursions will also be allowed, with all teachers now required to be fully vaccinated. Travel Travelling between Sydney and regional NSW was allowed from the beginning of November, on the same day that quarantine for fully vaccinated international arrivals was scrapped. Weddings, funerals and places of worship Weddings can have an unlimited number of guests, in line with the new density rule of one person per 2 sq metres. Dancing is permitted and eating and drinking are allowed while standing. The same gathering rules apply for funerals. Churches and places of worship can operate with one person per 2 sq metres, with singing allowed. Unvaccinated worshippers are permitted. What about unvaccinated people in NSW? Unvaccinated residents will still be under stay-at-home orders and excluded from the above settings (except for places of worship and small funerals) until 15 December, or when the state reaches 95% double-dose vaccination coverage – whichever occurs first. At this point, the mask mandate will largely be scrapped, although masks will still be mandatory while travelling on public transport, on planes and at airports, and for front-of-house hospitality workers.More than 10 million people in the UK have had Covid vaccine top-up shots, figures show, as government sources confirmed they are looking at plans for travel restrictions on people who do not take up the booster offer. NHS figures for Sunday showed that 10,062,704 people in the UK had received a booster jab, or third shots for those with weakened immune systems, with the number in England reaching 8.5 million. The milestone follows a record day for boosters on Saturday when more than 371,000 people in England had the jabs. About 30% of over-80s and more than 60% of people aged 50 and over have yet to receive the extra doses, however. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, urged people to take up the offer of booster shots when they became eligible, describing the push as a “national mission” that would help the country “avoid a return to restrictions and enjoy Christmas”. In a move that may further drive booster uptake, No 10 sources confirmed that ministers were considering a change in the rules on travel so that eligible people who had turned down a third dose would face quarantine and testing if they went abroad. The change was said not to be imminent. This month official guidance was updated to say government was “reviewing the implications and requirements of boosters for international travel certification” and “looking at whether and how booster vaccinations could be included in the NHS Covid pass for travel”. Currently, all over-50s, health and social care workers, and people who are clinically vulnerable are able to receive boosters six months after their second dose. On Monday, the booking system will change to allow people to arrange their appointment a month before they have the shot. John Roberts, a member of the Covid-19 Actuaries Response Group, said while the number of people becoming eligible for booster shots was still growing faster than boosters were being delivered, the situation had improved in the past week. “The really positive thing is the change that allows people to book their booster up to a month early. That will make a really big difference to things over the next few weeks,” he said. “I’ve been worried that we wouldn’t get all priority groups done before Christmas mixing takes place but I think this will make a big difference. “The important thing for me is the number who are being jabbed is growing. The weekly rate is up to 1.8 million now, and I think we’ll see quite a step forward over the next two to three weeks as people take advantage of being able to book in advance. The only caution is we seem to be struggling to get some of the over-80s boosted and I think maybe these people are less mobile, and may rely on their GP contacting them and to go to a centre very close to them.” Vaccines are highly effective at preventing hospitalisations and deaths but protection wanes over time, particularly in elderly people and at-risk groups. The booster programme aims to top up people’s immunity before an expected rise in cases in winter. Evidence from Public Health England shows that protection against hospitalisation falls from 95% to 75% in the five months after the second shot of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and from 99% to 95% for the Pfizer/BioNTech shot. Even small falls can have a major impact on hospitals, with a change from 95% to 90% protection against hospitalisation doubling the number of admissions in those vaccinated. It comes as the NHS is to receive £250m over the next year to help digitise scans, checks and test results so they can be shared more easily across computer systems in hospitals, labs and GP surgeries. The Department of Health said on Monday the funds would drive up efficiency, allow staff to do perform more diagnostic tests and scans, and so better tackle the healthcare backlog. The new technology was recommended last year in an independent review of NHS diagnostics by Prof Mike Richards. It will allow imaging specialists to view scans or X-rays remotely, without needing to be in an imaging lab, while further tools aim to help GPs order the most suitable scans based on their patients’ symptoms and medical history. The announcement follows the £2.3bn pledged for the NHS over the next three years in the latest Spending Review, which aims to improve diagnostic services with at least 100 community diagnostic centres across England.It’s usually rain that stops play in New Zealand, but on Sunday it was the unfamiliar sight of a swarm of bees that brought a halt to the cricket being played at Wellington’s Basin Reserve. Players and umpires dropped like flies as they took cover from the descending bees on the relative safety of the oval’s turf on the opening day of the Plunket Shield match between Wellington and Canterbury. The invasion caused a brief intermission in the 22nd over but play resumed shortly afterwards and the day ended with Wellington on 102-8 in reply to Canterbury’s 156, trailing by 54 runs. It is not the first time a swarm of bees has interrupted a cricket match. International cricket has also been stung in the past – in 2017 South African beekeepers came to the rescue during a one-day international against Sri Lanka in Johannesburg, while another match between the same two sides was interrupted at the 2019 Cricket World Cup. But it is believed to be the first time a top-level domestic match has been affected by the insects in New Zealand. “It was definitely a first [for me],” Wellington coach Glenn Pocknall said. “I was on the other side of the ground with [batting coach] Doug Watson and we saw everyone drop and we weren’t really sure what was going on. “After 30 or 40 seconds between us we figured out there were some bees out there floating around. It’s nothing I’ve ever seen at the Basin, which is bizarre.”That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for now. Keep up to date with all the latest Covid developments by following along here. And don’t forget to join us when we launch the blog a little later. Until then stay safe wherever you are in the world. US lifts bans on travel from specific countries from Monday, allowing in international travellers, but they must be vaccinated. The US is also reopening the land borders with Canada and Mexico for vaccinated people. Germany reports 23,543 new cases in the past 24 hours. Russia and Ukraine hit record Covid numbers. Low vaccination rates are a major factor in the sharp rise in cases. Australia will begin administering booster shots of Pfizer’s Covid vaccine from Monday amid an accelerating immunisation drive against the coronavirus. More than 10 million people have had Covid booster jabs in the UK, according to new figures, as people were told to get their top-up to help prevent restrictions this Christmas. Northern Ireland’s health minister is suing Van Morrison after the singer accused him of being “very dangerous” over his handling of Covid restrictions. UK government could restrict travel for people who refuse Covid boosters as government sources confirmed they are looking at plans for travel restrictions on people who do not take up the booster offer. The UK will start to roll out Merck’s molnupiravir Covid-19 antiviral pill through a drug trial later this month, Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser at the UK Health Security Agency said on Sunday. US president Joe Biden is pushing forward with an ambitious plan to require millions of private sector employees to get vaccinated by early next year, while simultaneously battling to convince workers in his own federal government to get the shot. Russia’s Covid-19 cases hit another one-day record over the weekend as the country struggles to contain a month-long wave of infections and deaths. The national coronavirus task force on Saturday reported 41,335 new cases since the previous day, exceeding the previous daily record of 40,993 from 31 October. The task force said 1,188 people with Covid-19 died, just seven fewer than the daily death record reported Thursday. Officials cite Russia’s low vaccination rate as a major factor in the sharp rise in cases that began in mid-September. A similar story is playing out in the Ukraine where the country has been inundated by coronavirus infections in recent weeks, putting the country’s underfunded medical system under severe strain. The health ministry on Saturday reported a one-day record of 793 deaths from Covid-19 and 25,063 new infections. Although four different coronavirus vaccines are available in Ukraine, only 17.9% of the country’s 41 million people have been fully vaccinated, the second-lowest rate in Europe after Armenia. Hi there I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking over from my colleague Tom Ambrose for the next short while. First up, some Covid numbers out of Australia where I’m reporting to you from. The state of Victoria has just recorded 1,126 local Covid-19 cases and five deaths. The NSW numbers are in and the state has recorded just 187 cases overnight and seven deaths. And a woman who lied on a border form is reportedly the source of the three-person cluster which triggered a lockdown in Katherine, Northern Territory. Australia will begin administering booster shots of Pfizer’s Covid vaccine from Monday as millions in its largest city, Sydney, woke up to more freedom amid an accelerating immunisation drive against the coronavirus. Australia’s vaccination rate has picked up pace since July, after widely missing its initial targets, when its southeast was hit by a third wave of infections triggered by the highly infectious Delta variant forcing months-long lockdowns. Sydney and Melbourne, its largest cities and worst hit by the Delta wave, have been racing through their inoculations before gradually relaxing restrictions, Reuters reported. Life will return close to normal on Monday in New South Wales, home to Sydney, as the state nears its 90% dual-dose vaccinations in people above 16. There will be no limit on the number of fully vaccinated guests at homes, while restaurants and entertainment venues can allow more patrons. Stadiums can operate at full capacity as organisers look to get more fans for the soccer World Cup qualifier between Australia and Saudi Arabia on Thursday. Amid a vaccine-driven shift to more freedom, Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt said more than 173,000 booster shots have already been administered in aged care centres and for some health workers ahead of Monday’s formal rollout. “So we are off to a flying start ... it’s a great start and good news for Australians,” Hunt told Seven News on Monday. The booster doses will be given to people 18 and over who took their second shot more than six months ago. Double-dose vaccination levels in Australia topped 80% over the weekend. A senior doctor has urged pregnant women to get the Covid vaccine “as soon as you can” to protect themselves and their baby. Professor Adam Finn, a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, told BBC News that unvaccinated pregnant women should not “defer the vaccination until after the pregnancy has ended but to get vaccinated while they are pregnant”. His call came as the family of a woman who died last week before getting the chance to hold her new-born daughter made their own plea for people to get the jab, PA Media reported. Prof Finn told the BBC: We now recognise that pregnant women are really at very substantially higher risk of getting seriously ill as compared to women of the same age who are not pregnant, and of course that increases the risk of premature delivery and the risks for the child. So pregnant women wherever you are in your pregnancy, come forward, get vaccinated and protect yourself and your baby as soon as you can. There are no described risks and very large numbers of pregnant women have now received these vaccines without any report of lost pregnancies or damage or injury to the foetus. So far no evidence at all of any risks of the vaccine, but lots of evidence of real risk of the infection. Northern Ireland’s health minister is suing Van Morrison after the singer accused him of being “very dangerous” over his handling of Covid restrictions. Robin Swann’s legal action relates to a well-publicised appearance by the musician at the Europa hotel in Belfast in June. Morrison criticised the Ulster Unionist party minister after the last-minute cancellation of his show. Video of the incident went viral after Morrison called the Democratic Unionist MP Ian Paisley on to the stage to join him in chants. Paisley has since described it as “parody” and said he did not believe Swann was dangerous. Four gigs scheduled by Morrison, including one at the Europa hotel, were cancelled at the 11th hour as live music was still not permitted under Covid restrictions. The management of the hotel blamed confusion by Stormont ministers for the late notice, believing they had been given the green light to proceed. A few weeks later, Morrison said he would challenge the Northern Irish government in court over its “blanket ban” on live music in licensed venues. According to reports, Swann began defamation proceedings earlier this year that also cite two subsequent incidents when the singer elaborated on his views on Swann. More than 10 million people have had Covid booster jabs in the UK, according to new figures, as people were told to get their top-up to help prevent restrictions this Christmas. Prime minister Boris Johnson said the milestone was “amazing” as he warned boosters will be “vital” to keep “you and your loved ones protected through the winter”. The prime minister tweeted: An amazing 10 million people across the UK have already come forward for their booster. We know vaccine immunity wanes over time, so boosters are vital in keeping you and your loved ones protected through the winter. Please get this lifesaving jab as soon as you are called. In total, 10,062,704 people in the UK have received a top-up jab, according to the government, with 409,663 receiving one on Saturday. But about 30% of over-80s and 40% of over-50s in England are yet to receive a booster shot of vaccine, the Department of Health and Social Care said. My colleague Mark Brown has an interesting piece this evening on the importance of pregnant women getting the vaccine. Here is an excerpt: She was eight months pregnant and weeks from welcoming her fifth daughter to the world, but Saiqa Parveen died of Covid after putting off getting the coronavirus jab. Her family have now issued an emotional plea for pregnant women to get vaccinated. Parveen, 37, had planned to delay having the jab until her baby was born, her family said, but she was admitted to hospital with breathing difficulties in September and put on a ventilator. A decision was taken by medical staff at Good Hope hospital in Sutton Coldfield, Birmingham, to deliver the baby by emergency caesarean section. Parveen died on 1 November after spending five weeks in intensive care. She never got the chance to meet her newborn baby, her fifth daughter, named Dua Maryam. Her husband, Majid Ghafur, a 40-year-old taxi driver, is now caring for all five girls. He told Sky News: “She didn’t even know if she’d had a baby girl or a boy. It was just shocking. She didn’t have a chance to talk to me, five minutes even, to tell me about the daughters, you know, what to do.” Asked what her last words were, Gahfur said: “She couldn’t even talk. She couldn’t breathe properly … She couldn’t talk.” He added: “I’m going to pass this message to the whole world, I just beg all people to get the vaccine, otherwise it’s very hard for them. It’s a very deadly disease, you know. She planned so many things, and this disease didn’t give her a chance.” Parveen’s brother Qayoum Mughal told the BBC his family had “lost everything”. He described how his sister had received a letter offering the vaccine, but told her family: “It’s too late now. When I’ve had my baby, I will get my vaccine.” “But she didn’t get the chance,” he said. See below for the full story. More than 10 million people in the UK have had Covid vaccine top-up shots, figures show, as government sources confirmed they are looking at plans for travel restrictions on people who do not take up the booster offer. NHS figures for Sunday showed that 10,062,704 people in the UK had received a booster jab, or third shots for those with weakened immune systems, with the number in England reaching 8.5 million. The milestone follows a record day for boosters on Saturday when more than 371,000 people in England had the jabs. About 30% of over-80s and more than 60% of people aged 50 and over have yet to receive the extra doses, however. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, urged people to take up the offer of booster shots when they became eligible, describing the push as a “national mission” that would help the country “avoid a return to restrictions and enjoy Christmas”. The Texas senator Ted Cruz led conservatives in condemnation of a much-loved public figure for advocating Covid-19 vaccinations for children. Big Bird. This week saw final US approval for five- to 11-year-olds to receive the Pfizer-BioNTech Covid vaccine. Sesame Street, which has offered Covid advice before, duly deployed its popular characters to encourage parents to protect their children. Big Bird, who despite his vast size and to some slightly overbearing mien is according to the beloved show perpetually six-and-a-half-years-old, announced on Saturday that he had been vaccinated. “I got the Covid-19 vaccine today!” the hulkingly benevolent yellow avian announced, using an appropriate communications platform, Twitter. “My wing is feeling a little sore, but it’ll give my body an extra protective boost that keeps me and others healthy. [CNN reporter] Erica Hill even said I’ve been getting vaccines since I was a little bird. I had no idea!” Cruz responded: “Government propaganda … for your 5 year old!” Other rightwingers piled in. Lisa Boothe, a Fox News contributor, said “brainwashing children who are not at risk from Covid” was “twisted”. To read the full story, see below. Worldwide Covid cases were approaching 250 million as the surge from the Delta variant eases and more normal trade and tourism resume. However, some countries in eastern Europe are experiencing record outbreaks. Over the last three months, the daily average number of cases has fallen by 36%, according to a Reuters analysis. Even though the spread has slowed, the virus is still infecting 50 million people every 90 days due to the highly transmissible Delta variant, the analysis showed. It took nearly a year to record the first 50 million Covid cases. Health experts are optimistic that many nations have put the worst of the pandemic behind them thanks to vaccines and natural exposure, although they caution that colder weather and upcoming holiday gatherings could increase cases. “We think between now and the end of 2022, this is the point where we get control over this virus ... where we can significantly reduce severe disease and death,” Maria Van Kerkhove, an epidemiologist leading the World Health Organisation, told Reuters. Here is a round-up of all the day’s top Covid stories so far: In the UK, a further 62 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid as of Sunday, bringing the country’s total to 141,805. As of 9am on Sunday, there had been a further 30,305 lab-confirmed Covid cases in the UK, the government said. A record 371,339 of booster jabs were administered on Saturday, NHS England said. The figure is 12.4% higher than the 330,445 recorded on 31 October, the previous highest day. A member of Sage, the UK’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, has said the British government’s “plan B” to control the spread of coronavirus is still “very much in consideration”. The UK will start to roll out Merck’s molnupiravir Covid-19 antiviral pill through a drug trial later this month, Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser at the UK Health Security Agency said on Sunday. Three million more people in England will be invited to have their coronavirus booster jabs next week, with the British health minister Sajid Javid urging the elderly and vulnerable to take up the offer so they can “enjoy Christmas”. US president Joe Biden is pushing forward with an ambitious plan to require millions of private sector employees to get vaccinated by early next year, while simultaneously battling to convince workers in his own federal government to get the shot. Italy reported 26 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday compared with 31 the day before, the health ministry said. Covid-19 infections are increasing in Hungary, and have been for weeks, with 4,106 new infections reported on average each day. That’s 44% of the peak, the highest daily average reported on 26 March, according to the Reuters Covid-19 tracker. Russia reported 1,178 deaths from Covid-19 over the past 24 hours, as well as 39,165 fresh infections. Covid infections in Germany have risen sharply again, with 23,543 new cases reported within one day. Stay tuned for more coronavirus news as it comes this evening and, of course, feel free to tweet me @tomambrose89. Italy reported 26 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday compared with 31 the day before, the health ministry said. It reported 5,822 new infections, down from 6,764 a day earlier. With 4.81 million cases to date, Italy has registered 132,391 deaths linked to Covid since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain, and the ninth-highest in the world. The number of patients in hospital with Covid – not including those in intensive care – stood at 3,215 on Sunday, up from 3,173 a day earlier. There were 26 new admissions to intensive care units, compared with 23 on Saturday. The total number of intensive care patients rose slightly to 398 from a previous 392. A total of 434,771 tests for Covid were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 491,962, the health ministry said. Good afternoon, I’m Tom Ambrose and will be seeing you through the rest of today’s Covid news from home and abroad. We start with the news that in the UK, a further 62 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid as of Sunday, bringing the country’s total to 141,805. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 166,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate. As of 9am on Sunday, there had been a further 30,305 lab-confirmed Covid cases in the UK, the government said. A further four deaths of people who had previously tested positive for Covid-19 have been reported in Northern Ireland. The Department of Health said there had also been another 1,035 positive cases of the virus confirmed in the last 24-hour reporting period. US president Joe Biden is pushing forward with an ambitious plan to require millions of private sector employees to get vaccinated by early next year, while simultaneously battling to convince workers in his own federal government to get the shot. About 70% of American adults are fully vaccinated and 80% have received at least one dose of a vaccine. The Associated Press reports: About 4 million federal workers are to be vaccinated by 22 November under the president’s executive order. Some employees, like those at the White House, are nearly all vaccinated. But the rates are lower at other federal agencies, particularly those related to law enforcement and intelligence, according to the agencies and union leaders. And some resistant workers are digging in, filing lawsuits and protesting what they say is unfair overreach by the White House. The upcoming deadline is the first test of Biden’s push to compel people to get vaccinated. Beyond the federal worker rule, another mandate will take effect in January aimed at around 84 million private sector workers, according to guidelines put out this past week. On Saturday, a federal appeals court in Louisiana temporarily halted the vaccine requirement for businesses with 100 or more workers. The administration says it is confident that the requirement will withstand legal challenges in part because its safety rules preempt state laws. If the mandates are a success, they could make the most serious dent in new coronavirus cases since the vaccine first became available, especially with the news this past week that children ages 5-11 can get the shot making an additional 64 million people eligible. But with two weeks remaining until the federal worker deadline, some leaders of unions representing the employees say that convincing the unvaccinated to change their mind is increasingly challenging. [...] Vaccines have a proven track record of safety, backed by clinical trials and independent reviews showing them overwhelmingly effective at preventing serious illness and death from Covid-19. More than 222 million Americans have received at least one vaccine dose and more than 193 million are fully vaccinated. More than half of the world population has also received a shot. Hospitals in Bosnia are bracing for a new wave of Covid in the Balkan nation that was already among the hardest hit European countries earlier in the pandemic. In the north-western town of Banja Luka, staff at the Covid-19 ward of the city’s main hospital warned that hospitalisations had increased in the past days and could explode soon, AP reported. Out of the hospital’s 300-bed capacity for Covid-19 patients, 223 were already filled on Friday, including 32 in intensive care. On Saturday, reports emerged that Bosnia’s only certified medicinal oxygen filling plant has been forced to close due to severe flash flooding, which caused power outages in most of the capital of Sarajevo. The oxygen plant is crucial for the treatment of the country’s seriously ill Covid-19 patients, CGTN reported. The country of 3.5 million has one of the lowest vaccination rates in Europe, struggling to reach 20%. On Friday, it reported 1,100 new daily infections and 32 deaths. A record 371,339 of booster jabs were administered on Saturday, NHS England said. The figure is 12.4% higher than the 330,445 recorded on 31 October, which was the previous highest day. Dr Nikki Kanani, NHS deputy vaccination programme lead and GP, said: The NHS Covid vaccination programme, the biggest and fastest in health service history, continues to go from strength to strength with another record day for boosters. More than 371,000 people were recorded as receiving a top-up yesterday, meaning almost 8.5 million have received one in the seven weeks since the latest phase of the programme launched. With winter fast approaching I would urge anyone who has not yet had a booster – or indeed a first or second dose – to not delay but take up the offer to protect themselves, their family and their friends. People can now walk-in without an appointment to get their top-up vaccination and from tomorrow can book in an appointment a month in advance of becoming eligible – so there is no excuse to not get the lifesaving vaccine and people should do so as soon as they can. Hospitals in England are already at peak winter levels for bed occupancy, according to NHS bosses who fear the health service will come under severe pressure in the months ahead, my colleague Ian Sample writes. The chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents England’s 240 NHS trusts, said the situation was unprecedented and “very worrying” as exhausted hospital staff prepare for higher levels of Covid and other respiratory infections such as influenza, while dealing with a backlog of care for patients. “What’s very, very striking in talking to our trust chief executives is how worried some of the very long term leaders, who’ve been around a long time, are at this point. What they are saying to us is they’ve never been so worried,” Chris Hopson told Times Radio on Sunday. Full story here. A member of Sage, the UK’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, has said the British government’s “plan B” to control the spread of coronavirus is still “very much in consideration”. Prof Dame Anne Johnson, president of Academy of Medical Sciences, was asked if the government was right to not go to plan B this winter. She told LBC: I think plan B is still very much, as I understand it, plan B is still in consideration. We’re only at the beginning of winter and I think if we want to avoid any restrictions in the future, or indeed reduce the damage, we need to think about all the things that we can do, which include not just vaccinating, which is very important, but also going to isolate when we’re sick, get tested. A lot of people get infected in their homes, trying to reduce transmission. So, all these things we can continue to do, and all those things are going to reduce the risk of having to go to plan B. Treasury documents that were leaked to Politico have suggested that a return to home working, a key element of Boris Johnson’s “plan B”, would cause up to £18bn of damage to the UK economy over five months. Here an update on the global pandemic situation from AFP: On Saturday, 6,306 new deaths and 411,296 new cases were recorded worldwide. Based on latest reports, the countries with the most new deaths were Russia with 1,179 new deaths, followed by India with 506 and Ukraine with 449. The US is the worst-affected country, with 754,279 deaths from 46,461,779 cases. After the US, the hardest-hit countries are Brazil with 609,388 deaths from 21,874,324 cases, India with 460,791 deaths from 34,355,536 cases, Mexico with 289,674 deaths from 3,825,404 cases, and Russia with 246,814 deaths from 8,795,095 cases. The country with the highest number of deaths compared with its population is Peru, with 608 fatalities per 100,000 inhabitants, followed by Bulgaria with 359, Bosnia-Herzegovina with 357, Republic of North Macedonia with 346, Montenegro with 342, and Hungary with 323. Latin America and the Caribbean overall has 1,525,388 deaths from 46,084,819 cases, Europe 1,424,434 deaths from 76,202,176 infections, and Asia 876,875 deaths from 56,130,911 cases. The US and Canada has reported 783,411 deaths from 48,189,463 cases, Africa 219,336 deaths from 8,531,449 cases, the Middle East 209,980 deaths from 14,024,411 cases, and Oceania 2,906 deaths from 267,951 cases. The UK will start to roll out Merck’s molnupiravir Covid-19 antiviral pill through a drug trial later this month, Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser at the UK Health Security Agency said on Sunday. This from Reuters: Last week, Britain became the first country in the world to approve the potentially game-changing Covid-19 antiviral pill, jointly developed by US-based Merck &amp; Co Inc and Ridgeback Biotherapeutics. The government said in October it had secured 480,000 courses of the Merck drug, as well as 250,000 courses of an antiviral pill developed by Pfizer Inc. Asked about the molnupiravir approval, Hopkins told BBC television: “That is great news and it will start to be rolled out through a drug trial in the end of this month/the beginning of December.” Hopkins said all the trials so far had been done with the unvaccinated, so this would help understand how it will work in the wider vaccinated population. “The new Pfizer drug is probably not going to be licensed until the new year some time,” she added. “It is still likely to be a couple of months away.” Covid-19 infections are increasing in Hungary, and have been for weeks, with 4,106 new infections reported on average each day. That’s 44% of the peak, the highest daily average reported on 26 March, according to the Reuters Covid-19 Tracker. Hungary’s employees at state institutions are now required to be vaccinated, while the government announced last week that private company employers will also be empowered to make Covid-19 jabs mandatory for employees if they believe that is necessary. Mask wearing has been mandatory on public transport from 1 November. Hungary has administered at least 12,744,317 doses of Covid vaccines so far. Assuming every person needs 2 doses, that’s enough to have vaccinated about 65.2% of the country’s population. Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser at the UK Health Security Agency, has said while the Covid-19 booster rollout was going well, she is urging more people to come forward to get their top-up jabs. Speaking on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show, she said: There’s over 60% of the population that are being offered boosters [who] are taking it up. I think it’s slower than we saw in the first round. I think that may be due to people thinking they’re already protected, which is why we’re giving a lot of public health messages about why it’s so important for them to come forward for that third dose. Hopkins said the peak number of new cases was on 18 October, with nearly 58,000 people being diagnosed. She said that while the UK is now at the flattening of the peak, the country could still stay at a “very, very high level like this, which will mean that we have deaths that could be prevented by vaccination”. Asked who was dying as a result of contracting Covid-19, Dr Hopkins said: The people who are dying are the same people who have died all the way through. It is particularly the older age groups, so the over-70s in particular, but also those who are clinically vulnerable, extremely vulnerable, and have underlying medical conditions. She said there are still deaths in the elderly population due to about 5% of those remaining unvaccinated and the waning effects of the vaccine on those who have been jabbed. Acoording to the government’s latest vaccine surveillance report published this week, 2,032 double-vaccinated individuals over 70 have died, and more than 3,000 from the same age group were hospitalised despite having had both jabs. Dr Hopkins added that while it is too early to say the virus has nowhere else to go, its changes are likely to be “smaller and more incremental from here on in”. Outlining if she thinks this will be the last Christmas where people will be wearing face masks, Dr Hopkins said: Hopefully this will be the last Christmas where we have to think that way. I think we’ll know much more when we get to the spring and as time goes on. I do think, though, that this is going to be part of our endemic seasonal influenza and other respiratory viruses. Russia reported 1,178 deaths from Covid-19 over the past 24 hours, as well as 39,165 fresh infections. Infections have been climbing steadily since mid-September, when daily new confirmed infections per million people stood at 122.44 on 12 September. This value reached 269.71 on Saturday, according to Oxford University’s Our World in Data database. On Saturday, the country recorded 41,335 new infections, its highest ever daily tally, despite president Vladimir Putin having declared a circuit breaker holiday period from 30 October to 7 November to curb infections. The chief executive of NHS Providers has described how he believes the Covid pandemic will soon be considered endemic and “draconian” lockdowns should be avoided. Chris Hopson told Times Radio: I think all of us in the NHS recognise that we are now moving from a situation of a pandemic towards an endemic where we need to live with Covid. Everybody in the NHS absolutely recognises that it’s our job to cope as best we can with Covid pressures, without resorting to the very draconian lockdowns that we’ve had to go through before. He added NHS staff recognise the “impact” of jabs as vaccinated people are less likely to be admitted to hospital or die. “The NHS needs to do absolutely everything it can to avoid having to call on measures to restrict social contact because of the impact of those measures,” he said. Long waiting times in emergency departments in England are becoming normal, with some patients spending days in A&amp;E wards before they can be moved into other hospital beds, emergency physicians have warned, my colleagues James Tapper and Toby Helm write. Leaders of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM) and the Society for Acute Medicine (SAM) said that some hospitals had effectively run out of space, meaning patients could not receive the right care until a bed became free. NHS figures for September show that 5,025 patients waited for more than 12 hours to be admitted to hospital in England. That is only 1% of the 506,916 admitted via A&amp;Es, but it is more than 10 times as many as the 458 waiting more than 12 hours in September 2019 and nearly twice as many as the January peak of 2,847. Read the full story here: Covid infections in Germany have risen sharply again, with 23,543 new cases reported within one day. The nationwide seven-day incidence also increased significantly, with the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) saying on Sunday the number of new infections per 100,000 inhabitants now stands at 191.5. The previous day the incidence was 183.7, and a week ago it was 149.4. Last month it had been 62.6. On Friday, the number of new infections reached 37,120, a record high since the pandemic began. A week ago, 16,887 new cases were recorded. Thirty-seven new deaths were recorded across Germany within 24 hours. A week ago there were 33 deaths. The number of patients admitted to clinics with Covid-19 per 100,000 inhabitants over the past seven days – the most important parameter for a possible tightening of the country’s coronavirus restrictions – was 3.91 on Friday and has not been updated since. On Thursday, it had been 3.73. The previous high was around 15.5 last Christmas. Three million more people in England will be invited to have their coronavirus booster jabs next week, with the British health minister Sajid Javid urging the elderly and vulnerable to take up the offer so they can “enjoy Christmas”. NHS England will be inviting those who had their second dose more than five months ago, meaning they can receive their top-up as soon as it has been six months since their last vaccine, PA Media reports. Government guidelines state that people who are 50 and over, or aged 16 and over with a health condition that puts them at high risk of contracting Covid-19, and had their second dose six months ago are eligible to get their booster. So far almost 10 million people in the UK have received a top-up jab, but about 30% of over-80s and 40% of over-50s in England are yet to receive a booster shot of vaccine, the Department of Health and Social Care said. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said younger relatives should urge eligible parents and grandparents to take up the offer of a booster and the flu vaccine. He said that if “we all come together and play our part” then the country can “avoid a return to restrictions and enjoy Christmas”. He said: Almost 10 million people in the UK have received their Covid-19 booster and third jabs, a phenomenal achievement in under two months. As we approach this milestone, I want to thank those who have come forward and urge everybody across the nation to get vaccinated, get protected and get boosted. We know immunity begins to wane after six months, especially for the elderly and the vulnerable, and booster vaccines will top-up their protection to keep people safe over the winter. I strongly urge everybody who is eligible for a Covid-19 booster or flu vaccine to take up the offer as soon as you can. For those not yet eligible, please help your parents, grandparents or vulnerable loved ones get their jabs, it could save their life. And if you haven’t yet had your first and second vaccines, it is not too late, the NHS will always be there to welcome you with open arms. This truly is a national mission. If we all come together and play our part, we can get through this challenging winter, avoid a return to restrictions and enjoy Christmas. NHS England said eight million people were vaccinated by Saturday out of 12 million people that have been invited. By next week, 16 million invitations for a booster will have been sent since the NHS booster programme began. People who have not received their invitation can book an appointment on the NHS website or call 119. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be at the helm of our global coronavirus blog for the next few hours. The city of Sydney will further ease social distancing curbs on Monday, a month after it started easing out of a coronavirus lockdown that lasted nearly 100 days, as close to 90% of people have got both vaccine doses. Although limited to people who are fully inoculated, the relaxation in the state of New South Wales, home to Sydney, lifts limits on house guests or outdoor gatherings, among other measures, Reuters reports. “We’re leading the nation out of the pandemic,” said state premier Dominic Perrottet, as he called for a “final push” to reach, and even surpass, a milestone of 95% vaccinations. Australia eased its strict border curbs for international travel on Monday for the first time during the pandemic, but only for its vaccinated public from states with high levels of inoculation. The south-eastern state of Victoria recorded the majority of Australia’s 1,417 new coronavirus cases, with public health figures showing 10 more deaths. There were no new infections in the remote Northern Territory, where a snap lockdown was extended until midnight on Monday to tackle a small outbreak in some areas. Australia crossed the 80% mark of full inoculations on Saturday. “That should give us all confidence in terms of opening up,” federal finance minister Simon Birmingham told broadcaster Channel 9 in an interview on Sunday. Domestic travel is still tightly regulated, as most states and territories keep internal borders shut. Western Australia state will reopen when it hits the 90% level of double vaccine doses, its premier said. So far, Australia has recorded a comparatively low overall infection tally of just over 180,000 cases and 1,597 deaths in total. Feel free to get in touch to flag any updates you think might be relevant for our coverage, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me.Astronomers have detected a record number of gravitational waves, in a discovery they say will shed light on the evolution of the universe, and the life and death of stars. An international team of scientists have made 35 new observations of gravitational waves, which brings the total number of detections since 2015 to 90. Gravitational waves are ripples in the fabric of spacetime, created by massive cosmic events – such as pairs of black holes smashing together – up to billions of light years away. Waves from these cataclysmic collisions were detected by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (Ligo) observatory in the US and the Virgo instrument in Italy between November 2019 and March 2020. The first detection of gravitational waves, announced in 2016, confirmed a prediction Albert Einstein made a century earlier based on his general theory of relativity. Monash University researcher Shanika Galaudage, a collaborator in the Australian branch of the project known as OzGrav, described gravitational waves as a game-changing “new window into the universe”. “Gravitational waves are not [electromagnetic] light,” Galaudage said. “We can see things that are invisible, such as binary black hole mergers.” Of the 35 new detections, 32 likely resulted from pairs of black holes merging. Notable discoveries included two massive pairs of black holes orbiting each other – one pair that was 145 times as heavy as the mass of the sun, and the other 112 times. The scientists also discovered a “light” pair of black holes with a combined mass only 18 times that of the sun. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Two of the 35 detections are believed to have originated from a neutron star merging with a black hole. Neutron stars are small, incredibly dense objects: although they weigh around 1.4 times the mass of the sun, they are city-sized, with a radius of approximately 15km, said research collaborator Prof Susan Scott, of the Australian National University. Scott said the detections were helping scientists understand both the evolution of the universe and also the nature of stellar objects. The number of recent detections were up tenfold from when the Ligo and Virgo instruments first started observing for gravitational waves, Scott said. She attributed the increase to upgrades in the detecting instruments, such as an improvement in laser power. “Eventually as we make the detectors even more sensitive, we’ll be able to see all the binary black hole pairs coming together throughout the whole universe,” Scott said. “Neutron stars when they collide – they don’t create as strong gravitational waves as the black holes because they’re not as dense, and therefore we can’t see them out as far.” In future, astronomers may also be able to detect gravitational waves from stars as they become supernovae. “This would help us to understand the process of stars when they finish their life cycle and run out of fuel and blow up and then collapse,” Scott said. Analysing certain properties of the mergers allowed scientists to determine how they were formed, Galaudage said. “By looking at how a black hole is spinning, for example – how fast it’s spinning, versus … which way it’s pointed – can tell us more about how it came to be: whether these black holes lived their lives apart and met at some point or whether they were stars to begin with, and then collapsed down [separately] to form black holes, and then went on to merge and produce these gravitational waves,” she said. Some of the new detections are still mysterious. The researchers believe the 35th event could be either a pair of black holes, or a merger between a black hole and a neutron star. The lighter object in this event had a mass greater than would be usual for a neutron star, but smaller than that of a black hole. “We’re seeing features … that we cannot explain yet,” Galaudage said.Severe thunderstorm warnings are again in place for large parts of Australia this week, with already “saturated” soil bringing a higher chance of flash flooding in hard-hit areas. Bureau of Meteorology senior meteorologist Sarah Scully said it would be an “exceptionally wet and stormy week” across eastern and central Australia and extending down to southern Western Australia. In south-east Australia, temperatures are forecast to be between six and 16 degrees below the seasonal average, with snow above 1,000 metres expected in New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania as the cold front continues. In Melbourne, showers are expected from Wednesday through to Sunday, with a peak of up to 30mm of rainfall expected on Friday along with southerly winds of between 25 and 45km an hour. Possible showers are expected in Sydney from Monday, with the chance of a thunderstorm and up to 10mm of rainfall on Wednesday and Thursday before a gradual easing in time for the weekend. “We’re forecasting weekly rainfall totals in excess of 50 to 100mm, depending where thunderstorms fall, with showers and storms on the east coast and throughout Queensland and the Northern Territory down into southern Western Australia, and across parts of inland South Australia,” Scully said. Scully said there would be the potential for “severe thunderstorms”, including hail and damaging winds stretching from south-east Queensland to north-east NSW and the Northern Territory from Monday afternoon. “From Tuesday a low pressure system will bring tropical moisture from Western Australia, and by Wednesday rain will develop extending from central Australia through Queensland and NSW, with the potential for severe thunder,” she said. “On Thursday, the low pressure system will travel eastwards, and by Friday it will be over eastern Victoria and south-east NSW, with the potential for heavy rain across the region.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Scully said high rainfall in areas that already had “well above” average moisture content would bring a greater risk of flash flooding. Large areas of eastern Australia were already “near saturated,” she said, with current flood warnings in place across Queensland, NSW, the Northern Territory and SA. “The grounds are so saturated, and there’s so much moisture in the air,” she said. “I’d expect more flood warnings to be issued ahead of the developing event. “With potentially heavy rain developing throughout week, and the soil saturated, it’s important to take extra care on flooded roads in particularly hazardous conditions. Don’t leave it to chance, pull over and wait for it to recede.” The potential for severe thunderstorms across parts of the country will remain in place all week until a drier air mass begins to push into western Australia by Friday. It won’t reach the eastern parts of the country until the weekend. Scully said a higher than average sea temperature in the north was contributing to high humidity and moisture, driving the continued wet weather and placing the bureau on “high alert” to declare La Nina in the coming days. The risk of La Nina developing jumped from 50% to 70% this month – roughly three times the likelihood of the event occurring in a normal year. Scully said it would bring above average rainfall and lower temperatures on the east coast throughout spring and into summer. “Expect lower maximum temperatures if we move to La Nina,” she said. “But so much cloud coverage and rainfall will help to prevent bushfires coming into summer.”“Cross me and I’ll kill ya,” says a steely Molly Johnson as she grips and aims her shotgun in the first act of Leah Purcell’s riveting debut feature film, The Drover’s Wife: The Legend of Molly Johnson. In her postcolonial reworking of Henry Lawson’s 1892 short story, being unsparing is a necessary trait for survival. The film’s take on the western is a chance to squarely point a bullet right between the eyes of the whitewashed Australian outback fable. It’s 1893, and up high in the New South Wales Snowy Mountains lives heavily pregnant Molly (as well as starring as the hardened bushwoman, Purcell wrote and directed the film) in a shoddy hut with her four young children. Her husband Joe is often away for months droving sheep, but Molly is fiercely protective in his absence: at the first sign of a threat she’s in front of her hut, gun cocked. This is the third time Purcell has adapted Lawson’s colonial classic about a nameless wife waiting, against the harsh frontier of the Australian bushland, with her dog “Alligator” for her husband to return. It follows on from her award-winning 2016 Belvoir Street Theatre play and subsequent 2019 novel of the same name. In rewriting Lawson’s colonial classic, Purcell was inspired by her own lived experiences and ancestral history, and she has used the original story as a basis for her own clear-eyed reimagining through an Indigenous feminist lens. In this third – cinematic – incarnation, Purcell’s supreme acting takes centre stage (the weary flickers of her facial expressions clue us into the deep anguish of Molly’s past), and while the adaptation is ambitious, it is at times tonally misguided. As in all three of Purcell’s adaptions, she has fleshed out the existing characters from Lawson’s story and created new ones along the way – with varying results. There’s the introduction of Louisa (Jessica De Gouw), the London-bred wife of a new lawmaker Sergeant Nate Clintoff (Sam Reid), who writes in the town’s magazine on “battered women’s” rights; and a fugitive Aboriginal man, Yadaka (Rob Collins), who stumbles on to Molly’s farm, a character fleetingly painted in Lawson’s prose as a deceptive, silly figure, but in Purcell’s script plays a pivotal, hero-like role to the Johnson family. As in Warwick Thornton’s 2017 film Sweet Country and Jennifer Kent’s 2019 The Nightingale, Purcell’s revisionist period drama is unflinching in depicting the harsh realities of justice for Indigenous people in the late 19th century. Purcell’s version leaves few notes of subtlety to decipher Molly’s brutal struggles in this dry bush environment, foregrounding issues of small-town racism and domestic violence with a searing, albeit heavy-handed, touch. The relationship between Yadaka and Molly is the film’s most moving, as the pair slowly gain each another’s trust: she uneasily removes his neck shackle, and later he reveals knowledge about her blood lineage that opens up the truth of her cultural identity. With the film’s visual metaphors and inclination to veer towards melodrama, it’s easy to picture Purcell’s story working more successfully on stage, or through first-person reflections in its novel format. The screen adaptation is stunning in visual scale, but doesn’t quite locate the fine balance needed to juggle the theatricality of the drama and the action-packed tropes of the western thriller. The underdeveloped storylines barrel towards a rushed third act, as the rousing suspicions increase around the mysterious disappearance of Molly’s husband, and Nate opens up an investigation into the murder of a neighbouring drover and wife. The secondary drama unfolding in the rural town of Everton, which involves Louisa’s progressive politics on women’s rights and Nate’s gradual villainous turn, aren’t afforded the proper time to deftly intertwine with Molly’s plight for survival in the mountains. Purcell’s directorial grasp is much more confident in the overall look of the film, rendering it a majestic cinematic quality against the story’s intensifying violence. Cinematographer Mark Wareham indulges in the romantic backdrop of the Australian alpine ranges and never-ending skylines, switching comfortably to capture the stuffy, smoky interiors of Everton. Salliana Seven Campbell’s jangly piano and violin-dominant score often intrudes over the film’s quieter moments, but is more effective in adding sweeping scope to the imagery, while providing a lumbering menace to the threats coming Molly’s way. But it’s Purcell’s powerhouse performance that lends the film its punchier, gritty edge. In the press notes, the writer-director-actor muses on the film having its “own Songline” – with her spiritual force passing down the stories and cultural practice of ancient traditions. Although the screen adaptation doesn’t always hit the mark, Purcell has now completed the “trilogy” of The Drover’s Wife with vigour, and in turn has reclaimed Molly Johnson as her own. The Drover’s Wife: The Legend of Molly Johnson is screening at the Sydney film festivalAt a beachside bar at the southern tip of Taiwan, a handful of visitors in swimwear and bare feet mill around the open air deck, enjoying the warm midweek night, cheap beer, lack of crowds, and zero Covid. The bar’s owner, in between serving drinks, says domestic tourism to the surf village of South Bay, is booming, but the custom is concentrated on the weekends. There are no international visitors to fill tables during the week, let alone to make up for a difficult three months of forced shutdown during the summer outbreak of Covid. She says the business has also been affected by supply chain issues – a knock-on effect of the pandemic – and has been unable to buy basics such as mayonnaise or tortillas. “It’s crazy – I haven’t found it in three months.” The scene sums up the mixed fortunes of Taiwan, as the rest of the world opens up but the island remains firmly closed. ‘There is a price’ For the first 18 months of the coronavirus pandemic, life in Taiwan was blessed. As cities locked down across China, Europe and Asia, and death tolls climbed into the millions, Taiwan was safe, vibrant, almost normal. Thanks to a strategy of case prevention and swift elimination, it recorded a relatively low 16,430 cases – mostly imported and detected in quarantine – and 847 deaths. But now, as the world begins opening up, having accepted coexistence with the virus while mitigating it with high vaccination rates and other measures, Taiwan risks being left behind. Almost two years after Covid first emerged, the island has held tight to the measures that made it an early success – closed borders, strict quarantine, intensive case tracing and widespread mandatory mask-wearing. And there is little sign of these requirements ending. The island is now among a few holdouts – alongside China and Hong Kong – that are resisting rejoining the post-Covid world and wrestling with what that means for the economy and the public. The restricted borders have crushed international tourism, hindered trade and exacerbated supply chain issues. Airmail services to and from several countries are suspended. Families have been separated, livelihoods hurt. Throughout the pandemic tourists and other non-residents have been banned from entry, including the foreign partners and children of Taiwan residents. Authorities recently lifted the ban, but it only applied to the families of Taiwanese citizens, not foreign residents. “Being unable to be with the one you love is really, really hard,” said French national, Clement Potier, whose partner is stuck overseas. The partial lift was even harder to swallow, he told local media, because “you see that it could be possible, but not for you”. In 2019 there were more than 29 million international arrivals in Taiwan. In 2020, during the height of the pandemic and prior to vaccines, the figure dropped to 3.9 million. So far this year there have been just 335,000. “How long can you maintain it? There’s a price for it,” says Prof Chunhuei Chi, the director of Oregon State University’s centre for global health. “Taiwan sacrificed international collaboration in commerce and exchange.” In July, the Economist Intelligence Unit said the Zero Covid approach used in Asian countries “has delivered both health and economic benefits, and has been popular where implemented”. “If the rest of the world had adopted a similar approach, zero‑Covid might prove a sustainable strategy,” it said. But they hadn’t, and the policy “will become unviable as the global economy reopens”, the report found. Some Taiwan-based businesses relying on the global market have begun looking at moving manufacturing on the island, given there is no indication when the problems will ease, because there is no clear roadmap being presented to residents. Currently all entrants must quarantine in designated hotels or government facilities, and then spend another week “self managing” limited isolation. Home quarantine ended after it was linked to Taiwan’s only significant Delta outbreak in Pingtung county, and observers don’t see it returning soon. ‘We must wait until the virus becomes mild’ A primary factor in Taiwan’s continued closure is its struggle to match international vaccination rates, especially in second doses. A drive to deliver Moderna doses to some sector workers saw delivery of second shots, which are recommended at 28 days by the WHO, delayed to at least 12 weeks, with some recipients forced to cold-call hospitals around Taiwan looking for doses. A combination of under-ordered supplies, global shortages, and foreign interference by China, means Taiwan’s vaccination program has been largely propped up by significant but inconsistent donations, and lately its own domestically developed vaccine. About 73% of people in Taiwan had received at least one dose – with the highest proportions among the elderly – and just over one-third has received their second dose. The government says it’s on track to meet its 60% target by year’s end, when they will consider unspecified future changes. Politics is also a factor, says Prof Chi. With local elections on the horizon, Chi predicts the DPP will wait to open borders because of the high chance any outbreak will be used by the opposition KMT to criticise the government. “It cannot afford any new outbreak,” he says. In September the central epidemic command centre (CECC) told the Guardian Covid Zero was not its target but they were heading in that direction. Asked in parliament last month if their plan was for Covid zero or coexistence, health minister Chen Shih-chung appeared to say both. “The current goal is to achieve Covid-19 zero, but Taiwan must also be prepared to coexist with Covid-19,” he said, suggesting they were hoping the virus eventually lessened in severity. In October, special adviser to the CECC, professor Lee Ping-ing, appeared to suggest that would take three years. “We must wait until the virus becomes mild and the human immune system can adjust before it can start coexisting with the virus,” he said. Observers note readying the public is a key issue for the short term if Taiwan is to open up, in order to address strong fear and significant stigma attached to infections. “Even if Taiwan had 70% of the population who received two doses, it is still worrying to think of opening up,” said one resident on Taiwan’s social media platform PTT, saying other countries have become accustomed to the pandemic. “Taiwanese are afraid of death and opening after vaccination. They still hesitate.” Prof Steve Tsang, of the SOAS Institute, said he understands why the government is going slow, “but it will have to accept that we will have to live with Covid now, and the Zero Covid policy is not sustainable”. “It may well need more time to increase the rate of vaccination before it can relax substantially the travel restrictions, but it should provide clear guidelines on the criteria for doing so.”Sun damage can also seriously affect our eyes. Yet only about half of Australians say they always wear sunglasses when they’re outside, according to research conducted by Specsavers.Australia is hit by more solar energy than any other continent on earth. And while we’re raised on a diet of “Slip, Slop, Slap, Seek, Slide”, at least two-thirds of us will be diagnosed with skin cancer before we turn 70. Sun damage can also seriously affect our eyes. Yet only about half of Australians say they always wear sunglasses when they’re outside, according to research conducted by Specsavers. The science behind sun protection has come a long way since the early days of “no hat, no play”. Our defences against UV damage are always improving, and it’s time to make sure you’re doing the best you can to keep every part of your body safe in the sun. Sunscreen is only part of being sun smart Lathering on a thick layer of sunscreen at the beach feels more like sun protection than it really is, says Dr Linda Martin, a doctor with Melanoma Institute Australia. She says the more critical aspects are keeping out of the sun altogether or, if it’s unavoidable, putting as many barriers as possible between us and UV rays. “The most important parts of sun protection are behavioural: walking in the shade, not going out in the midday sun, and wearing appropriate clothes and hats,” Martin says. That means wearing a hat that protects our ears, face and neck, tops and pants that cover our skin, and well-fitted sunglasses. “Sun protection is wearing long-sleeved clothing and a hat, and sitting in the shade.” There are different types of sun damage Spending time in the sun without protection has short- and long-term risks. Sunburn exposes us to pigmentation changes, such as age spots and freckles, and signs of premature ageing, such as decreased elasticity, dryness and uneven skin texture. “But the long-term risks are getting cancer,” Martin says. “The common skin cancers are BCC (basal cell carcinoma), SCC (squamous cell carcinoma) and actinic keratosis. But, while rare, there are also more deadly skin cancers, like melanoma.” Our eyes can be affected in different ways, too. Simon Kelly, an optometrist at Specsavers, says we also need to be thinking about protecting the whole eye, not just the iris. “The skin on the eyelid is particularly thin and a very common place for eye cancers,” he says. “Other sun-related issues that can affect the quality of our vision are cataracts, pterygiums – a fatty growth that can spread to the cornea – and macular degeneration.” Your eyes need sun protection, too Choosing the right eye care is critical to getting the right level of protection. “There are different types of sun protection,” Kelly says. “Polarised is recommended by the Cancer Council for good reason – because the light that bounces off things and gets under our natural defence mechanisms, like the eyebrow, can get into our eyes and cause damage. Polarisation cuts out that bounce and glare.” Always think about sun protection for your eyes, no matter how long you’re planning to be outdoors or what the weather is like. Kelly says we should be choosing sunglasses that are big enough to cover the eyes and the skin around them, and that wrap around the side to try as much light as possible from getting in. He says we need to look for regulated products that are fit for purpose, not just fashion sunnies that look good but don’t offer any protection. “Sometimes people have got vision problems, and they might need prescription sunglasses. Some people don’t like to wear sunglasses because they can’t see as well, or because they’re looking through a darker lens, but it’s often because their eyes are out of focus. All they need to do is get prescription sunnies.” Prevention is the best defence Martin and Kelly both say we should always be thinking about sun protection for our eyes, no matter how long we’re planning to be outdoors or what the weather is like. “Sun protection should be considered on all occasions,” Martin says. “One thing to remember is that the visible light – the brightness of the day and heat – are separate from UV radiation. Just because it’s hot doesn’t mean there’s high UV and vice versa.” The World Health Organisation recommends that sun protection should be considered when the UV index is greater than 3. But Martin says the need for protection also depends on skin colour and the duration of exposure, and we should always err on the side of caution. The effects of UV damage might not show up until years later Starting good sun protection habits early can save lives. We have a significantly increased chance of developing melanoma if we were sunburnt as children and teenagers. We have a significantly increased chance of developing melanoma if we were sunburnt as children and teenagers. Teaching our children to cover up properly, apply and reapply sunscreen, wear the right sunglasses and avoid midday sun can protect them from deadly cancers and other sun-related conditions later in life. For the rest of us, choosing the best sun protection every day – even if we’re only outdoors for a moment – is the best way to minimise long-term damage and stay healthy. Specsavers optometrists are encouraging all Aussies to be sun smart as we head into warmer weather, and to visit an optometrist for a routine eye test or if they have any concerns about their eyes. To book your appointment or for more information visit here.Australia did not get the same impact from their French foreign legion as their Japan-based teammates in their defeat to Scotland at Murrayfield, but the Wallabies should persevere with overseas selections. With Quade Cooper, Samu Kerevi and Sean McMahon “defecting”, in coach Dave Rennie’s language, to rejoin their Japanese clubs, France-based second-rowers Rory Arnold and Will Skelton and utility back Kurtley Beale were included for the three-Test tour of Britain. Cooper and Kerevi, in particular, were influential in the Wallabies’ success against South Africa and Argentina in the Rugby Championship, but Arnold, Skelton and Beale could not help Australia avoid a third-straight loss to the Scots, which snapped Australia’s five-game winning streak. Arnold, who started the match, was a commanding presence in the lineout, which had been an area of concern for the Wallabies, but he was relatively quiet in general play, although he was more involved as the game progressed. Skelton replaced Arnold in the 50th minute with the Wallabies leading 10-7 after trailing 7-3 at half-time. While Skelton made a few strong ball carries and was busy around the ruck and maul, he did not deliver any of his trademark offloads, which could have sparked the Wallabies’ attack. But Skelton did make his considerable presence felt in one crucial area – the scrum. By the time Skelton entered the game, the Wallabies had conceded four scrum penalties to one, their set-piece badly disrupted by the loss of their two tight-head props Allan Alaalatoa (sin bin) and Taniela Tupou (head bin). They were forced to play veteran loose-head prop James Slipper at tight-head and rookie Angus Bell at loose-head until Alaalatoa returned to the field, but they were under pressure on both sides of the scrum. Trailing by three points midway through the second-half, Scotland passed up two potentially equalising shots at penalty goals to opt for five metre scrums, leading to replacement hooker Ewan Ashman’s acrobatic try in the left corner in the 58th minute. But with the 140kg Skelton pushing in the second-row the Wallabies forced Scotland’s scrum to collapse in the 74th minute and received a penalty. With the strong-scrummaging Tupou in doubt for the Wallabies’ Test against England on Sunday morning (Australian time), Rennie must seriously consider starting Skelton to prevent Australia’s scrum from being smashed. Beale came on at fullback in the 66th minute with Andrew Kellaway moving to the wing to replace the substituted Tom Wright. The Wallabies led 13-12. With his first touch Beale took a high ball and beat two defenders, looking like the “excitement machine” of old. But he committed two errors which marred his game – when he was held up in a tackle by the Scottish backrow in the 72nd minute, giving Scotland a scrum feed and then when he kicked the ball out on the full in the 78th minute to gift the Scots a lineout 23 metres from the Australian line, enabling them to close out the game. The Wallabies should have had the game completely under control well before Skelton and Beale came onto the field, but undermined themselves with ill-discipline and lack of accuracy. While the Australians were frustrated by some of French referee Romain Poite’s interpretations, they only had themselves to blame for the loss. In the opening minute outside-centre Len Ikitau needlessly flicked a reverse pass in Scotland’s 22 which ended up in Scottish hands, setting the tone for a looseness in the Wallabies’ play. It was just one of a number of missed opportunities. Inside-centre Hunter Paisami was penalised for an extra roll after being tackled just short in the Scottish line; Wright was over the try-line, but called back after Paisami was penalised for an illegal clean-out; and Alaalatoa was yellow-carded for clumsily connecting with Scotland number eight Matt Fagerson’s head in a clean-out just metres from the try-line. The Wallabies should have had more than 20 points on the scoreboard at half-time, but left them on the field. Both teams attempted to play an expansive, up tempo game, but without Cooper and Kerevi, the Wallabies’ attack lacked cohesion and penetration and they struggled to utilise the width of the field in attack. Winger Jordan Petaia did not receive his first touch of the ball until the 38th minute and then went off after being injured in the tackle. As was the case earlier in the international season, the Wallabies seemed betwixt between when to run the ball and when to kick it. A perfect, or perhaps imperfect, example was when the Wallabies were in possession just outside their 22 midway through the first-half. Under instructions to play for field position, five-eighth James O’Connor kicked down field seemingly unaware that the Wallabies had seven attacking players on two defenders on his right hand side. It is important to execute the game-plan, but it is equally vital to see and take opportunities when they arise. It was the Wallabies’ seventh straight loss against British and Irish opposition. The Australians will need to improve markedly when they play England or Eddie Jones’s men will make sure they have an unsuccessful tour.Pressure on the Australian government to lift its 2030 emissions target is expected to escalate and continue into next year, based on a document released by the British hosts at the Glasgow climate summit. A summary of issues to be negotiated in the second week of the Cop26 talks includes a push for countries that have not improved their short-term targets to be told they are expected to do so in 2022. Australia was one of the few countries to not increase its short-term pledge – formally known as a nationally determined contribution (NDC) – before or at the summit, rejecting direct calls from allies in Britain, the US, Europe and the Pacific. The Morrison government instead re-submitted the 2030 target set under Tony Abbott before the landmark Paris agreement was signed in 2015 – a 26-28% cut compared to 2005 levels. Others to not update include were Russia and Brazil. Countries are expected to “ratchet up” their commitments every five years to build action and momentum towards global carbon neutrality. This year the US doubled its 2030 target, other G7 members all set goals of at least a 40% cut and India said it would have 50% renewable energy. China offered a more modest increase. On Sunday, the British environment secretary, George Eustice, said the UK may eventually need to introduce a carbon border tax, placing a levy on imported goods from countries without a carbon price. He said this could particularly apply to meat imports. The European Union is proposing a similar carbon border tariff and US Democrats have raised a similar idea. A former Australian climate diplomat now with the Australia Institute, Richie Merzian, said Australia was “under increasing pressure along with some other laggards”. “It’s clear that its attempts to get away with a weak net zero plan have failed and the international community is asking for an immediate increase in effort and target in the short-term,” he said. There have been varying estimates of how substantial the new commitments could be in limiting emissions. Some studies have found that, if delivered, they could keep heating to below 2C above pre-industrial levels. But a United Nations assessment found they would still lead to global emissions rising 13.7% by 2030. Scientists have called for emissions to be cut roughly in half by the end of the decade to keep alive the chance of limiting global heating to 1.5C, which the scientific consensus has marked as a threshold to limit the impact of worsening heatwaves and extreme events and give coral reefs and at-risk species a chance of survival. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The British government’s summary document of issues to be debated this week emphasises the “importance of keeping 1.5 degrees in reach” – a potential strengthening of the language of the Paris agreement, which said that countries would “pursue efforts” to stay at that level. Some countries are arguing the agreement should be accelerated so that NDCs are updated every year. The summary document also shows the disquiet over the delay in reaching a commitment of US$100bn funding for climate finance for the developing and worst affected nations, which was meant to be met last year. It says countries have expressed “deep concern” that the goal has not yet been met. A recent UN report suggested it should be reached by 2023. The US special climate envoy, John Kerry, said in Glasgow it could be delivered in 2022. Scott Morrison has announced an additional $500m climate finance commitment over five years, less than many comparable countries. A Greenpeace investigation last week found fewer than a quarter of designated Australian climate aid projects actually made any mention of climate change or environmental concerns.A nurse in Western Australia has been charged after allegedly faking the Covid-19 vaccination of the teenage child of someone she knows. The 51-year-old registered nurse was arrested and charged with gains benefit by fraud on Sunday after the Perth medical centre where she worked reported her to WA police. Police say the nurse was approved by her employer to administer Covid-19 vaccines to people she knows, and on Sunday, the teenage child of an acquaintance was booked to be vaccinated at the clinic. It is alleged after the Covid-19 vaccine needle was inserted into the teenager’s arm by the nurse, she failed to inject the liquid, and then disposed of the vaccine, and made a medical record falsely claiming the teenager had received a dose of the Covid-19 vaccine. The alleged false injection was picked up by a doctor at the practice who observed the process, as per the medical centre’s standard policy for Covid-19 vaccination. Police also allege the nurse put another employee at the centre’s name as having administered the vaccine, rather than her. After the medical centre reported her to police, she was arrested in Byford, and charged with one count of gains benefit by fraud. The nurse was refused bail and is set to appear in the Perth magistrates court on Monday. WA police say the investigation is ongoing. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It is the first report of alleged faking of a Covid-19 vaccination in Australia. In Germany in August it was reported a nurse in Friesland – a rural district near the North Sea coast – had allegedly injected 8,600 residents with a saline solution rather than the Covid-19 vaccine. Police in the Germany case said at the time her motives were not clear, but said in social media posts the nurse had expressed scepticism about vaccination. Western Australia is furthest behind the vaccination rollout in any state or territory in Australia, with 66.5% of the population 16 years and over having had both doses, compared to 80.5% as the national average. The WA government last week announced it would not ease its strong border controls until 90% of the population 12 years and over has received two vaccine doses.The Christchurch mosque terrorist has filed complaints alleging that his treatment in New Zealand custody – including the refusal to refer to him by name – constituted a violation of his human rights, and that his guilty pleas were obtained under duress. Brenton Tarrant, an Australian white supremacist who murdered 51 people in an attack on two Christchurch mosques in March 2019, said via a memorandum from his lawyer Dr Tony Ellis that his guilty pleas were obtained under duress due to mistreatment in custody. He was sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole in August 2020. Ellis told local media outlets that he expected the gunman, Tarrant, to file an appeal against his convictions. In the wake of the attacks, prime minister Jacinda Ardern vowed she would never say the attacker’s name, and many other government bodies followed her lead. “He sought many things from his act of terror but one was notoriety, that is why you will never hear me mention his name,” Ardern said of the gunman at the time. “He is a terrorist. He is a criminal. He is an extremist. But he will, when I speak, be nameless. … He may have sought notoriety but we, in New Zealand, will give nothing – not even his name.” Imam Gamal Fouda, the imam of one of the mosques at the centre of the attacks, said the terrorist was “grandstanding” and attempting to further traumatise the families of those who he killed. “I believe this unnamed terrorist wishes to become famous and [is] grandstanding, especially with the coroner’s inquiry due in early December this year,” he said. “This situation is causing further trauma to the whānau (families), and the terrorist should not be given the opportunity to re-traumatise all of us as New Zealanders.” “I fully support what the New Zealand courts have done, and I request that all media whether in New Zealand or overseas do not provide the terrorist with any voice. I believe they should continue to disregard his name.” “I don’t know how he can appeal it because he already admitted to what he’s done,” said Rashid Omar, whose son Tariq Omar was killed in the attacks, and who is co-chair of the 15th March Whānau Trust. “If it’s going to go ahead, it’s going to recreate all the trauma that we had. And I think that’s what he enjoys, what he wants us to feel – to go back to day one again, after two and a half years.” The coroner’s office would not release the memo on Monday, saying in a written statement that “Chief Coroner Judge Marshall makes no comment in this matter,” and said the memo could be requested from Tarrant’s lawyer. Ellis declined to comment to the Guardian on the memo or to provide its full text, and said Tarrant had released it to only two local media outlets. According to RNZ, one of the media outlets given the memo, Tarrant says he pleaded guilty to the charges because of the inhumane and degrading treatment he experienced while awaiting trial. He has been held in near 24-hour solitary confinement, and has highly limited access to news. Ellis also alleged his client had had correspondence withheld, including letters from the coroner and copies of the royal commission of inquiry. “He sent me about 15 pages of narrative of how he had been treated since he’d been in prison,” Ellis told RNZ. “He said because of how he was treated while he was awaiting trial and afterwards, [that affected] his will to carry on and he decided that the simplest way out was to plead guilty.” “By this, he means he was subject to inhuman or degrading treatment whilst on remand, which prevented a fair trial.” According to the outlets provided with the memo, Ellis writes that the chief coroner’s refusal to use Tarrant’s name – instead referring to him repeatedly as “the individual,” was a serious breach of human rights and an attempt render the offender a “non-person”, failed to provide him equal protection and equal treatment before the law and was “deeply offensive and unlawful”. In both the royal commission’s full report into the attack and the coroner’s 47-page scope of inquiry, the terrorist is never referred to by name, only as “the individual”. “What we’ve been doing, calling him ‘an individual’ is very, very polite,” Omar said. “To me [he] is nothing. He’s not even a human being. So I still call him ‘it’ – he doesn’t deserve any name at all.”Medical professionals have lashed out at Flight Centre’s threat to launch legal action against the Western Australian government’s ongoing border restrictions, calling on the company to “pull its head in”. Flight Centre is claiming it will sue if the state’s domestic and international borders don’t reopen in line with the national plan, when Western Australia reaches 70 to 80% vaccination targets. Flight Centre’s chief executive, Graham Turner, said he believed his legal team had a “reasonable chance of success” and he would know his course of action by the end of the week. “The economic fallout is one thing – if you look at tourism, hospitality and travel, airlines have been badly hit, farmers have been hit,” he said. “It’s just one of the states but it represents quite a big business ... it has an impact on us, as it does on a lot of businesses. “But the other aspect is relatives ... the people with family interstate who can’t visit for Christmas, it’s a long time waiting. Australia has a constitution for a good reason, we’re a democracy, we should be able to travel freely.” Turner said he’d been contemplating a legal course of action for “some time” but had been waiting for Western Australia to announce its reopening plan before deciding the “best course”. Under premier Mark McGowan’s transition plan, the border will remain closed until at least late January, when 90% of people aged 12 and above are vaccinated. McGowan has said the threshold, which depends on a further 250,000 West Australians getting vaccinated, will save 200 lives. Turner said his legal team would have a greater chance of success than billionaire Clive Palmer’s failed high court challenge, which attempted to draw upon section 92 of the constitution to argue interstate movement should be “absolutely free”. Last year, the court unanimously agreed the border policy was not discriminatory and was justified by the level of risk associated with the Covid-19 pandemic. Turner said his challenge would be “different to the Palmer case” as he would lead a judicial review in federal court to prove the border directions were unreasonable, and circumstances had changed since the vaccination rollout. “We have other backers in travel and tourism ... and we believe we can act along to get things moving. The state has to open some time, whether it’s 80% or 90% that doesn’t make a difference, and our experts will be able to show that,” he said. West Australian branch of the Australian Medical Association president, Mark Duncan-Smith, said if Flight Centre were to take legal action against the Western Australian government, he would “never [step] foot in another store again”. “The threats constitute a company that has a focus on profits and not people, and would damage their business reputation in Western Australia immeasurably,” he said. “The arrogance that the people who run Flight Centre think they know better than the government, when they have all the modelling, is to me unbelievable … they need to pull their head in. Duncan-Smith said while there could be some “nuances” with respect to the state’s reopening, he was broadly supportive of the West Australian government’s roadmap. “We would see excessive disease and deaths from opening at 70% or 80% … and that’s consistent with ANU and UWA modelling which showed, aspiration-wise, you should only open up at 90%,” he said. “We have the lowest number of public hospital and intensive care beds of any state or territory, a medical system with no reserves. We will be more easily overrun than New South Wales or Victoria, who are already tinkering on the edge of being overrun. “The fewer cases we get the better, hundreds of cases a day, not thousands or our medical system would be overrun.” While the Doherty Institute’s modelling is based on vaccination targets of 16-year-olds and above, Western Australia’s reopening requires 90% of people aged 12 and over to be vaccinated before reopening. “We haven’t had a single community death, we’re effectively Covid free … things are booming,” Duncan-Smith said. “We’re inviting a killer disease into the state. Of course we have to eventually, but we’re going from completely normal life to restrictions, that has to be understood.” McGowan said he acknowledged some people would be “frustrated” they wouldn’t be able to reunite with family over Christmas. “But as difficult as it is, it’s for the right reasons,” he said. “The difference in easing border controls at 90% rather than 80% is 200 West Australian lives are saved.”Restrictions for fully vaccinated residents of New South Wales eased further from Monday 8 November. There are now no limits on the number of visitors to your home, or limits for hospitality venues and major recreation and entertainment facilities. Travel restrictions between greater Sydney and regional NSW, as well as the end of quarantine for international arrivals, were eased from the beginning of November. NSW eased more Covid restrictions for fully vaccinated people on 8 November. What are the new freedoms? However the date that unvaccinated residents can rejoin society has been pushed back further, to when the state hits a 95% double dose rate, or December 15, whichever comes sooner. Here is everything you need to know about the plan. What changed on 1 November? From 1 November, caps on bookings for hospitality venues were lifted. Travel between Greater Sydney and regional NSW also resumed. Intrastate travel was initially slated for 80% vaccination targets, but was delayed to allow time for regional NSW vaccination rates to increase. Quarantine requirements were also removed as well as caps for overseas arrivals, provided they are fully vaccinated with a TGA-approved, Commonwealth recognised vaccine and receive a Covid-19 test prior to flying. Overseas arrivals who are not fully vaccinated are capped at 210 people per week, and will be required to complete 14 days quarantine. What changed from 8 November? On Monday 8 November, the following settings applied to fully vaccinated residents. Gatherings in the home and outdoor public spaces No limit on the number of visitors to a home. Density will shift to one person per 2 sq m for indoor and outdoor settings. No limit on the number of people who can attend informal outdoor gatherings. Covid-safe plan required for outdoor events with more than 1,000 people. Community sport permitted for all people. Venues including hospitality, retail stores and gyms Retail stores can operate at one person per 2 sq m. Personal services such as hairdressers, spa, nail, beauty, waxing, tattoo and massage can operate with one person per 2 sq m. Hospitality venues can operate with one person per 2 sq m inside and outside, with no seating required for eating and drinking. Gyms and indoor recreation facilities, including indoor pools, can operate with one person per 2 sq m (uncapped). Intimate services can open with one person per 4 sq m. Major outdoor recreation facilities Major recreation outdoor facilities including stadiums, racecourses, theme parks and zoos can operate with one person per 2 sq m. Entertainment, information and education facilities Entertainment facilities (including cinemas, theatres, music halls) can operate with one person per 2 sq m. Information and education facilities (including libraries, museums and galleries) can operate with one person per 2 sq m. Amusement centres and nightclubs can open with one person per 4 sq m. Working from home Working from home will be at the employer’s discretion. Education All year groups continue with face-to-face learning. Weddings, funerals and places of worship One person per 2 sqm for weddings with dancing permitted and eating and drinking allowed while standing. One person per 2 sq m for funerals. Churches and places of worship can operate with one person per 2 sq m, with singing permitted. Travel Domestic travel, including trips between greater Sydney and regional NSW. International travel is permitted, with fully vaccinated travellers able to enter Sydney without quarantining provided they complete Covid-19 tests. Caravan parks and camping grounds can operate. Carpooling is permitted. Quarantine settings for vaccinated arrivals will be altered. A cap on unvaccinated travellers may remain. Masks Mask-wearing will be mandatory while travelling on public transport, on planes and at airports, and for front-of-house hospitality workers. Mask wearing is not required when outdoors. What about unvaccinated people in NSW? Unvaccinated residents will still be under stay-at-home orders and excluded from the above settings until 15 December, or when the state reaches 95% double-dose vaccination coverage – whichever occurs first. At this point, the mask mandate will be scrapped. Will overseas travel and quarantine change? Quarantine for vaccinated arrivals was lifted from 1 November. Caps were also be lifted for vaccinated travellers. Unvaccinated international arrivals still have to complete 14 days quarantine. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.A missing teenage girl was rescued in the US after using a hand gesture that signals distress or domestic violence to capture the attention of a passing driver. The 16-year-old was spotted travelling inside a silver Toyota near London, Kentucky, about 150 miles south-east of Louisville, on 4 November. A driver called police after noticing “a female passenger in the vehicle making hand gestures that are known on the social media platform TikTok to represent violence at home – I need help – domestic violence,” the Laurel County Sheriff’s Office said in a statement on 6 November. The caller noted that the girl “appeared to be in distress” and was being driven by an older male. Laurel sheriff’s investigators positioned themselves to watch for the passing Toyota and intercepted the vehicle as it exited the highway. Deputies conducted a traffic stop and a subsequent investigation revealed the teenager had been reported missing by her parents days earlier. Police say the teenager told investigators that she traveled with the man through North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky and Ohio. Authorities allege she had been attempting to get motorists’ attention to call 911. Following the police stop, James Herbert Brick, 61, was arrested at the scene and charged with unlawful imprisonment, the sherrif’s office said. He remains in custody. The gesture reportedly used by the teenager to signal violence or distress is believed to have been first introduced by the Canadian Women’s Foundation last year. It has been adopted by women around the world who need to discreetly ask for help, or show they are in distress. The gesture is a hand up, palm out, with the thumb tucked, then folding the fingers down. • In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org.The low tide at Seaton Sluice has left lines in the hard-packed sand, indentations like a map of Norway, all inlets and fjords. With no water in the narrow harbour, we can enter over a curving sandbank between high bladderwracked walls. It was this propensity to silt up which led to local landowner Sir Ralph Delaval having sluice gates built in the 17th century. These closed with the incoming tide to be reopened at low water, flushing out the sand and giving the town its name. The further we get from the harbour mouth, the muddier it gets underfoot. Small boats have been left dry, their dank looped ropes attached to old tyres in the silty bottom. Their names speak of people, and I wonder who they were: Donna J, Elsie Eira, Wendy G, My Girl, Wor Ted. Inland, the Seaton Burn turns sharply northwards towards the harbour entrance. By 1764 a new channel had been blasted through the land, creating The Cut, a straighter route to the sea. Each end of The Cut could be sealed to make a wet dock of up to six metres in depth, where ships could be unloaded whatever the tide. This left a wedge of land known as Rocky Island, reached by a high footbridge. Once clustered with houses, it is now a windy knoll where yarrow, ragwort, coltsfoot and wormwood grow alongside white trumpets of bindweed and bristly burdock. Below us, on the rocks, a thickly creamy wave dislodges a gathering of oystercatchers. They fly up with peeping calls, a flash of magpie feathers and red beaks, and settle down again. Redshanks methodically work the shallows. A curlew wades a rock pool, sending out circular ripples as it probes through the water with its slender arc of a bill. Bobbing in the bay is a raft of eider ducks, affectionately known here as Cuddy’s ducks for their association with St Cuthbert, who offered them protection. Now, on the European red list of threatened species, the status of the common eider, Somateria mollissima, has just changed to endangered; this beautiful, characterful duck is common no longer. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryMore than 60% of people who visited a Melbourne vaccination centre targeting those facing disadvantage did not have a Medicare card, while about 5% were probably homeless, figures show. Data on approximately 9,100 people vaccinated at Melbourne town hall since 1 September was released by chief executive of Cohealth, Nicole Bartholomeusz, on Monday. The hub was specifically opened for some of the city’s most disadvantaged residents. Of those who used the hub, 51% were aged in their 20s or 30s, reflecting the high numbers of international students, Bartholomeusz said. Overall, 61% of people did not have a Medicare Card. About 5% were born in Australia, but did not have Medicare cards, and were likely homeless or experiencing severe disadvantage. The top five countries by birth were China, Australia, Colombia, India and Vietnam. The top three preferred languages other than English were Mandarin, Cantonese and Spanish, with 33% of those vaccinated at the hub having a preferred language other than English. “There has been an overwhelming uptake from culturally and linguistically diverse communities to access the vaccine which shows that providing a culturally safe offering combined with our community engagement approach works,” Bartholomeusz said. She said now that the vaccination centre had hit the target of reaching vulnerable community members in the city, it is offering vaccination more widely. “The vaccination centre has hit the target in reaching vulnerable community members in the CBD, and we’re excited to be opening the doors even wider as the city opens back up,” she said. From Tuesday the vaccination centre will be open to anyone who lives in, works in or visits the city, with extended hours to catch people after work. It will be open from Monday to Friday between 10am and 6pm with walk-ins and appointments available. “As workers return to the city and the shops get busier in the lead-up to Christmas, we hope to offer a convenient and welcoming health space for people who want to drop in and get their first or second jab,” Bartholomeusz said. Melbourne lord mayor, Sally Capp, said she hoped expanding the reach of the vaccination centre would help Melbourne reopen safely, and sooner. “We want to bring the buzz back to Melbourne and support our city business owners, and the best way we can do that is by hitting Victoria’s vaccination targets,” Capp said. As of Monday, 92.6% of Victorians aged 12 and over have had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, while 84.1% have had two doses. Once 90% of Victorians aged 12 and over are fully vaccinated, all gathering limits, capacity and density limits in the state will no longer apply.‘That happens in Russia, it shouldn’t happen in Britain.” These were the words of Chris Bryant, chair of the standards committee, on the events of last week, when Conservative MPs voted to reject the recommended suspension of Owen Paterson, while the government tried to change the system that had found him guilty. The sense of abhorrence is welcome, but the insinuation that it was an un-British occurrence, the kind of thing that is only supposed to happen in dark and dastardly faraway places, is disappointing. It is a common rhetorical tic in this country: the deep-seated urge to make sense of the state of British politics by invoking foreign lands, instead of looking at our political class directly in the face. What happened in Westminster was neither exceptional nor inherently foreign. It is simply what happens in all countries where the political system has, in one way or another, been captured by a small elite of political and business interests. This capturing doesn’t always announce itself through overt power grabs – both democratic and undemocratic means can be used. It can happen via military coup, the hoarding of natural resources by a ruling family, or through a born-to-rule elite riding a wave of nationalist populism into power. I have lived in countries where all three of these models have thrived and they all have the same thing in common: the concentration of influence in so few hands that the public become an afterthought to the job of doing politics. All that is required for a corruption-friendly ecosystem to prosper is for those in power to have such a strong mandate that they can start assailing political norms without fear of punishment. There is an Arabic expression that warns against the perils of an abundance of wealth: “Loose money teaches theft.” Britain has the dubious honour of being the home of the loose money of the global rich, facilitating its movement through secret offshore companies, setting up entirely legal means to profit from these opaque transactions. Taking liberties in office tends to work the same way. Loose power teaches corruption, which in turn happens through technically above-board means. That loose power broadly requires three further conditions to trigger misconduct – a craven or cowed press, a lack of what is seen as a viable political alternative and a large section of the public made quiescent, either through apathy or tribalism. Sound familiar? Welcome to the global community of those living under corrupt governance. The good news is that you are not alone. The bad news is that, once corruption starts to set in, it becomes very hard to reverse. It becomes (this will also sound familiar to you), “priced in” to people’s expectations of the political class, even institutionalised. People in those other countries – the ones you more easily associate with corruption than your own – will explain the subtle evolution: what was before a furtive cash bribe that you needed to pay for a government stamp becomes an official fee that you are handed a nice crisp receipt for. What was before an outrageous grab of power from a democratically elected government becomes a legal process blessed by an election, perhaps one even overseen by international observers. The unprincipled will not be shunned but enriched and honoured. The press will contradict what you have seen with your own eyes. Conspiracy theories will begin to flourish because everyone is in the business of making up narratives, so the truth becomes a matter of spinning and selling the most convincing lie. Ministers might even, after attempting to rig a regulatory system in their favour, tell you that their government is trying to “restore a degree of integrity and probity in public life”. It will begin to exhaust your sense of outrage and warp your sense of right and wrong. Eventually what will begin to settle is a sense that you as an individual have no control, no matter how many freedoms – voting, protesting – you feel you can exercise. Those rights will feel like levers that aren’t connected to anything. And so you give up. The main political emotion I grew up with in the Middle East and north Africa was not that of suffering oppression, but of jaundice – a sort of cultivated cynicism that protected us against the despair of life under regimes that stole from us and then remade the rules in their favour. I have felt this creeping up on me in the UK. It is an impulse that I recognise in the continuing support for the Conservatives, or the tepid resistance to them despite their proven malpractice, their endless scandals, their failure to deliver on what were once considered basic criteria for governments: that the state does everything it can to protect its citizens’ lives in a pandemic, and that most people’s material circumstances get better with time. Once the state withdraws from that role of honest broker and facilitator, the result is a fatalism: we must carry on and make do with what we have. How we think about politics in the UK is confused by exceptionalism at the best of times, and so we compare ourselves with “failed states” overseas to show that, sure, things are bad, but we are not there yet. It’s a false comfort. Corruption bores through the system and settles within it so that we don’t quite see it for what it is. So favouritism and fast-tracking when handing out Covid-related contracts is rebranded as a necessity in times of emergency. So huge donations to the Conservative party, revealed in investigations at the weekend, correlate with seats in the House of Lords (with no serious consequences likely because, as the CPS said back in 2007, “direct evidence” of an “agreement” would be needed for any prosecution). Corruption in Britain lives in plain sight; it even follows the rules. We may not be Russia, but we don’t need to be for us to be in trouble. “Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way,” Tolstoy wrote. The same applies elsewhere – every corrupt political system is corrupt in its own way. The end result, the collective unhappiness, is the same though. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistReading the full genetic code of childhood cancers can help doctors improve diagnoses, understand how tumours will grow, and find the most effective therapies, according to a pilot study. Doctors in Cambridge used whole-genome sequencing on 36 children with cancer and found that the extra information the test provided changed four of the patients’ diagnoses and revealed new treatment options in seven cases. Armed with a full readout of the cancer’s DNA, clinicians refined two of their previous diagnoses, discovered more about the likely course of disease in eight children, and found possible hereditary reasons for two of the tumours. “Our aim was to illustrate what can be achieved with whole-genome sequencing and to try and advertise its utility,” said Dr Patrick Tarpey, lead scientist for solid cancer in the east Genomic Laboratory Hub based at Cambridge University hospitals NHS foundation trust. “Locally in Cambridge it was never really in question that this would add value.” The results are to be presented on Monday at the National Cancer Research Institute festival, a virtual online conference. NHS England is rolling out whole-genome sequencing for childhood cancers with the aim of making the tests a routine part of care. The approach was introduced in the 100k genomes project, which led to the creation of seven genomic laboratory hubs, or GLHs, which serve hospitals around the country. The 36 children recruited for the study had 23 different tumour types between them. All underwent standard tests to identify their cancers, but doctors sent tumour and blood samples for additional whole-genome sequencing to see whether the approach was worthwhile. Reading the complete genetic makeup of a tumour and comparing it with the DNA of healthy tissue from the same person can flag the mutations that are driving a cancer, and potentially reveal gene variants that make the tumour susceptible to particular drugs. But while the process gives in-depth information, it is complex work and requires careful interpretation, typically taking two to three months, as opposed to the few days to weeks required for more targeted cancer tests. Tarpey said about three-quarters of the gene variants flagged up in the study came from whole-genome analysis rather than the standard cancer tests the children had. “There are cases where the diagnosis was completely uncertain and we’ve been able to confirm it, and in doing so identify the mechanisms that impaired the genes,” he said. One patient, Daniel, was 10 when he was diagnosed with a rare kidney tumour after numerous trips to A&amp;E and subsequent medical tests. His tumour looked like a type of adult kidney cancer, but was extremely difficult to diagnose. Because the cancer had spread to other parts of the body, Daniel had the organ removed followed by a year of chemotherapy and three weeks of radiotherapy to destroy the secondary tumours. As part of the pilot study, doctors used whole-genome sequencing to look more closely at Daniel’s cancer and found it was similar to Wilms’ tumour, a form of the disease that in many children can be cured with chemotherapy and radiotherapy. “The diagnosis confirmed that the clinicians had pursued the correct treatment,” said Tarpey. Daniel’s mother, Catherine, said he was now back to playing football, basketball and other sports. Sheona Scales, paediatric lead at Cancer Research UK, said children with cancer often undergo gruelling treatments and even when the treatment is successful, the side-effects can last a lifetime. “It is vital that we find ways to tailor treatments towards the individual and for this, whole-genome sequencing is a game-changer,” she said. “Understanding more about the makeup of a child’s cancer can help doctors make the most informed treatment choices for their patients. The hope is that this will lead to better outcomes for children with cancer, not just in terms of survival, but also in the quality of the rest of their lives.”The legitimacy of the Cop26 climate summit has been called into question by civil society participants who say restrictions on access to negotiations are unprecedented and unjust. As the Glasgow summit enters its second week, observers representing hundreds of environmental, academic, climate justice, indigenous and women’s rights organisations warn that excluding them from negotiating areas and speaking to negotiators could have dire consequences for millions of people. Observers act as informal watchdogs of the summit – the eyes and ears of the public during negotiations to ensure proceedings are transparent and reflect the concerns of communities and groups most likely to be affected by decisions. But their ability to observe, interact and intervene in negotiations on carbon markets, loss and damage and climate financing has been obstructed during the first week, the Guardian has been told. “Civil society voices are critical to the outcome of Cop, but we’ve not been able to do our jobs. If participation and inclusion are the measure of legitimacy, then we’re on very shaky grounds,” said Tasneem Essop, the executive director of Climate Action Network (CAN), which represents more than 1,500 organisations in over 130 countries. CAN is one of two environmental “constituencies” – loose networks of NGOs including youth groups, trade unions, indigenous peoples, business, agriculture, and gender – recognised by the UNFCCC. Gina Cortes, a member of the Women and Gender Constituency, representing women’s groups, said they also had to “call out the deep inequities and deep injustices of this Cop”. “There are thousands of activists who should be here but who are missing and there is a shocking degree of closing space for civil society and frontline voices … it is offensive, unjust and unacceptable,” said Cortes. In the run-up to Cop26, the UK government had boasted that Glasgow would be the most inclusive summit on record. In reality, about two-thirds of civil society organisations who usually send delegates to Cop have not travelled to Glasgow due to “vaccine apartheid”, changing travel rules, extortionate travel costs and Britain’s hostile immigration system. Observers say the situation was most critical during the two-day leaders’ summit at the start of last week, when they were limited to one or two tickets per constituency despite six negotiating rooms operating simultaneously. In addition, work stations, offices and restaurants were also cordoned off, preventing observers from having face-to-face contact with negotiators. “The level of restrictions was unprecedented,” said Sebastian Duyck, from the Centre for International Environmental Law. “It’s alarming, because the relationships we build at the start of Cop are crucial to the work we do after … the limited participation absolutely undermines the credibility of Cop.” Access has improved since the ticketing system was lifted, with one observer per constituency now technically allowed in each meeting room – if there’s enough spaceaccording to social distancing rules. But their ability to participate meaningfully remains limited. Observers are particularly concerned about negotiations over carbon trading protocols, as governments and corporations look for ways to achieve net zero commitments using offsets. “There’s a real risk that decisions made in these rooms will impact human rights in the most dramatic fashion, like we saw happen under the carbon trading mechanism under Kyoto. If we get a bad rule, it’s almost impossible to fix afterwards. The scale of carbon markets means there’s a greater threat to communities,” said Duyck. This is a huge worry for indigenous communities, who comprise 6% of the global population but protect 80% of the planet’s biodiversity. “Without our voices this risks the creation of rules that will continue to violate human, territorial and spiritual rights of Indigenous Peoples,” said Eriel Deranger, an observer for Indigenous Climate Action. The UK government points to the unprecedented challenges posed by the pandemic, and says access has been boosted by the new online platform that has so far been used by 12,000 people. But for some, trying to follow what’s going on virtually, technical glitches have made access a “logistical nightmare”, said Hellen Kaneni, regional Africa coordinator for the international nonprofit Corporate Accountability. “Cop has never been credible but this year it’s much worse, access has been limited in so many ways, it’s horrible.” Aderonke Ige from Corporate Accountability and Public Participation Africa, who made it to Glasgow from Nigeria for her first Cop despite the Covid restrictions, said she felt “disappointed and unfulfilled” after failing to get online and being denied access to the meeting rooms and offices of the African group negotiators. A spokesperson said: “The UK is committed to hosting an inclusive Cop. Ensuring that the voices of those most affected by climate change are heard is a priority for the Cop26 presidency, and if we are to deliver for our planet, we need all countries and civil society to continue demonstrating their ideas and ambition in Glasgow.” The success of this Cop will be judged over years to come. But according to Nathan Thanki from Demand Climate Justice (the second environmental constituency), the summit’s legitimacy had been seriously undermined by restrictions in access and the way rich countries had used Cop26 to make headline-grabbing announcements outside the UNFCCC’s pledge and review framework. “It’s impossible to monitor these announcements, which means there’s no accountability to civil society or other countries. That’s the sorry situation at this summit.”Gambling companies are among the heaviest advertisers on radio during “school run” hours when millions of children are in the car, according to research that prompted warnings about their exposure to promotions for the national lottery, online casinos and sports betting. Data shows gambling came second in a list of industries that spend the most to appear on commercial radio between 8am and 9am and from 3pm to 4pm, according to an analysis for the Guardian by market analysis firm Nielsen. The analysts found that gambling accounted for 5% of all spending during school-run hours, with about 1,200 hours of ads airing during those times over the past 12 months. The amount spent on gambling ads was exceeded only by government communications – including Covid-19 messages – and motor supplies. Nielsen does not disclose the actual spending figures because it is commercially sensitive data. Many of the adverts are for the national lottery, but ads broadcast during the school run also include spots for betting and online slot machine brands such as Gala Casino. After it was contacted by the Guardian, Entain, which owns Gala Casino, is understood to have added a stipulation to its media-buying arrangements to prevent broadcast during weekday school-run times. Government statistics suggest millions of children are likely to be in the car during the period. There are 8.9 million schoolchildren in the country and the last in-depth survey by the Department for Transport survey found that 46% of children aged 5-10, and 23% of those aged 11-16, go to school by car. Addiction experts and campaigners said the figures underscore the need for an ongoing government review of gambling regulation to take a tough stance on advertising. Heather Wardle, Lord Kelvin Adam Smith reader in social sciences at Glasgow University, said: “Commercial gambling is rightly considered an adult-only activity, yet the way it’s advertised across radio and other media makes it very difficult to protect our children from being exposed to this. “Evidence from the Gambling Commission shows that 7% of children exposed to gambling advertising said that seeing or hearing advertising prompts them to gamble when they were not planning on doing so.” Labour MP Carolyn Harris, who chairs a cross-party group examining gambling harms, called for reform of “national disgrace” advertising rules. “Until we completely overhaul their access to advertising platforms, we will continue to expose children and vulnerable adults to this unrelenting attack,” she said. The government is due to publish proposals for the reform of gambling regulation early next year. A spokesperson for the Betting and Gaming Council (BGC) said: “BGC members abide by the strict rules set down by the Advertising Standards Authority. Indeed, since the BGC began two years ago, we have introduced a number of measures to go even further than the requirements of the advertising codes developed by both the ASA and the Committees of Advertising Practice. “In addition, our members also ensure that 20% of their TV and radio ads are safer gambling messages.” A spokesperson for the national lottery operator, Camelot, said it needed to advertise at all times of the day to reach as many people as possible. “We’ve always followed strict guidelines to ensure our ads don’t appeal to children, and this has contributed to it being widely recognised that the inherent risk of unhealthy play associated with national lottery games is extremely low,” said the spokesperson.Posing expertly for Instagram snaps, a parade of young and beautiful DJs, models and socialites line up to endorse Velo, a brand of flavoured nicotine pouches made by British American Tobacco (BAT). Between them, the 26 social media influencers boast 2.2m followers, and an audience that skews young, meaning they are hard to reach through traditional advertising channels. Holding up cans of Velo to the camera, DJ GW Harrison tells his 35,000 followers: “My favourite has to be the ruby berry flavour. What’s yours?” MC and rapper Bru-C, AKA Josh Bruce, hails the “glow in the dark technology” to his 156,000-strong audience, while another DJ, Jess Bays, gushes: “Product is so cool – especially for in the clubs!” The former Made in Chelsea star Alex Mytton has posted Velo-themed videos for his 391,000 followers, while racing driver Archie Hamilton, with 207,000 followers, features in an e-sports-themed YouTube series, in association with British racing team McLaren. This new breed of nicotine influencer – one might call them nicotinfluencers – are soldiers at the UK front of a marketing war that London-based British American Tobacco has long been waging on foreign soil. Earlier this year, analysis by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism found that BAT had bet around £1bn on harnessing the popularity of influencers on TikTok, Instagram and Facebook to reach young people in countries including Pakistan, Sweden and Spain. Now BAT is deploying the same tactic to win over British hearts and minds. Velo, the product at the heart of the Instagram promotion, is a small flavoured pouch, placed between the lip and gum, that releases a hit of nicotine to satisfy cravings. According to material published on the websites of several major retailers, “You’ll feel a momentary tingling sensation, which is how you know the nicotine is released and working for you.” BAT markets Velo as a way to “move on” – an alternative to cigarettes. Yet not one of the posts from BAT’s army of nicotinfluencers mentions quitting. Indeed, critics suggest that the products are as much about recruiting new customers, pointing to BAT’s own analysis, which suggests that half of the market for the pouches comes from people who did not previously use nicotine. In a letter to the chief executives of Facebook, Instagram, TikTok and Twitter, a coalition of more than 100 health and anti-smoking groups from around the world are demanding an end to the promotion of the addictive products on social media. They point to a report by the US surgeon general, which found that nicotine use could have a negative impact on both adolescent and pre-natal brain development. The same report found “substantial evidence” that using nicotine in adolescence can increase the likelihood of nicotine addiction in adulthood. “The true intention of these ads is quite clear: to keep customers addicted to nicotine and to entice young people to try nicotine products,” said Caroline Renzulli, of the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. “Tobacco companies don’t care about your health. In fact, they don’t even care which addictive product you use, because as long as they can keep you using one, then they have a customer for life.” A BAT spokesperson said: “Our products are for adults only and we believe that youth should never use any tobacco or nicotine products. Our marketing is done responsibly, in strict accordance with our international marketing principles, our youth access prevention guidelines, legislation and the policies of social media platforms. “Our social media accounts are age-gated so they are only visible to adult users, for example in the UK market, where those users have confirmed that they are 18+, and all of our posts display the words ‘18+’ and ‘For adult nicotine consumers only’.” Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram, is investigating whether the posts conform to its guidelines, which prohibit the advertising of nicotine products. It has removed several since being contacted by the Guardian. Velo’s Instagram campaigns are aimed at over-18s and the posts make that clear. But verifying the age of Instagram users is difficult and, according to a report by social media analytics firm Klear, 35% of the audience for such posts are under 24. British American Tobacco is far from alone in leveraging the power of social media to push its products. Swedish Match, a nicotine pouch company that does not sell cigarettes, also appears to be targeting the UK with its brand, Zyn. Its glossy Facebook page makes clear that the pouches are only for “existing smokers and vapers in the UK”, although it also says that they are “not a smoking cessation product”. The Facebook campaign appears to support the notion that nicotine pouches can be used alongside tobacco, with the slogan: “Can’t smoke? Can’t vape? Can Zyn.” “We regularly review consumer engagement across social channels to ensure we are reaching the appropriate audience,” said a Zyn spokesperson. “Facebook does not receive any payment for click-throughs to ZYN.com.” A JIT spokesperson said influencers are vetted to ensure they don’t have a particular appeal to minors and that at least 75% of their audience are over 18. In some cases, tobacco products are being openly marketed on social media. Ismod UK Ltd, which sells electronic tobacco heating devices, has enlisted young fashion influencers on Instagram for its marketing. Collaborators in the UK include Furkan Usenmez, a Devon-based menswear influencer with more than 9,800 followers, and Chloe Bain, a fashion model from Swindon with 140,000 followers, as well as model Sofia Spokes, who has 145,000 followers. In the caption on her sponsored post, Bain, 27, offers a discount code that gives buyers up to 20% off. Advertising Standards Authority regulations ban under-25s from “playing a significant role” in the non-broadcast advertising of cigarette alternatives. Spokes claims in her Instagram bio to be 20 years old. In posts labelled as Ismod ads, Bain and Spokes are pictured holding the tobacco heating device in their underwear. Samer Jalloul, Ismod’s chief executive, said: “Ms Spokes’ account is managed by a third party internationally. We have, however, taken the appropriate measures to rectify the situation. “We have never paid @sofiaaspokes for advertising. We always verify that [product reviewers] are smokers and of legal age. When we had initially checked, we did see that she was over 18, but did not realise that she was under 25. “Inadvertently approving the brand content to show ‘paid partnership with’ was a mistake by a junior social media associate. We have now rectified this and ensured that this is removed and untagged accordingly.” None of the influencers contacted by the Guardian responded.This week, Starwatch is some advance warning for next week’s peak of the Leonid meteor shower. The shower is under way now as it lasts from 6 to 30 November. The peak activity this year is expected in the early morning of 17 November. The chart shows the view from London at midnight as 16 turns into 17 November. From Sydney, Australia, Leo will rise a few hours later. The Leonids take their name because they appear to radiate from a point in the constellation Leo, the lion. The radiant is situated just under the head of the lion, but do not look directly at it when searching for the shooting stars. The meteors, instead, appear in all directions around the radiant, so keep scanning the skies around this location. The meteors are best seen from the darkest location you can find but this year the light from a waxing gibbous moon will interfere, washing out some of the fainter meteors. Under perfectly dark conditions with no moon, you can expect to see about 10-15 meteors an hour. This year, the numbers will be in single figures but do not let that discourage you, patience is the key. A single bright meteor can make a memory that lasts a lifetime.Arsène Wenger knows that his love for the beautiful game is actually an all-consuming addiction. For the 34 years he spent managing football teams – 22 of them at his beloved Arsenal – he was possessed by the need to win. Little else mattered. At times this devotion produced magnificent results. At others, self-destruction. “Competition is something that eats slowly at your life and it makes of you a little monster,” he says, video calling from his office at Fifa’s Zurich headquarters, where he has worked since 2019. “That’s what I became, yes. I spent my whole life in top-level competition and it makes you slowly somebody who is psychologically obsessed and one-dimensional, someone who kicks out everything on the road that is not winning the next game.” In a new documentary about his life and career, Arsène Wenger: Invincible, the 72-year-old declares: “The meaning of my life was football. Sometimes I’m afraid of that.” “There are other important things in life – art, for example – that I didn’t explore at all,” he tells me, when I ask what’s so scary about this single-mindedness. “Maybe only geniuses can be successful in many multi-territorial things. I was not a genius; I had to dedicate my whole energy to one thing.” But there’s no denying that it worked. When Wenger came to Arsenal in 1996, the impact was almost immediate. He won the Premier League title and FA Cup in his second season, becoming the first foreign manager to win the double, then did the same again a few years later. His crowning achievement was in 2003/04, however, when Arsenal became known as the Invincibles after winning the Premier League title without losing a single game. Even his greatest rival, Sir Alex Ferguson, had to give Wenger his due, commenting: “The achievement stands aside, it stands above everything else.” Arsenal still hold the record for the longest unbeaten run in league history, at 49 matches. Two years before the Invincible season, Wenger had announced that he thought his team could do it – and been mocked for saying so. “If you don’t set high targets,” he says now, “you don’t push people to go as far as they could be.” But there were obstacles off the pitch as well as on. Wenger was one of the first foreign managers in the league, and his arrival contributed to English football’s transformation from an inward-looking monoculture to the global game it is today. The press was sceptical – “Arsène who?” asked one infamous Evening Standard headline. Winning games turned that scepticism into hostility, “a mass of negativity because he was a foreign manager and he was doing things that are different,” Arsenal legend Ian Wright claims in the documentary. It climaxed with false reports of Wenger’s dismissal and rumours that a newspaper was set to print a highly compromising story about his private life. Wenger held an impromptu press conference on the steps outside Highbury, Arsenal’s stadium at the time, and said he was ready to refute the lies. No such story was ever published. “I had enough maturity to deal with it,” says Wenger. “I think I have one quality, maybe, when I’m in adversity: I can concentrate on what is important and what is less important. At that stage, I felt surprised, but I felt: ‘Let’s do what I think I can do, which is to manage a football team.’ So I was not destabilised.” There was a marked culture shift as players started drifting in from the continent, and individual performances were bolstered by revolutionary concepts such as a healthy diet and not following Ray Parlour’s lead by sinking 10 pints the night before a match. Wenger transformed Arsenal’s style of play from one of safety first to a more expressive, improvisational attacking game – which at its peak was christened “Wengerball”. And he brought calmness to the dressing room. Wright says Wenger was the first manager he had who didn’t indiscriminately “blast you down” at half-time. “I felt always that the most important thing is that you get a good diagnosis of what’s going on,” Wenger says. “The hairdryer method [screaming at your players] is more to get your frustrations out – and it’s not very efficient. If you do that every week, people adapt to the behaviour of their manager. I thought it’s more important to be kind, master the situation and give an indication of what you should do. “I thought: ‘What is the most efficient, not what is the most spectacular?’ I have a very passionate character; when I lose it, I lose it in a dangerous way. So I learned to control myself. Because you can make mistakes when you are out of control that you cannot repair.” It bred a fierce loyalty in his players; former Arsenal midfielder Emmanuel Petit says he would have climbed Everest without oxygen for him. Others have spoken about how Wenger was a father figure to them. “I believe that players have to know that you love them,” Wenger says. “The players must feel at the start that you can be demanding, but as well they must believe that, deeply, you want to help them.” He led by example and prepared for games as if he himself was playing. He wouldn’t go out for 48 hours before a match (“Life in central London? I can watch that on television”), and knew only the triangle made by the training centre, stadium and his home in north London, where he lived with his wife, Annie Brosterhous, a former basketball player (from whom he separated in 2015) and daughter Léa. His devotion to the game – not to mention his bespectacled, scholarly appearance and academic background – earned him the nickname Le Professeur. But, for all his reserve, Wenger was never the most gracious in defeat. He thinks this profound hatred of losing may have started in the village where he was raised – Duttlenheim, near the German border in Alsace, north-eastern France – at the local Catholic church. “I was not the most patient child,” he says, remembering how he would be forced to kneel in front of the whole congregation after talking during services. Mass, being in Latin, was of little interest. “People went to my father’s pub and told him that I’d been kneeling in front of everybody again. That’s maybe where my hate for losing comes from: being humiliated.” Wenger was born in 1949, the youngest of three children. His earliest memories – aside from ignominy – are of the football pitch and the village bistro his parents owned. It was used as a clubhouse for the local team; they’d get changed there then make their way to the match. Watching the men interact in the bar and studying their behaviour was “a great psychological experience for a boy” and kindled his lifelong fascination with the human psyche. Wenger has always been very demanding of himself, for which he credits his father, Alphonse, who would never tell him: “Well done!”, only: “You can do better”. “It was the style of education at the time,” says Wenger. “Today, when you educate your children, you give them more of the drive for quality of life. The generation after the war was more ‘work hard, don’t question that’.” “In a village,” he continues, “especially in a farmers’ village, you have a long-term view. You work hard, wait and maybe you will be rewarded. That’s what the farmer’s life is about. It gives you patience and investment in long-term work.” Did any of his life’s achievements spur a “Well done!” from his father? “Never.” Not even the Invincibles? “No, it was not that kind of life. You don’t reinvent yourself at that age. He was of course very happy that things went well for me. But that was not his biggest quality, to say: ‘Well done!’ And maybe he was right, because one of the important things in life is to always try to be better.” Wenger started playing football for the village team at 12; he would take his mass book and pray before and during the games, as it was the only way he felt they could win. Though a career in football was an unconventional path, his parents were happy he pursued his passion. “I was very independent, very young,” he says. “At 19 years of age, I had never gone out of my village. After that I never came back to my village, and had a very international life.” His professional playing career was short-lived and fairly unremarkable, taking in a handful of French clubs, including Strasbourg. By his early 30s he had secured a management diploma, had graduated from Strasbourg University with a degree in economics and begun coaching the Strasbourg youth team. Managerial stints at Nancy and Monaco followed, before a brief spell in Japan at Nagoya Grampus Eight. It was a chance meeting that led him to Arsenal. He went to watch a match at Highbury and at half-time shared a cigarette with Barbara Dein, wife of David, the club’s vice-chairman. She introduced the two men, they struck up an immediate rapport, and Wenger was appointed manager in 1996. If the first half of Wenger’s reign as Arsenal manager was characterised by success, the second was more problematic. When Arsenal moved from Highbury (“my soul”) to the Emirates stadium (“my suffering”) in 2006, it left the club with a lot of debt and fewer resources to invest in the team. Arsenal endured a barren spell of nine years without a trophy. “Wenger Out” protests became depressingly frequent. Did the constant calls for his sacking ever wear him down? “No, I am quite focused on what I have to do,” he says. “I always said to the players: ‘The judgment of people depends on your performances, so that means it’s something that you can change.’ In this kind of job the assessment of other people is always overboard; it’s too high or too low. You are a genius or you are Mr Nobody, and the truth is always in between.” In March 2018 he was finally told it was over. He left in May as the club’s most successful ever manager, with three Premier League titles and seven FA Cups. Wenger wonders now if he should have left sooner: identifying with one club so fully for such a long time was, he feels, a mistake. “I didn’t even consider …” – he pauses – “I had so many offers to go elsewhere, you know, and at the end of the day it turned against me.” But he never fell out of love with Arsenal. “I will support the club until the end of my life, because I think I contributed a lot to what the club is today,” he says. “I suffered a lot. I sweat a lot for every stone that is in the stadium and I sacrificed the best years of my life to do that. So I won’t renege on that. I will support this club for ever.” He is now Fifa’s chief of global football development, where he is known for his controversial support for a biennial World Cup. He has not returned to Arsenal since leaving three years ago. Many fans (myself included) feel that is a great shame. Is there a chance he will return this year? “This season? I don’t know. Because I travel a lot, you know, and I have a very, very busy schedule. But at some stage, why not?” He could come and sit with us in the North Bank? “Yes, that’s the best place! That’s my favourite one.” But he has other priorities. Such was Wenger’s relentless focus on Arsenal, he was unable to take care of the people around him as much as he should have, including Léa, who is now in her 20s. He is now trying to repair the damage. “That’s why I told you the competition eats you slowly, because you’re less available to other people. Every passion is selfish.” Does he still carry the guilt of that selfishness? “Yes,” he says. “Less now because you put things a little bit more into perspective. I think it was Mark Twain who said: ‘There are two important days in your life: the day you were born, and the day you know why.’ And I knew, always, why. For me, it was obvious that I was [meant to be ] in football, in the competition. But of course, people around me maybe suffered from that.” If he had to do it all again, would he strike a different balance? “No,” he says. “I believe that when you have a dream in your life, you have to commit totally, completely. There are prices to pay … but there is no other way.” Wenger described leaving Arsenal as like witnessing his own funeral, such was the intensity with which his life’s work was eulogised. But his enduring feeling is joy, not mourning. “Yes, I’m happy and content,” he says. “I have some days when I’m less happy and some days when I’m more happy … But if happiness is to lead the life you want to lead, then yes, I am happy.” Arsène Wenger: Invincible is in cinemas from 11 November and on Blu-ray, DVD and Digital on 22 NovemberTikTok and telly go together like Ant and Dec before the drink-driving ban. Most obviously, TikTok is good for reliving highlights from daytime and reality shows past. Remember that iconic “Dear-lord-what-a-sad-little-life-Jane” moment from Come Dine With Me? Or that time an indignant Curtis from Love Island chose coffee-making over morning cuddles? Or everything Gemma Collins has ever said and done? All these have been faithfully chopped, churned, lip-synced and lauded by accounts such as Greatbritishmemes, Qualitybritishtelly and Loveofhuns. It makes the enforced ad breaks on All 4 and ITV Hub just whiz by. That’s only the beginning of this sweet symbiosis however, because TikTok also provides a glimpse into TV’s future. The outrageously talented Munya Chawawa has finally reached Channel 4, as co-host of Complaints Welcome, but his viral music parodies have long-threatened to spill out of the small(er) screen and into the mainstream. And since TikTok allows quality content to bypass the traditional gatekeepers and connect directly with an audience, there’s plenty more where he came from. The likes of Bigmiko (if Shakespeare was a roadman …), Abi Clarke (relatable queen of banal office chat) and Harry Trevaldwyn (he’s already been cast in the UK remake of Call My Agent) are shaping up to be the panel show regulars of tomorrow. In fact, there’s so much untapped, unsigned and frequently unhinged talent on here that it can start to feel like one big audition room, full of stage-school kids cartwheeling for attention (“I’m Brendan and I’m gonna be doing the reaction face of everyone on White Lotus …”). That’s when it’s time to move on to another corner of TV TikTok – and Gen Zs discovering classic Millennial/Gen X era shows for the first time always feels like a safe space. Fellow Buffy fan Ellie Addis has nailed the aesthetic with her “outfits i’d wear to kill vampires in Sunnydale” post and Tannai’ TV Guide’s earnest appreciation of life lessons gleaned from random episodes of Grey’s Anatomy is a tonic. Plenty of TikTokers also have plans to retrospectively “cancel” Saved By The Bell’s Zack Morris. The case against him is on Funny or Die for all to see. But do beware the slippery slope to nostalgia-perving. It starts innocently enough, with a quick scroll through the Friendspaperclips feed – Chandler Bing was HOT back in the day, y’know? Then, before you know it, you’re lost in a super-cut of Succession’s Kendall chewing gum to suggestive R&amp;B tracks, or some, ahem, respectful, slo-mo appreciation of the Peaky Blinders cast. At this point, only an uptempo remix of your favourite theme can snap you back into the room. Oxide and Neutrino have known the Casualty tune slaps since 2009, but how about a Vanilla Ic /Game of Thrones mashup from @tee_tow? It makes an undeniable sort of sense when Daenerys declares herself “Deadly/ When I hear a dope melody”. Doctor Who: the UK garage remix? (thank you, @fnp_music). Or, somewhat inevitably, Squid Game with a drill beat? (@DDark). Still, all TikTok roads lead back to The GC eventually. Stop fighting it: type “Gemma Collins in Squid Game” and let that FYP algorithm really get to know you.Urban life shields us from nature. Yet nature has a way of slipping through the cracks. When Mara Allen’s Olivia, a well-spoken London professional, loses a child, she can’t escape flesh-and-blood reality. The experience is primal and no amount of middle-class luxury can protect her from that. As it happens, in Lorna French’s two-hander for Pentabus and Theatre by the Lake, she has family connections to a Shropshire farmhouse where she takes refuge. Here, she starts to make sense of her bereavement in a place where the cycle of life, death and, crucially, rebirth is more apparent. We see her loss in the context of a fox’s attack on a nest or a gamekeeper’s nurture of pheasants for blood sport. Bad things happen. And bad things have a knock-on effect. The gamekeeper concerned, Stuart Laing’s Matty, has allowed the tensions of his job to spill into his private life. Taking the actions of animal rights activists personally, he has turned his anger towards his son, who is less interested in taking up the family business than in finessing the art of baking. Matty’s gruff homophobia suggests he is the only man never to have seen Billy Elliot, his old-school intolerance at odds with his sensitivity elsewhere. But, like Olivia, whose trauma has pushed her away from her husband, he has allowed an emotion he can barely articulate to disrupt his domestic relationships. The movement of the play is not just from death to renewal, but also from division to reconciliation. Plenty of material, then, for a 70-minute play, especially when coupled with a late-developing theme about Oliva’s experience as a black woman in a predominantly white rural community. But in Elle While’s ponderous production, the night-time conversation between Olivia and Matty rarely convinces. She is inexplicably belligerent towards him. He is oddly tolerant of her. At different points, each turns a shotgun on the other, but neither seems to mind. Are they always being held up by moonlight? And why don’t this mismatched pair just walk off into the night? The emergence of a puppet curlew from Charlie Cridlan’s blanket-strewn set is charming but it would carry more emotional weight if we had fewer questions. Jacaranda is at Theatre by the Lake, Keswick, until 13 November, then touring until 27 November.Media organisations should agree not to contact people seriously injured in a terrorism attack or bereaved relatives of victims for at least two days and stop printing photos of attackers, according to demands drafted by a group of survivors. The Survivors Against Terror report, whose contributors include the widower of the murdered MP Jo Cox and relatives of victims of the Manchester Arena and Fishmonger’s Hall attacks, calls on news outlets to reduce the naming of terrorists, suppress any manifestos or videos and stop publishing detailed accounts of their methods or the injuries they cause. Editors should not publish pictures of the bereaved or seriously injured without family permission, the report says. It calls for a “survivors support hub” to provide independent information, with the power to exclude media that breach the guidelines from press briefings and interviews. Based on a survey of 116 survivors, the report points to “endemic” levels of media intrusion and harassment, with 59% personally experiencing media intrusion, mostly within 48 hours of an attack. Nine in 10 supported reducing the focus on terrorists’ names and identities, more than eight in 10 said videos made by terrorists should never be shown – even in part, and 98% agreed that terrorist “manifestos” should not be a high-profile part of media coverage. Brendan Cox, whose wife, Jo, was murdered in Batley, West Yorkshire, in 2016, said: “Reporting on terror attacks is clearly in the public interest. What isn’t in the public interest is routine intrusion, spreading fear and sharing terrorist propaganda. While there are some great examples of responsible media reporting there are too many instances of media coverage causing deeper pain to survivors while furthering the aims of the terrorists by amplifying their hatred. “The coverage of the recent murder of Sir David Amess MP was markedly different from the previous attacks, with much less profile given to the alleged attacker. We hope that this is an early sign of media organisations thinking more deeply about how to cover such attacks.” Darryn Frost, who helped fight off the Fishmonger’s Hall assailant, Usman Khan, said: “When repeatedly sharing the names and faces of terrorists we unwittingly play into their hands, helping them gain notoriety while simultaneously spreading fear, hate and division. My greatest wish is that we all deny them the infamy they seek.” Journalists’ representatives criticised some of the demands. Prof Chris Frost, the chair of the ethics council of the National Union of Journalists, said: “While the NUJ is sympathetic to the survivors’ concerns and certainly cannot condone the harassment of witnesses and the bereaved, many of the report’s recommendations are unrealistic and a danger to the freedom of speech. “We are disappointed that the survivors’ group didn’t consult with the NUJ for advice during this process. We welcome the setting up of a survivors’ hub to assist those involved in terror events or disasters, but not with the powers proposed by this group. “It is important to cover fully such events and to do so sensitively and responsibly with the exercise of editorial judgment informed by the NUJ code of conduct. The NUJ is happy to work with anybody to achieve that.”As a child, Khadija Mackenzie saw a horse only if she happened to pass the polo club. “It’s very urbanised in Singapore,” she says. “We don’t have much wildlife … I think every Singaporean would associate horse-riding with a certain demographic.” Yet horses rescued her from a deep slump. In 2015, Mackenzie’s husband, David, died suddenly of a heart attack. “There was no time for goodbye … I felt very bleak. There was no light at the end of the tunnel.” Three years passed. She realised: “Either you are going to dig a deeper hole or you are going to find a way out.” Feeling she was in a “void”, she began to cast around for something to fill it. Friends took her to lawn bowls, yoga, Zumba. “None caught my fancy,” she says. One day, browsing Stitch, a companionship website for the over-50s, she was intrigued by a photograph of a man on a horse with a pride of lions behind him. She thought: “Who’s this guy?” The guy was Shai, who was pictured on a horseback safari in Kenya. They soon started seeing each other and later got married, in 2019. With Shai’s encouragement, Mackenzie, then 60, discovered there were riding schools in Singapore. She told the friends who had suggested bowls and Zumba. “They said: ‘Are you mad? Horse riding! Why don’t you do something sensible?’” Mackenzie’s first lessons were terrifying. But, as she rode, something began to change for her. “I felt so exhilarated that this magnificent animal was allowing me to ride on his back, in the parts of Singapore you don’t normally see. It gave a connection to nature that I never had as a child, a sense of freedom.” Mackenzie was not daring or sporty as a child. No one in the family played sport. She was born in Mumbai, home to her mother’s family, but grew up in Singapore: “A simple childhood – swings, seesaws, climbing trees, tag.” But Mackenzie now thinks she was “a closet rebel”. She eschewed an arranged marriage to “some nice Indian guy”. David was from New Zealand, while Shai is Indian, but has spent most of his life in the UK and New Zealand. When her two boys were young, Mackenzie, 63, says she was “a helicopter parent” – but as they grew, and she grew, they all became more adventurous. “Believing in your abilities, capabilities … motherhood does that to you.” On one family holiday, she and her youngest son parachuted. Mackenzie’s type of fun, of course, comes with risk. One day, she invited three colleagues from the technology company she works for to join her on a guided horse riding trail. “They were given a guide; I was on my own. We went up a slope and I don’t know what spooked my horse, but he started to gallop. I had to throw myself off. My glasses hit my face. I had bruises, a hairline fracture to my ankle.” Horse riding had given Mackenzie freedom and strength – but now she felt physically vulnerable. “I did have doubts: am I insane to be doing this at my age?” Shai told her: “Every sport has its risks. Does it give you joy? If so, learn how to do it properly. The risk will never go away. It’s about whether you can accept it.” So can she? “I can,” she says. “I had a very conservative, protective upbringing, so I wasn’t confident to try new things. But I have become confident with age.” Mackenzie is back in the saddle. She hopes to ride trails with Shai on their travels. When her sons see horses, they send her pictures. “I am pushing the boundaries of my own comfort zone. When I hit 50, I felt transparent. You don’t see women of this age in the media here … It would be easy to give up on trying to live your best life and look your best self. So this is also part of the decision: I am not going to allow myself to become transparent.” Horse riding has no room for transparency: you need forthrightness, the will to assert a physical presence, to impress your body upon a powerful creature. As Mackenzie says: “Horses need a leader before they will follow. You have to be very present and to feel your presence.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?A handful of Republican members of Congress have arrived at the UN climate talks in Glasgow in an attempt to portray the party as engaged on the climate crisis, with this message already badly undermined by colleagues back in the US who have downplayed and even dismissed the impacts of global heating during the summit. A delegation of five Republican lawmakers arrived at the talks, known as Cop26, on the weekend and will depart on Tuesday. Garret Graves, a Louisiana Republican, said that the politicians were “not going there just to drink” and will hold a number of meetings to stress a different approach to climate change than Joe Biden. “Republicans care deeply about the environment and preserving it for future generations,” insisted John Curtis, a Republican congressman from Utah and another member of the group. “We have ideas, and we want to be at the table to find solutions.” But the tone has been markedly different from the bulk of elected Republicans back in the US, who have either ignored the landmark talks, which scientists say must deliver rapid cuts in planet-heating emissions to avoid catastrophic climate change around the world, or sought to dismiss its importance. Highlighting the dismissal of climate science that permeates the GOP unlike any other major political party around the world, Steve Scalise, the Republican whip in the House of Representatives, said last week that “it gets warmer, it gets colder – that’s called Mother Nature”. Scalise added that “carbon emissions have been around from when before man walked the Earth … the idea that hurricanes or wildfires were caused in just the last few years is just fallacy.” The world’s leading climate scientists have said that the evidence that humans are altering the climate is “unequivocal” and that “irreversible” impacts are being locked in by continued burning of fossil fuels that is causing the world to heat up. The world’s temperature is now higher than at any point in human civilization, with scientists warning that disastrous heatwaves, floods and wildfires are pushing many parts of the world towards the edge of human livability. Other Republicans attacked Biden’s attendance at the talks. Senator John Barrasso, of Wyoming, questioned the emissions of flying a “bloated US delegation” to Scotland while Senator John Kennedy, of Louisiana, said that Biden, his climate envoy John Kerry and “other Trotsky-like wokers” want to “buy natural gas and oil from other countries, and basically give countries that hate us more money, so they’ll have weapons to try to kill us”. The comments have prompted ridicule from climate experts. “I couldn’t believe that comment from Scalise, it was extraordinary, just unbelievable,” said Robert Brulle, a professor of sociology and environmental science at Drexel University. “It’s the most retro thing I’ve seen in a long time. It’s comical in a way – do they expect people to take them seriously when they say things like this?” Republican disdain for climate science was embodied by Donald Trump, who famously called it a “hoax” and “bullshit”, but the party has sought to reset its image somewhat since the former president’s electoral defeat last year. Polling shows that younger Republicans, in particular, are concerned about climate breakdown and want the party to reflect this. “This sort of rhetoric is the old talking points and we clearly need new talking points spread more widely,” said Bob Inglis, a former Republican congressman who founded republicEn, a group that advocates for climate policy. Inglis said he hoped the Republicans going to Glasgow will realize the benefits of a global price put on carbon dioxide emissions, a policy favored by some moderate members of the party, such as Utah senator Mitt Romney, who see it as an effective market-based response to the climate crisis. “I hope they get a sense of how vital it is for America to lead, that they have a sense of acceptance and are welcomed into the conversation,” Inglis said. “I hope they get that vibe rather than told they are the dumb kids in class. That probably won’t be helpful.” Despite the calls for change from sections of the Republican party, it still has yet to put forward any sort of substantive plan that would deal with the climate crisis, nor set out how its focus on innovation and voluntary action will hit emissions reduction targets scientists say are urgently needed to avoid disastrous global heating. With this lacking, critics say the party’s gradual change in rhetoric is little more than a superficial rebrand to avoid alienating the growing number of American voters, battered by several years of worsening fires and floods, who say they are alarmed about the climate emergency. Republicans also remain closely aligned to the fossil fuel industry. At a recent Congressional questioning of the oil and gas companies that knowingly caused dangerous global heating, several GOP members apologized to executives for the hearing and refrained from asking them about climate change. “That was really a demonstration to me of how the Republican party aren’t engaging in a good faith debate on climate change – they have no solutions and just preach the ideology of fossil fuel companies,” said Brulle. “I just can’t take them seriously on climate. It is somewhat depressing to see the lockstep the Republicans are marching to on this.”The Tower 9pm, ITV Gemma Whelan was always destined to step into the shoes of a heavy-sighing, perma-frown primetime detective, wasn’t she? She plays DS Sarah Collins, whose crime scene (look away if squeamish) involves the smashed-up bodies of a long-serving police officer and a teenage Libyan refugee at the bottom of a London tower block. Standing on the roof: a young boy in a bear suit and a rookie police officer – the only witnesses to what happened up there. Hollie Richardson MasterChef: The Professionals 7.35pm, BBC One Marcus Wareing and Monica Galetti test another gang of cooks as series 14 gets under way. Immediately, two of the contestants are given a seemingly straightforward task: bangers and mash with gravy, the details of which will be scrutinised minutely. Two more have to do monkfish with a pea and bacon ragout. There, timing is key. Jack Seale Inside the Care Crisis With Ed Balls 9pm, BBC Two The shameful handling of care home staff and residents during the pandemic is painfully raw, and it can be hard to digest on screen (see Jodie Comer and Stephen Graham’s recent Help). Here, Ed Balls – who admits he didn’t do enough to help fix the care crisis as an MP – stays at St Cecilia’s in Scarborough to meet and work with some of the people on the ground. HR Rape: Who’s on Trial? 9pm, Channel 4 Produced by an all-female team, this ambitious documentary follows Avon and Somerset police as they investigate cases of sexual assault and rape. In the wake of Sarah Everard’s murder, it asks timely questions: why do so few women report sexual offences, and how do police approach consent? A debate between police, politicians and survivors follows. Henry Wong Succession 9pm, Sky Atlantic After last week’s disruptive Nirvana needle drop, another merry-go-round of shifting alliances as the well-heeled drama about morally bankrupt jet-setters continues. Can the Roy clan put their infighting aside ahead of a vital shareholder meeting? Perhaps a high-stakes summit with a Hollywood guest star will help … Graeme Virtue Dexter: New Blood 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic After an eight-year hiatus, Michael C Hall is back as Dexter Morgan, along with Clyde Phillips, who was the original series’ showrunner for the first four seasons. Set a decade after the disappearance of the forensic expert turned serial killer, we find him living a new life under a false name in a small upstate New York town. So, what has Dexter been up to? HRNews Corp Australia has posted a $60.7m loss as the pandemic exacerbates ongoing upheaval throughout the media industry. The company blamed a $167m hit to advertising revenues on regional and community closures or digital transitions. More than 220 Australian newsrooms have shrunk or vanished since the start of the pandemic, while 111 have opened or expanded. The Public Interest Journalism Initiative (PIJI) collates public data for its Australian Newsroom Mapping Project. According to that data, since January 2019, News Corp Australia has had 116 “contractions”, most of which were the closure of mastheads or the cancellation of print editions. The figures show 20 News Corp newsrooms experienced growth with new websites, and it is understood an additional four News Corp websites also launched in that time. The number of people reading newspapers was dropping long before Covid. While the pandemic saw an initial bump in news consumption, it didn’t last. News Corp Australia’s financial report for its publishing and printing group revealed the $60.7m loss to Asic this week – less than the $151.4m the year before. Its 2020-21 report shows a $167m decline in advertising revenue, “reflecting the closure or transition to digital of regional and community newspapers”. Those closures, though, were also partly responsible for a drop in expenses of $58m. A 25% increase in digital subscribers (to 810,000) drove circulation and subscription revenues up by 17% to $636m. Earnings before tax, interest and depreciation were $48.6m, and the News Corp Australia tax bill was $8.2m. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In March, parent company News Corp signed a deal with Google and Facebook for the Australian part of the business, which chief executive Robert Thomson said would have a “material and meaningful impact on our Australian news businesses”. That deal is not detailed in the 2020-21 report. The Australian company went on a “hiring spree” earlier this year after rounds of job cuts. In the United States, News Corp last week posted a profit of US$267m, up from US$47m the year before. Journalist union the Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance has estimated up to 5,000 journalists have left the industry in the past decade, and at least 1,000 since Covid struck. PIJI chief executive Anna Draffin said Covid had accelerated the changes already occurring in the media industry and exposed existing weaknesses. “There are clear trends emerging. Obviously the flight to digital is broadly reflected – we saw that as a remedial response to Covid, as mastheads closed. We saw suspended print productions and digital mastheads operating in their place,” she said, adding that some had since started again. There was cause for hope though, she said. “What we’re seeing in terms of green shoots is the community interest in local news versus the financial reality,” she said. “There is reason to hope but … that needs investment and incentive for investment.”Top story: MPs hold emergency debate on standards Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories today. A watchdog had to prevent ministers breaching a strict code on political neutrality and independence during the search for new leaders for the BBC and the British Film Institute. A Freedom of Information Act response by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments has revealed that ministers were asked to replace interview panellists for the high-profile jobs because they were “not sufficiently independent”. The regulator has described such breaches as “threatening to undermine the independent status” of a role intended to bring “challenge and rigour” to finding appointable candidates for selection by cabinet ministers, including the prime minister. It highlights concern that the government is seeking to “rebalance” the boards of public bodies – particularly in the arts, heritage and broadcasting sectors – and comes as MPs hold an emergency debate on standards in the wake of the Owen Paterson scandal. The Commons standards committee is considering a ban on MPs from holding consultancy roles which could affect around 30 members. The Commons Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, is also expected to make an intervention, with one report claiming he is set to propose his own review of the standards rules for MPs. * * * Booster threat – More than 10 million people in the UK have had Covid vaccine top-up shots, figures show, as government sources confirmed they are considering travel restrictions on people who do not take up the booster offer. British Airways and Virgin Atlantic will put the worst of the pandemic behind them this morning when they resume transatlantic flights for leisure travellers to the US for the first time since Covid-19 closed borders in March 2020. BA flight BA001 – a number previously reserved for Concorde – and Virgin flight VS3 will take off from Heathrow on parallel runways for New York’s JFK airport at 8.30am. * * * Astroworld investigation – Police in Houston are investigating how eight people died in a crush of fans at a concert by rapper Travis Scott on Friday, as families mourned the dead and concertgoers recounted the horror and confusion of being trapped in the crowd. One fan claimed on Instagram that people began to “drown” in the crush as soon as 30 seconds into Scott’s set. The singer, who has spoken of his devastation at the tragedy, has already been named in a lawsuit from an injured attendee, which also targets the concert organiser and promoter. The suit alleges “motivation for profit at the expense of concertgoers’ health and safety”. * * * Unfair Cop – The legitimacy of the Cop26 climate summit has been questioned by participants who say restrictions on access to negotiations are unprecedented and unjust. As the gathering enters its second week, observers warn that excluding them from negotiating areas and speaking to negotiators could have dire consequences for millions of people. Their ability to observe, interact and intervene in negotiations on carbon markets, loss and damage and climate financing has been obstructed during the first week, the Guardian has been told. A survey in 10 countries has revealed that although people are alarmed by the climate crisis, few are willing to make significant lifestyle changes. * * * Brexit violence – A bus was set on fire last night by four masked men on the outskirts of Belfast, sparking fresh fears of of violence by loyalists opposed to the Brexit withdrawal deal. The men boarded the double-decker bus in Newtownabbey at about 7.45pm, ordered passengers to get off, and set it alight. It came as the prospect of a trade war between the UK and the EU has edged closer, with Ireland giving the clearest hint yet that Brussels plans to suspend the entire trade deal struck last December if the British government suspends the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. * * * Royal decree – The wartime forces’ sweetheart, Vera Lynn, was ordered to perform at Princess Elizabeth’s 16th birthday celebrations at Windsor Castle in 1942, even though the entertainer was meant to appear in a London show on the same day. A previously unseen document reveals she was told her services were “required for a private command performance” laid on by King George VI. The letter forms part of a new exhibition of memorabilia belonging to the singer, who died last year aged 103. Today in Focus podcast The world’s only gay top-flight footballer, Adelaide United’s Josh Cavallo, talks about the “overwhelming” response to his recent coming out. However, he fears it will raise other issues and even worries he might not be able to go to the World Cup in Qatar – if he is selected for Australia. Lunchtime read: Arsène Wenger: ‘I learned to control myself’ With a documentary film about his life coming out soon, the former Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger offers some fascinating insights into his life and career. He tells Chris Godfrey about how growing up in rural France shaped his view of the world (“It gives you patience”), his mastery of dressing room psychology (“I learned to control myself”) and how he would have his career all over again despite the cost to family life. Sport Jürgen Klopp was left incensed with the referee Craig Pawson and his video assistant Stuart Attwell after Liverpool’s 3-2 defeat by West Ham on Sunday, claiming the officials had let down his players in regard to two key decisions and accusing Attwell of “hiding” behind Pawson on both calls. Exultant in victory, Max Verstappen revelled in his success at the Mexican Grand Prix. He was clearly aware of the significance of the achievement. From third on the grid he beat Lewis Hamilton into second place and the win crashed with thunderous import across the championship, his joy surely informed by the knowledge that he has opened a 19-point lead that leaves Hamilton facing a huge challenge to overcome in the title fight, with only four more races to come. Marcus Smith simply must play at No 10 for England in the rugby Test against Australia this week, full stop. Not to select him would, frankly, be akin to an act of cultural vandalism. Beaten 41-32 in the 2017 World Cup final by New Zealand, England’s Red Roses have now put 99 points on the current champions across two one-sided contests. The latest result, a battering at Franklin’s Gardens, underlined a seismic shift in the global power balance. Emma Raducanu says she has told the people around her that she refuses to allow any off-court commitments since her US Open triumph to influence her work on the court, and training will always be the priority. Business Business output has fallen for the sixth month in a row amid the supply chain crisis, energy price rises and a shortages of workers. Activity hit its lowest level since March during the last national coronavirus lockdown, according to accountancy firm BDO. Its measure fell from 105.23 points in September to 103.35 points in October. The FTSE100 will open flat this morning while the pound is on $1.347 and €1.166. The papers The Guardian leads with “Watchdog hits out at ministers over top jobs”, and also has more on the possible ban on MPs taking consultancy roles. The Mirror leads with “Cops told: probe Tory Lords scandal”, the i has “PM battles to contain Tory sleaze backlash”, and the Scotsman’s splash is “SNP in call for police probe as Tory sleaze row deepens”. The Times leads on “Doctors set to be barred from jobs in richer areas” while the Telegraph has advice from a former health secretary: “Hancock: Jab NHS staff before winter hits”. The Express says “On the brink! Brexit trade war looms” and the Mail has “New fears over micro plastics in your home”. The FT splash is “French prosecutors probe Gupta operations over ‘misuse of assets’”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendTuvalu’s foreign minister has recorded a speech for the United Nations climate conference in Glasgow standing knee-deep in seawater to highlight how his low-lying Pacific Island nation is on the frontline of climate change. Images of Simon Kofe standing in a suit and tie at a lectern set up in the sea, with his trouser legs rolled up, have been shared widely on social media, drawing attention to Tuvalu’s struggle against rising sea levels. “The statement juxtaposes the Cop26 setting with the real-life situations faced in Tuvalu due to the impacts of climate change and sea level rise and highlights the bold action Tuvalu is taking to address the very pressing issues of human mobility under climate change,” Kofe said in his video message. The video was shot by public broadcaster TVBC at the far end of Fongafale, the main islet of the capital Funafuti, a government official said. It is due to be shown at the climate summit on Tuesday and comes as regional leaders push for more aggressive action to limit the impact of climate change. Many big polluters have vowed to intensify their carbon cuts over coming decades with some aiming for net zero carbon emissions by 2050. But Pacific Island leaders have demanded immediate action, pointing out that the very survival of their low-lying countries is at stake. Before Cop26, it emerged that one-third of Pacific small island states and territories would be unable to send any government figures to the summit in Glasgow due to Covid-19 travel restrictions. The lack of high-level representation of Pacific nations at the meeting led to fears that the concerns of these countries, which are among those most at risk due to the climate crisis, would not be appropriately represented at the summit. In October, a World Bank report said that projected sea level rise could cost the Marshall Islands, a country in the north Pacific halfway between Hawaii and Australia, its status as a nation. It has a population of 59,000 and a land mass of just 180sq km, consisting of 1,156 individual islands. It is one of the countries considered most at risk of disappearing due to sea level rise. With ReutersMore than 130 MPs, including over half of the parliamentary Labour party, have signed a cross-party letter to their pension fund calling on it to divest from fossil fuel companies to “ensure that our pensions are not funding climate disaster”. The letter, to be delivered on Monday to trustees of the Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund (PCPF), applauds recent reductions in investments in fossil fuels, but adds: “We believe you must go a step further, divesting from the fossil fuel industry in its entirety, as quickly as possible. “Without this, our pensions are contributing to temperatures rising above 1.5°C. If this limit is exceeded, then by the time younger members are old enough to draw our pensions, a full-blown climate catastrophe will have struck, with ice caps melted, food systems collapsed and deadly extreme weather becoming the norm.” A total of 132 MPs have signed, including 107 of the 199 members of the parliamentary Labour party, with nine members of the shadow cabinet signing. Thirteen SNP MPs, five Liberal Democrats and two Conservatives also signed, among others. The letter, drafted to coincide with the UK’s hosting of the Cop26 climate summit, reiterates a UN warning that current investment in planned fossil fuel extraction “vastly exceeds” the limit needed to keep global heating below the 1.5C rise mandated by the Paris agreement. “It is recognised that as elected representatives, we have a responsibility to show leadership on the climate emergency and ensure that our pensions are not funding climate disaster,” it says. “Let us get our house in order by aligning our pension investments with a green and prosperous zero-carbon future that helps to contain global heating to below 1.5°C. “The world’s eyes are on us. It is time that we show true leadership and divest parliament from the fossil fuel industry.” The letter has been coordinated by the Labour MP for Coventry South, Zarah Sultana as part of the long-running Divest Parliament campaign, which claims the backing of more than 360 current and former MPs. Another signatory, David Warburton, the Tory MP for Somerton and Frome, said Cop26 had put the UK “at the centre of international diplomacy and coalition-building in a pivotal moment for climate action”. The branch of the GMB union that represents MPs’ staff this week said it supported Divest Parliament and announced that it would be launching a similar campaign centred on staff pensions. “We recognise that MPs and the Westminster community have a unique opportunity to show leadership on climate action and responsible investment through addressing the practices of their own pension fund,” it said in a tweet.Know what you owe The first step in dealing with debt is knowing exactly what you owe and who you owe it to. Payments for any formal debts, such as loans or credit cards, are usually taken from a bank account. Go through old statements and add up all of the direct debits each month. For loans, dig out the original agreements or check online banking – see how much you borrowed, what is outstanding and for how much longer you are due to be making repayments. To this you need to add any borrowing from friends or family, and any outstanding credit card debt. If you are in arrears on rent, council tax, energy or water bills, this is also debt. Write down the companies, when payments were missed and how much they are. This might be scary but it is important to work out the extent of your debts – you might even find that having a concrete number to tackle is less terrifying than just knowing that you are struggling. Build a budget The next step is to build a budget using your financial commitments and all of your income. National Debtline has a tool on its website that can guide you through this. Be sure to include expenditure that only occurs occasionally, such as Christmas presents. As most debts are billed every month, it is important to set out your budget on a monthly basis. Once complete, you will have a comprehensive picture of how your finances are, which will show you if your income should cover your repayments or if it falls short. Prioritise and sort debts Not all debts are equal. Some can cause more problems than others. Identify and deal with your priority debts first. If you have limited money each month, direct it to repaying these. “Rent or mortgage arrears, energy bills and council tax are your priority debts as there can be serious consequences if you don’t pay them,” says Lorraine Charlton, a debt expert at Citizens Advice. “Many organisations have put in place protections for people who’ve struggled to pay their bills during the pandemic.” After housing-related debts come bills for your gas and electricity, phone, internet, TV licence and court fines. Citizens Advice also lists goods bought on hire purchase – which could be taken back by the seller – and unpaid child maintenance among those that must be paid first. Secondary debts could be credit or debit cards, payday loans, unpaid water bills and parking fines, as well as money that you owe to family and friends. Often the consequences of not dealing with these debts will be less severe than with priority debts. Contact creditors As soon as you fall behind on any payments it is worth contacting the company or person you owe to see if you can buy yourself some time – mortgage lenders, for example, will consider payment holidays or a switch to an interest-only loan for a while, and other companies will consider repayment plans. The charity National Debtline suggests giving a summary budget to creditors. This is a short document that can illustrate if you make an offer to them, it is reasonable and affordable. Creditors may agree to lower repayments if they can see you are offering what you can afford. StepChange, the debt charity, says it is possible to negotiate settlements with creditors where they accept a percentage of what is owed if it is clear they will not get the full amount of money. If you find you owe a creditor money that you are not currently repaying, contact it via email so that there is a record to confirm details of the amount, and tell it that you are trying to deal with your debts. Beware, though, that in some cases, if the debt is old, the creditor has a limited time to take you to court to pay – usually six years. After that it might not be able to force you to pay. But if it is under, or close to being under, the time limit might restart. Get help Dealing with debt can be an intimidating prospect but there are many organisations there to help. StepChange (0800 138 1111) gives free debt advice to 650,000 people every year. National Debtline (0808 808 4000) gives advice to people across the UK. The Debt Advice Foundation (0800 043 40 50), another charity, offers free advice about loans, credit and debt. Citizens Advice (England – 0800 144 8848, Wales – 0800 702 2020) has been in operation for more than 80 years, giving advice on legal and debt issues, among others. If you need time to assess your debts and how to deal with them, the government’s Debt Respite Scheme offers a 60-day space when creditors are not allowed to add interest or fees to any of that, or to take enforcement action against you. You do have to pass eligibility checks and must continue to keep making regular payments if you can afford to do so. The scheme can only be started by a debt adviser or a local authority that provides debt advice. Consider formal solutions When informal arrangements with creditors are not enough to help you clear your debts, you may need to consider an alternative. Take advice before doing so, as most options have long-lasting implications. A consolidation loan could work for you – it is a new loan used to pay off all of your other debts. It may make your monthly repayments more affordable and help you stick to a repayment schedule but you might not get a good interest rate, and you will have to be disciplined about not taking on other borrowing. A debt relief order is an option if you owe less than £30,000 and do not own your own home, have substantial assets or much spare income. It usually lasts for a year, during which creditors can’t force you to pay off debts unless your situation improves. At the end of the period, the debts are usually written off but it will stay on your credit record for six years and there’s a £90 fee you have to pay. An individual voluntary arrangement is an agreement to pay off debts over a specific period, based on what you can reasonably afford. The money is paid to an insolvency practitioner who distributes it to your creditors, an arrangement that usually lasts for up to six years. The creditors have to agree before an IVA can go ahead, and there are fees to pay the practitioner. An administration order is an option if you have an unpaid county court judgment and owe no more than £5,000 in total. You pay a monthly amount to the court which shares it out to your creditors.South of the Sahara, and just north of the Great Rift Valley in landlocked Ethiopia, the Blue Nile flows from Lake Tana, the largest lake in the country. Radiating out from the sacred source is a scattering of forest islands, strewn across the dry highlands like a handful of emeralds. At the heart of each circle of forest, hunkered down under the ancient canopy and wrapped in lush vegetation, are saucer-shaped churches – otherworldly structures that almost seem to emit a life force. And in a sense they do. Ethiopia is one of the fastest expanding economies in the world today and the second most populous country in Africa. The vast majority of people live in rural areas, where the expansion of settlements and agriculture is slowly thinning the forest edge by cattle and plough. Over the past century, 90% of Ethiopia’s forests have been lost. In Amhara province, the only remaining native forests are those that surround the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church buildings. Preserved as an act of faith for centuries, these forests are proof of the power of spiritual ideas to create sustainable landscapes. Seen from above, the forests are demarcated by the stark boundary between sacred and secular, church and field, work and rest. They are places detached from everyday life yet central to it, informing human work and relationships within society. Like other objects within Orthodox traditions, the forests direct the worshipper to look beyond what is visible. Entering them, the arid silence of subsistence farmland gives way to the forest’s cool, fragrant air, filled with a cacophony of living song. The sounds of insects, birds and monkeys rise with human voices into the canopy and up to the heavens. Generations come and go under the same ancient trees as their ancestors. The symbol of the tree is at the heart of the Christian story, from the tree of life standing in the Garden of Eden in Genesis to its redemptive role in Revelation, bridging the river of life and bearing fruit for the healing of nations. The story of Eden has been shared in Ethiopia for millennia – well before the Aksumite kingdom adopted Christianity around 325AD, and even before a tree came to symbolise the global faith. Today, in Ethiopia, each church forest is seen by its guardians as a miniature Garden of Eden. The religious significance of the forest is equalled by the importance of its ecological function. These sacred oases raise water tables, lower temperatures, block destructive winds and are home to yield-boosting pollinators essential to surrounding agriculture. The forests are, therefore, genetic repositories vital for the future survival of human life in Ethiopia. Priests who do not protect these natural resources are deemed to have failed in their mission, and since understanding the global importance of the forests they care for, the priests have become even more committed to the cause. The vast church forest network, covering an area the size of England and Wales, has the potential to offer a significant barrier to desertification in this region. For now the task is to strengthen what remains by the simplest solution possible: building conservation walls around the forests that keep grazing cattle out and allow vegetation to regrow. Only 20 churches, all supported by church forest experts Dr Meg Lowman and Dr Alemayehu Wassie Eshete, have walls, and only a few hundred out of the many thousands are viable habitats. All need protecting. Yet, as unique as they are, these forest churches are not merely a localised cultural novelty: Ethiopia’s grassroots and spiritually motivated conservation efforts sit within a global context of efforts to resolve our ecological crises. In the secular west, we can easily overlook spiritual viewpoints as we seek ways to restore and protect the environment, despite the roots of the modern environmental movement being spiritual. As these photographs show, spiritual beliefs still have the power to conserve and heal. The Church Forests of Ethiopia, by Kieran Dodds, is available from 15 November.The first song I remember hearing One of my most vivid first memories is my mum and dad dancing around the kitchen to I’ve Got a Woman by Ray Charles, which cemented my love of golden-era Black American music. The first single I bought Bye Bye Baby by the Bay City Rollers. I was about eight, so my mum would have bought it for me from the Liverpool Woolworths. They had big racks full of 7in singles, so that’s where you bought your records from, along with your pick’n’mix. The song that is my karaoke go-to Always on My Mind by Willie Nelson is less overblown and more stripped back than the Elvis version, so it’s easier to sing. And Nelson sings it from the heart. I’ve felt that emotion a few times; he just captures it spectacularly well. The song I know all the lyrics to There’s too many. I’ve got a peculiarly good memory for words. If someone forgets a line on Red Dwarf, everyone looks at me because I know all their lines, too. I can remember my O-level history notes: “Bismarck’s main aim after 1871 was to preserve the status quo whilst he concentrated on the internal affairs of the German state.” How useful is that to me? The best song to play at a party My DJ sets are full of party starters such as I Like It Like That by Tito Nieves and I Wish by Stevie Wonder. The song I stream the most At the moment, it’s Break My Heart Again by Finneas. I know it’s sad, but I’m peculiarly drawn to that song. It gives me earworms. It’s a song you can’t get out of your head. The song that I secretly like, but tell everyone I hate I’ve taken a great stance against Abba throughout my life. The same goes for George Michael and Take That. But A Million Love Songs by Take That? That’s a tune, man. The song I can no longer listen to My brother Dean died a while back and his favourite song was Mind Blowing Decisions by Heatwave. I used to play it when we were getting ready to go out. So I always feel a bit of a twinge when I hear it now. The song I want played at my funeral When my dad was cremated, we played Hot Hot Hot by Arrow, which was quite funny. I think my wife and kids will probably choose what to play. But there will be so many tears, you won’t be able to hear the music. There will be too much eulogising. Craig Charles’s show is broadcast weekdays, 1pm, BBC Radio 6 Music and BBC Sounds.Countries that have failed to come up with national plans on cutting greenhouse gas emissions in line with limiting temperature rises to 1.5C must be forced back to the negotiating table every year from now on, poor countries have said ahead of crunch talks at the Cop26 climate summit. Current pledges are inadequate, and would lead to heating of 2.7C, according to UN calculations. But under the Paris agreement, countries are only required to ratchet up their pledges – known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – every five years, with the next deadline falling in 2025. Developing countries say this is much too late. Lia Nicholson, lead negotiator for the Alliance of Small Island States, told the Guardian: “Major emitters have to step up their climate action now, not in 2025, backed by concrete steps like ending fossil fuel subsidies in the next few years. Scaled up, accessible climate finance needs to happen now for more ambitious climate action in developing countries, through grants and not debt. It’s time to get to work and live up to our grand pledges.” However, the UK’s environment secretary, George Eustice, suggested in an interview with Times Radio on Sunday that a commitment on bringing countries back to the table with fresh pledges would not be included in the final decision from Cop26. Christiana Figueres, the former UN climate chief who oversaw the Paris agreement, told the Guardian that countries returning every year was possible under the Paris agreement, and a plan to do so should be agreed in Glasgow. “The most vulnerable countries have called for an annual reporting on increased ambition for all governments, especially the major emitting countries. This could be done as a new regular component of the yearly Cops, and is allowed under the Paris agreement,” she said. “[This] should be part of the agreed outcome of Cop26.” The Climate Vulnerable Forum, made up of 55 developing countries most affected by the consequences of the climate crisis, has also called for a “Glasgow Emergency Pact” from the summit, which would include a requirement from all countries for annual reporting on emission reductions, on a voluntary basis. “The climate emergency requires an annual review, and not just every five years,” said Saleemul Huq, director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development in Bangladesh. Ed Miliband, Labour’s shadow business secretary, and a veteran of the 2009 Copenhagen Cop, added: “If George Eustice represents the position of the government, it is deeply worrying and cannot be allowed to stand. All the evidence suggests we will leave Glasgow with a chasm between where we are and where we need to be to halve global emissions this decade and keep 1.5C alive. If the world decides not to revisit commitments on halving emissions until 2025, it will deliver a devastating blow to the prospects of keeping 1.5C alive.” Some others have estimated that heating could be reduced to 1.9C or 1.8C, given other pledges made outside the Paris agreement, but these are controversial as they rely on many untested assumptions about countries fulfilling voluntary, and sometimes vague, promises. Only pledges made through the UN can be counted on, developing countries insist. The discussion over when countries should return to the table – known as the acceleration, or ratchet, issue – is one of the key sticking points to a potential deal that the UK presidency is trying to put together in the second week of the Glasgow talks. The first week was dominated by announcements of deals on preserving forests, galvanising climate finance from the private sector, and phasing out coal. The second week will focus on some of the hardest elements of the talks, including issues around the ratchet and: Regulations on how countries measure and report on their emissions. Whether, and how, carbon trading can play a role in how countries meet their commitments, under article 6 of the Paris agreement. How countries can be helped to adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis, and how they can receive financial help for any impacts too great to be adapted to – known as loss and damage. However, cracks are already appearing in the goodwill and constructive approach that appeared to characterise the first week of the talks. Greenpeace accused Saudi Arabia of leading efforts to ensure that a commitment on accelerating the review of NDCs was off the table. Jennifer Morgan, executive director, said this was familiar behaviour from the oil producer: “Saudi Arabia is at the chess board, manipulating the pieces in an effort to stop an outcome that keeps 1.5C within reach. Other governments now need to isolate the Saudi delegation if they want this Cop to succeed for everyone, not just fossil fuel interests.” Mohamed Adow, director of the Power Shift Africa thinktank, warned that developing countries would not accept a poor outcome. He criticised rich countries for failing to deliver $100bn to poor countries in climate finance, a target that was originally set for 2020 and now looks likely to be met only in 2023. He warned: “The mood among developing countries is sour. Real progress needs to be made on adaptation funding and the setting up of a loss and damage mechanism to address those growing needs. Unless we get that developing countries will wonder why they bothered coming.”Throughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Claudelice dos Santos, Maraba, Brazil Editor’s note: Claudelice’s brother, José “Zé” Claudio Ribeiro da Silva, and sister-in-law, Maria do Espírito Santo, were conservationists who campaigned against logging in the Amazon rainforest and were assassinated in 2011. When Zé Claudio and Maria were murdered it was as if the world had vanished from beneath our feet. We knew my brother and sister-in-law were being threatened for defending the environment – but we never imagined they’d actually be killed. The state knew about all the violence their community was suffering from land-grabbers and loggers, and nothing was done. Ten years later it still hurts so much. Each morning I remember. Every day my mother cries. But we knew we wouldn’t find peace until there was real justice. So eventually we decided that rather than just mourning, we had to fight. We were part of the struggle for social and environmental justice long before Zé Claudio and Maria were killed. But when you’re driven by pain and fear, and above all injustice, it makes you bolder. So I embraced my fear, my despair and my pain. Some days I couldn’t even get out of bed for fear of being shot because of the death threats I was getting. Or because I was consumed by the pain of losing Zé and Maria. I overcame all this because we believe change is possible. What’s crucial is our capacity for resilience. And our ability to stand up and say: “I’ll fight. I’ll denounce things. I’ll ask the international community to pay attention. I will not remain silent.” Zé and Maria fought until the very end because they wanted a better world for others. They wanted to live in peace in the place that was theirs – just as so many others continue to fight for their lands, forests and waters around the world. Yet today, the situation remains the same, and in some ways is even worse – because there’s even less forest and more environmental defenders are being killed. Everything Zé and Maria fought against while they were alive continues: the killings, the destruction of the forest. This is a struggle that will never end because just when you think things couldn’t get any worse, along comes [Brazil’s president, Jair] Bolsonaro. Never in my worst nightmares could I have imagined we’d face such regression. We’ve reached the limit of everything. Nature’s limit. The limit of our own strength. But we are still alive and we will continue to resist.Kudos to Dave Eggers. In this follow-up to the admirable, big-tech, dystopian thriller The Circle (which you needn’t have read to enjoy the current book), he again squares up to the new enemies of everything untamed and brilliant in humankind. If you meant to read Shoshana Zuboff’s important and demanding The Age of Surveillance Capitalism, but were too worn down by surveillance capitalism’s intrusions to get round to it, The Every tackles the same concerns from a shared perspective of humanist outrage, in the form of a gulpable fictive entertainment. The Circle’s titular startup turned metaphysical empire (think: Googlebook) has merged with an unmistakable e-commerce site referred to, doubtless for legal reasons, only by its nickname: “the jungle”. Messianically rebranded as The Every, the corporation is now run by Mae Holland, The Circle’s fast-rising, newbie protagonist. Under Holland, The Every pursues its heedless agenda of a worldwide, soft totalitarian order of mass behavioural compliance through surveillance. However, in part due to a corporate culture of timid self-scrutiny, there is a dearth of new ideas on campus. Enter another newbie, Delaney Wells, radicalised by her years studying under anti-monopoly crusader Professor Agarwal (surely based on the aforementioned Zuboff, Agarwal articulates the novel’s moral and intellectual conscience in letters to her former protege). Bent on bringing down The Every from the inside, Delaney conspires with her housemate Wes, a big-tech resisting “trog”, to sabotage the company. The pair settle on a strategy of terroristic accelerationism: if they can introduce enough vile or moronic apps into The Every’s portfolio, it might trigger a popular insurrection that will bring about the company’s downfall. Predictably, it doesn’t work out this way. Both The Every and regular people embrace their innovations even as they bring “a new kind of self-hatred and ruination upon all humans”. Delaney begins to realise how much humiliation and diminished liberty the people of the world are willing to suck up in exchange for safety, convenience and the social annihilation of wrongdoers. The spectre of an overtly darker and less comic novel floats through The Every, which is equal parts science-fiction nightmare of the next five seconds and broad, Silicon Valley satire. A parade of plausibly obnoxious apps shrinks, polices and homogenises experience. The Every’s customers – everybody – keep a close eye on their Shame Aggregate, as curtain-twitching citizens post “shams” on an app that logs public indiscretions as viral videos. This familiar “mixture of benign utopianism and pseudo-fascist behavioural compliance” undergirds other apps such as TruVoice, which scans messages for “any of the Os – offensive, off-putting, outrageous, off-colour, off-base, out-of-date” - and replaces them with anodyne alternatives. An optical-surveillance breakthrough propels a global frenzy of “eyeshaming”, in which those who ogle are publicly disgraced, leading to a wave of suicides among “caught and called-out persons, mostly men”. The byproduct is ubiquitous guilt and anxiety about where we let our eyes roam – staying at home feels safer. What binds all of The Every’s incursions is an ancient and trending emotion: “shame ensued, and shame was deserved, and shame was the internet’s currency and lever for change”. The consequence of pervasive surveillance, both internalised and overt, is a taming of the charismatic human: “She was less interesting, surely, and less funny – for humour does not easily survive the intense filtering that the 21st century made mandatory – but she was also kinder, more positive, more generous and civil.” (She sounds a bit like contemporary everything.) The Every is unabashedly partisan and polemical. Eggers’s adversary is the war on subjectivity, nuance and wildness being waged by the clever yet mediocre men and women who wield more power than any government in history. About halfway through, the plot leans into the outlandish, then teeters towards the apocalyptic. And what a feeble anticlimax may await our cowed species – going out not with a bang, but with a sad-face emoji. For Eggers, Googlebook – I mean The Every! – threatens to devolve us into Nietzsche’s “last man”: a domestic pet, mild and neutered, too meek for greatness. At 577 pages – the number diagnosed by an odious lit-streamlining app as the limit of readerly tolerance – The Every is not as tight as The Circle. As momentum builds, the plotting gets clunky, while the novel’s comic exuberance means it lacks the cathartic brutality of, say, Nineteen Eighty-Four. But Eggers is a wonderful storyteller with an alert and defiant vision. His down-home decency means he pulls short of articulating a thought that recurred for me throughout reading The Every: threatened with spiritual extinction through conformism, sanitisation, shame, inanity and surveillance, it might yet be our evil, our perversity, our psychopathology, our hate that prove the saving of us. Rob Doyle’s latest book, Autobibliography (Swift Press), is out now • The Every by Dave Eggers (Penguin, £12.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.I walk past a very smiley man in reception, past a smelly changing room, into a matted space. It’s like walking into a Street Fighter II level. On one side, teenage boys practise sit-ups in tandem. They rise and fall, like grubs. On the other, tough guys pretzel each other in submission holds. Punchbags lie around bearing words such as “Venum” [sic] and ‘“Blitz”. I’ve come to 10th Planet Jiu Jitsu at Diesel Gym, London, to try wrestling, but I’m not happy about it. Wrestling is a thing brothers do, to littler brothers, to sisters, to the cat. As an only child, I never had any interest in the performing of piledrivers over sofa cushions. I like ferns. I’m looking for John, I say, to a muscular, topless man. An awed look passes over his face. My trainer today, mixed martial artist John “the Hitman” Hathaway, is clearly revered. “Hey!” says a voice behind me. It’s the man from reception, who was smiling at nothing. Standing up, he looks different. He looks like Jonathan Rhys Meyers, playing a French baker in a Jean-Pierre Jeunet film. He has soft eyes, and the widest smile. I later look up videos of Hathaway in action, mercilessly raining elbows on to his opponents’ heads. I’m very confused. Other class members have trooped in. “Let’s warm up with some pummelling,” announces Hathaway – hardly comforting to hear. Pummelling actually involves slipping hands beneath your opponent’s arms to gain a superior position. I’m teamed up with another beginner, Jack, and we practise underhooks and overhooks in pairs. I begin to get a grip on the basics. Wrestling involves staying low, arms narrow, and being quick on your feet to avoid being pinned or locked. Grappling moves are very specific, which I had never realised. It’s a dance, slipping in and out of dominant position. Wrestling is among the oldest forms of combat, featured in world mythologies such as the Epic of Gilgamesh, the Iliad and the Mahabharata. Most countries practise their own form, and folkstyle wrestling is taught as standard in US high schools. There is an elementary resourcefulness that explains its appeal and endurance. “It’s the simplest contest of strength, and way to settle an outcome,” says Hathaway. I think the simplest contest is throwing things into a waste paper basket from a distance. They just don’t talk about it in the Prose Edda. For an hour, we practise low single-leg holds. I sweep low, holding Jack by the ankle with a head against his knee, slamming him to the ground. Jack practises a defence against this move, yanking me up by the chin and armpit, then dropping me, and scooting round and hugging my chest. I learn a defensive move too: placing a foot on his shoulder and jack-rabbiting to safety. It’s not a striking art, so serious injuries are limited. It does take it out of you, though. It’s exhausting, and we course with sweat. One man has taken his top off very early. Of course, he has a six-pack. (I don’t believe they feel the heat more than the rest of us.) When we practise footwork drills, trying to tap each other’s foot to win a point, my lightness becomes an asset and I dance away every time. But I want to try my hand at the real stuff, not the baby steps. “OK, let’s try a few moves,” smiles Hathaway, and I enter a ring alone with the elite Ultimate Fighting Championship fighter. Hathaway holds an incredible 17-2 record, and trying a few moves involves throwing me around like pizza dough. He threads his legs through mine and stretches out my achilles. He locks my limbs and applies pressure to my head. He wraps me up like a python. My body is making noises never heard before: gurgling, moans, squeaks – the sort gases make when exiting a corpse. I experience triangle and anaconda chokes, arm bars and foot locks, heel hooks, something called a “darce”. Although I am in tremendous pain, there is a somewhat goofy energy to this. Hathaway grins more than anyone I’ve ever met. He is also narrating what he is doing in real time, under his breath. “We can grab him in a scarf hold, like this, then drop him, like this,” he says, windmilling me to the canvas. He might as well be adding: “The crowd goes wild!” Hathaway is so nice. I don’t get it. “I don’t want to beat people up! I just like winning, being the best …” he demurs, before that smile breaks out again, “… at beating people up.” Seriously, what kind of people like wrestling? “Tough kids, sissy kids, even kids with chickenpox,” he laughs. I later discover he’s quoting a vintage TV commercial, for Armour hotdogs. Goofy. I did enjoy the wrestling, against all odds. My body aches for a week, but there is a value to withstanding pain. We are stronger than we know, and that is empowering. There is a bond that comes with shared physical exertion; it has been nicely different to hang out with the tough guys. We’re brothers in arms. And legs, and armpits. Will I go back? I’m approximately 1ft tall and weigh the same as a bag of sugar. Absolutely not. Smugness points Underhooked. 3/5 Want to suggest an activity for Rhik to try? Tell us about it here.Many are the legends of lost walkers tricked by swirling mists, pixies or ghosts on the northern edge of Dartmoor, one of Devon’s more isolated corners. In the 18th century, when stage coaches rattled over rough tracks, it was a harsh and dangerous place to travel. There is still a sense of remoteness - this is where the Atlantic winds arrive unhindered, and it is at once bleak and bracing, dramatic and drear. But if you haven’t got wheels, it has been harder to reach in recent times than it was for generations past. That is set to change on 20 November, when the Dartmoor Line will reopen almost 50 years after it was axed. Now local shoppers and workers, as well as walkers and climbers, cyclists and campers, will be able to travel from anywhere in the UK, via Exeter, and reach the top of Dartmoor easily and without driving. The £40.5 million line, the first to be reinstated as part of the Department for Transport’s “Restoring your Railway” initiative, is a significant national moment as well as great news for the tourism-reliant south-west. Stations at Ivybridge and Totnes have opened up the east and south moor. The new line to Okehampton – described by one campaigner as an “oasis in a rail desert” – could be a boon for the north moor as well as parts of Cornwall. It will also take some traffic off the often jammed A30. Locals campaigned for the reopening for more than two decades, working alongside councillors, railway experts and Great Western Railway, even running three special “protest” trains from Okehampton to Paddington, Stratford-upon-Avon and Weymouth to force the government’s hand. When it opened in October 1871, the 15.5-mile line from Exeter was the initial stage in a series of two major railway extensions that continued west to Launceston in Cornwall and, in 1890, down to Tavistock and Plymouth via the Tamar valley. Though not scheduled to close as part of the initial Beeching cuts of the 1960s, the last regular train ran back in 1972. A Sunday service operated in the summer months from the late 1990s but the line was largely for transporting – ironically enough – railway ballast from Meldon Quarry. West Devonians are still calling for a restoration of the complete route down to Plymouth, their case strengthened in 2014 when a storm destroyed the GWR tracks at Dawlish. For now, though, we’ll have to make do with the new line, which will make the journey from Exeter to Okehampton in 40 minutes with a single stop at the tiny bishopric of Crediton along the way. Trains will run every two hours (hourly from 2022). Often overlooked, Okehampton is a likable enough market town that’s home to the Museum of Dartmoor Life, retelling the region’s history from the Mesolithic to post-industrial times, and an excellent YHA hostel that occupies an old railway goods shed. Over the winter, its Victorian station will be refurbished, the cafe restored, and there are plans for a Dartmoor national park visitor centre next year. With the town centre just 20 minutes’ walk from the northern border of Dartmoor national park, Okehampton is pitching itself as the “gateway to the moor” and is likely to be a popular base for those setting off on walks. Just west of the town is Meldon Viaduct, a popular place to start ascents of High Willhays and Yes Tor, the highest points on Dartmoor. Twelve miles southeast lies Chagford, a lively former stannary (tin-mining) town inside the national park. Arts and crafts studios, vegan cafes and jazz nights make it a sort of Totnes of the top of the moor, and there are plenty of cottages and inns offering B&amp;B. It’s a fair, but pleasant, walk and the 178 bus runs once daily (except Sundays) between Okehampton and Chagford. There are lovely woods and riverside footpaths around the town. Each region of Dartmoor has its own character. The north and northwestern moors generally feel more open and exposed, and while there is plenty of good walking, the uplands can be Baskerville-level boggy. The presence of the MoD and its firing ranges can be a pain if war games coincide with your planned visit – but they’re not that common and usually military activity is restricted to one of three areas (firing and other military exercises are flagged up in advance online. A major upside is that Dartmoor is the only area in England that currently explicitly permits wild camping. For domestic tourists keen to reduce their carbon footprint, a train ticket and a tent are all they need to escape to the wilds of the far north. The best options for walks and rides from the new line Circular walk from Okehampton From Okehampton follow the road to the Battle Camp – just inside the moor – to do a popular circular five- or six-mile walk around West Mill Tor, Rowtor, Scarey Tor and Tors End, returning via the quaint Tors Inn at Belstone. Granite Way The mainly traffic-free 11-mile Granite Way cycle route runs between the station and Lydford. You can rent bikes and e-bikes at Granite Way Cycles on Klondyke Road. Two summits The 10-mile climb from either Okehampton or Meldon Viaduct up to the two highest points on Dartmoor – High Willhays and Yes Tor – is easy enough so long as it’s not lashing down. The name of High Willhays, recorded as “High Willies” and “High Willows” in some old documents, might de derived from Welsh “gwylfa” for “watching place” – suggesting it might have been a lookout for beacon fires. Its summit is not of the dramatic, pointed kind but at 621 metres above sea level, it is often wind-lashed and wet. Okehampton to Buckfastleigh It’s a serious-sounding 26 miles between these two small towns, but the terrain is varied and rarely tough going, and there are excellent places to camp en route, including beside the Grimspound stone hut circles or in the woodlands and gorse patches on the eastern slope of Hameldown. This last is a majestic humpback hill with fine views in all directions. Buckfastleigh is served by the touristy South Devon Railway, which links up with Totnes for mainline trains. Cross Dartmoor The 37-mile West Devon Way between Okehampton and Plymouth is a good option for those who come by bus or train: each of the eight stages starts and stops at a bus stop. Two Moors Way Passing smack-bang between Okehampton and Crediton, the Two Moors Way involves a 10-mile “walk in” or a taxi. The 102-mile coast-to-coast footpath, from Lynton in north Devon to Wembury near Plymouth, spans Exmoor and Dartmoor; ultra runners can complete the journey in a single day. Sustrans’ 99-mile Coast to Coast route, between Ilfracombe and Plymouth, is the equivalent for cyclists. Loop the loop The 95-mile Dartmoor Way, which passes through Okehampton, loops round the park on lanes and minor roads, ideal for cycling and e-bikes. It can be used for day trips or for a full five-to-seven day holiday. A parallel 108-mile route is used by walkers. Note on navigating Large areas of Dartmoor are featureless, mists are common and sudden, and there are morasses all over. The double-sided Ordnance Survey OL28 map covers almost the entirety of the national park at 1: 25,000 scale, ideal for walkers BMC XT40, a single 1:40,000 scale map showing the whole of Dartmoor, is suitable for general planning or easy, short walks on well-used paths. • Tickets from Exeter to Okehampton cost £8 return, for information and tickets visit Dartmoorline.comIn February I purchased a Samsung washer dryer from John Lewis to be installed in a house I was buying. After a delay completing on the property, it was finally installed in April. Less than two weeks later there was a minor leak, and then a problem with the machine’s motherboard. After some faffing about John Lewis agreed to send a replacement machine – the same model – which was delivered in May. By the end of July the replacement had leaked as well, only this time it flooded my kitchen causing major damage to the laminate floor, underlay and the subfloor. John Lewis went back and forth, again passing the issue from department to department, and it eventually agreed to send me a replacement – an AEG model which has been fine ever since. Since then, I have been battling to get someone to pay for the damage which I’ve been quoted between £763 and £983 to fix, depending on labour time and materials. John Lewis sent the claim to Samsung which rejected it and said it wasn’t liable. John Lewis then responded saying that it wasn’t going to pay for the damage, either. On John Lewis’s website people have left reviews of this model saying that their machine had leaked, too. Samsung claims that we damaged the washer drum by including keys or a coin in a wash, which, even if it was true, would be absurd. I believe there is a genuine design flaw in the model of Samsung I purchased, which I note the store has since stopped selling. NA, Sheffield I initially thought this would be fairly easy to resolve given that all you are claiming is £760, but that has not been the case. Both John Lewis and Samsung have refused to help. Despite the fact that you had two machines (both model number WD90T534DBN) that have both leaked, the companies are claiming, as you say, that the second leak was not a manufacturing fault, but came from damage to the drum caused by a set of keys or a coin being put in with some clothes. They say that “a full engineer inspection proved that no manufacturing issues are responsible for the damage”. You argue that they have produced no evidence, and note that there is a class action in the US in which owners claim Samsung has used poor quality steel in its drums which, in turn, has caused failures. Citizens Advice advises consumers in your position to seek redress from the retailer from which you bought the item. Gather as much evidence as you can of other models similarly leaking and file a small claim online. In the meantime, other Samsung machine owners need to be aware of how sensitive their machines can be. I would argue that a washing machine that can be damaged by a pound coin or similar is not fit for purpose. It is telling that you have had no problems since you switched to AEG. Good luck. We’ll report the outcome in due course. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.Q My wife and I (both mid-40s with two primary school aged kids) currently own a home in south-east London which is valued at about £575,000 and has a £250,000 mortgage on it. We also still own and rent out our previous home which has a £100,000 buy-to-let interest-only mortgage and gives us an annual rental income of £18,500. I’d estimate that the rental property is worth somewhere between £475,000 and £550,000. Its value is a little vague as very few similar properties have sold since we bought it off plan in 2003 so we have nothing to compare it with. However, it’s in a prime location popular with buy-to-let investors. My wife is very keen to sell up both properties and buy something mortgage free. Her job is very stressful and from time to time she dreams of packing it all in and becoming an artist. This would probably mean moving far from our current area, which I really don’t want to do. However, I think the rental income, plus our equity, means we should either remortgage both to the max and buy something bigger, or else increase our BTL mortgage and pay off our home mortgage for lower monthly repayments. We’ve worked hard to reduce our borrowing over the years, while increasing value, which I don’t want to throw away. What are the pitfalls of my approaches, and what would you suggest? GS A I suggest that you start by looking at hard facts before coming to a conclusion that you don’t find favour with a certain course of action. For example, you say that your wife’s idea of selling both your properties and buying one mortgage free “would probably mean moving far from our current area” but I can’t see why you think that. If you sold both properties and paid off the mortgages on them you would be left with £700,000 to play with which seems ample to buy somewhere in your current area (given that your current home is valued at £575,000). You could also achieve your wife’s dream of being mortgage free – and minimise the disruption of moving house – by selling just your rental property and using the £375,000 (left after clearing the £100,000 mortgage) to pay off the £250,000 mortgage on your home. What you would do with the remaining £125,000 in cash is up to you. I am totally flummoxed as to why – when your wife is aspiring to be mortgage free – you think that remortgaging both properties “to the max” would help her achieve that aspiration. I am also struggling to get my head around the concept of increasing a mortgage to achieve lower monthly repayments. Increasing your mortgage seems to be in complete contradiction of your desire not to throw away your hard work in reducing your borrowing over the years. So I’m stumped and I suspect that your wife might be too so maybe it’s time for the two of you to have a chat about what you want out of life and how to achieve it.Vaccine clinics and general practitioners have begun administering Covid-19 booster shots to the general population, with almost 2 million Australians set to be eligible for their third dose by Christmas. More than 170,000 severely immunocompromised Australians had already received third doses as a part of a limited early phase of eligibility, however from Monday, any Australian who received their second Covid-19 vaccine dose at least six months ago is now eligible for a booster. Here’s everything you need to know about whether you can get a booster shot yet, and what it will mean for your immunity status. Who is eligible? You’re eligible for a booster shot once six months has passed since you received your second dose of an approved Covid-19 vaccine. This means anyone who received their second dose on or before 8 May is now eligible. Given Australia’s vaccine rollout was initially slow, it’s expected that booster eligibility and uptake will largely mirror the pace of the early phases of the rollout. By Christmas, the federal government believes 1.7m people will be eligible for their booster shot. Will any groups be prioritised? The government has said aged care and disability settings will be prioritised. This reflects the phases of prioritisation for first doses earlier this year, as it will be people in these groups that become the first Australians to have six months pass since their second dose. However anyone who is eligible for a third dose because six months has passed since their second dose can book from Monday. If I’m eligible, when and where do I get it? You can already book your third dose for vaccine clinics and GPs that were part of the initial rollout. You can either book via the government’s Vaccine Clinic Finder website (previously known as the vaccine eligibility checker), or contact a practice if they take bookings directly. You don’t have to book at the same location you received your first and second doses. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning If it’s not six months since my second dose, can I book a booster in advance? Yes, but it depends generally on how far in advance the clinic or practitioner takes Covid-19 vaccine bookings. You can book via the government’s Vaccine Clinic Finder website, with participating clinics currently accepting future bookings. Is the booster shot free? Yes. Just like the first and second shots, Covid-19 vaccines in Australia are free. Which brand of vaccine will I get for my booster? Does it have to be the same as my first two? As of Monday, Pfizer is the only vaccine approved for use as a booster dose, however health minister Greg Hunt has said he expects other brands including Moderna to apply to the Therapeutic Goods Administration for approval. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) advice is that third doses are of an mRNA vaccine – which are currently the Pfizer or Moderna options. Given that only Pfizer is approved for third doses, you can expect that this is the brand of vaccine you’ll receive if you book your booster dose in the near future. Generally, Atagi’s advice is if your first two doses were of an mRNA vaccine, you should stick with the same vaccine type for your third. If you received Moderna for your first two doses in Australia, you’re still a few months off being eligible for your booster shot. If your first two doses were AstraZeneca – which is not an mRNA vaccine – the advice is for your third dose to be an mRNA vaccine. However the government has said there may be certain circumstances where someone needs an AstraZeneca vaccine as their booster, giving the example of someone who had side effects after receiving a second mRNA vaccine. Will my booster shot show up on my vaccine passport? Yes. Hunt said Medicare’s vaccination records will be updated to reflect third doses. Will my fully vaccinated status end if I don’t get my booster dose? At the moment, so long as you’ve had two doses of an approved vaccine, you’ll still be considered fully vaccinated, and therefore eligible for all of the state and federal government introduced freedoms. Hunt said the federal government “at this point, our medical advice is that if you have had two doses, you are fully vaccinated and the booster adds to that” and that freedoms for fully vaccinated Australians, including the right to international travel, is “based on the medical advice and the medical advice is that two doses represents full vaccination”. States and territories may set their own policies, however they are yet to announce if booster shots will impact fully vaccinated status. How will booster shots impact international travel? It depends where you’re travelling. In terms of leaving and returning to Australia, Hunt has said Australians who have had two doses of a Covid vaccine will still be considered fully vaccinated, and won’t need a dose within six months to be able to leave Australia. However, countries around the world who are at the advanced stages of their vaccine rollouts are already factoring booster shots into their entry requirements. Israel’s government has moved to incorporate booster doses into its vaccine freedom “green pass” system. Travellers are only able to enter the country if they have received their second or booster dose within six months, and in terms of freedoms when in the country, green passes are only valid for six months after their second, or third booster shot, or after recovering from Covid. Austria and Croatia have also put expiry dates of 270 days on their Covid vaccine certificates, after which point a booster is required to enter. Will we need more boosters after a third dose? It’s too early to know. Australian experts and health leaders have made comments in recent months that immunity data will need to be monitored over coming months before decisions can be made about further doses. The emergence of future variants could also impact whether further rounds of boosters are needed.When director Tamara Saviano decided to make a film about the Americana songwriter Guy Clark, she knew she couldn’t tell his story without covering the lives of two other creative souls – his wife, the songwriter and painter Susanna Clark, and his best friend, the fellow Americana star, Townes Van Zandt. “They influenced him so much, and he influenced them too,” said Saviano to the Guardian. “You can’t separate them.” At the same time, their entwined lives endured deep fractures and brutal hurts. The story Saviano tells in the new documentary Without Getting Killed or Caught, named after a lyric from one of Clark’s best-known songs, LA Freeway, traces a wide arc of personal traumas and creative triumphs. It involves a violent suicide, multiple addictions, and ruinous depressions. But, despite all that, the central figures forged a three-way love that, however unconventional, enriched them all. To reveal the intimacies of the story, Saviano scored a true coup – audio and written diaries left by Susanna Clark after her death from cancer in 2012. Throughout the film, the diaries are read by Oscar-winner Sissy Spacek. “They’re a goldmine,” Saviano said of the tapes. That the director was able to secure them from Guy Clark shows the trust he had in her. Saviano, a music journalist, got to know the songwriter, who died of lymphoma in 2016, over a decade ago when she wrote his memoir, which shares the name of her film. Amazingly, Clark never listened to, or read, his wife’s diaries when he bequeathed them to Saviano. “Guy said, ‘Whatever’s in there is Susanna’s truth and you’re welcome to it,’” the director said. “He wasn’t afraid of it. I thought that was really brave of him.” Then again, Clark’s openness dovetails with the kind of songs he wrote. Like John Prine, Clark used plain language in his songs to achieve literary feats. Similarly, the music he composed infused basic American genres, like folk, blues and country, with fresh tunes, which he delivered in a voice that communicated both a dry humor and a ready empathy. Throughout the film, friends of Guy’s, including fellow Americana stars Rodney Crowell, Steve Earle and Vince Gill, talk admiringly about the craft in his songs, as well as his indifference to commercial concerns. They speak just as openly about the complications in his key relationships. Guy’s connection to Susanna began in tragedy. When they met, he was dating her sister, Bunny, who had become pregnant. Soon after, she killed herself. “There was no singular reason anybody could pinpoint,” Saviano said. “There was a news article that said she suffered from depression but nobody really knows.” Guy wrote the poignant song for Bunny, She Ain’t Going Nowhere. The loss of her sister hit Susanna hard. In the diary she wrote, “I was desperate to hold on to my sister and Guy was the closest thing. Over our grief for Bunny, we fell in love.” Back then, in the late 60s, Guy had a day job as an art director for PBS Television but he longed to devote himself fully to songwriting. He took inspiration from his friend Townes Van Zandt who had already started a prolific career. After Susanna met Townes, they forged a bond as deep as she had with her husband. “Guy and I were married, but Townes and I were soul mates,” she wrote in her diary. The relationship between Susanna and Townes wasn’t just emotional but, at times, sexual. Oddly, the latter aspect isn’t covered in the film. “To me, it just didn’t matter,” Saviano said of the omission. “It was really about the love and the friendship between them. Guy knew that it was sexual and it was just accepted. We have to keep in mind that they were all young adults in the free love era of the 60s. And it’s not like Guy was the perfect husband by any stretch. They were all individual artists and they wanted to do what they wanted to do. They weren’t big on convention in any part of their lives.” As Steve Earle says in the film, “the relationship between Susanna and Townes, nobody talked about because it was a little too intimate to be in the same room with sometimes. And nobody brought up questions nobody wanted the answer to.” Saviano believes Townes gave Susanna something that Guy couldn’t. “He had this spiritual, vulnerable side and Guy didn’t share that,” she said. “Guy was a much more stoic, no-nonsense kind of person. I think he liked that Townes took some of the pressure off him so he didn’t have to be the charming husband all the time.” Beyond their friendship, the trio’s bond centered on the art of songwriting. To celebrate it, Guy, Susanna and Townes formed an informal salon of fellow songsmiths. Susanna used to tape some of their conversations, several of which are featured in the film. Some capture them drunk, a key feature of their nights together. Though Susanna most often expressed her creativity as a painter – evidenced by work of hers that graces album covers by Guy, Emmylou Harris, Willie Nelson and others – she also wrote songs. Hers had more commercial appeal than Guy’s or Townes’s, which caused some jealousy. Two pieces she co-wrote became no 1 country hits: I’ll Be Your San Antone Rose for the singer Dottsy, and Come from the Heart sung by Kathy Mattea. While some of Guy’s songs did well through cover versions by artists like Jerry Jeff Walker, Ricky Scaggs and Vince Gill, his own albums in the mid-70s bombed. Worse, he fought mightily with his record company over their insistence on fuller arrangements and production. Even the use of drums in his recordings irritated him, believing they took attention away from the heart of the song. Van Zandt went further, going out of his way to alienate even those Nashville executives who tried to help him. Guy Clark released five albums on major labels and hated all of them, though they contained classic pieces he wrote, like Desperados Waiting for a Train or The Randall Knife. In the early 80s, he quit the business for five years. By decade’s end, he came back to record for the kind of indie labels that allowed him to perform largely with an acoustic guitar, as he preferred. His work wound up anticipating the Americana movement, for which he was later recognized with many awards in that field. “Guy has legendary status there,” Saviano said. At the same time, his marriage to Susanna went through terrible times, leading them to split for a number of years. “She had enough of my bullshit,” Guy says in the film, while in Susanna’s diaries, she expresses her need to work out things on her own. In time, however, the depth of their connection brought them back together and Townes remained a tight part of their lives. But by then Townes had begun a fatal spiral downward, with addictions to both alcohol and heroin. “Nowadays, Townes would have been diagnosed as bipolar,” surmised Saviano. “When he was young, they did shock therapy on him and he lost all of his memory. So, who knows what that did to his brain.” When Townes died, at 52 in 1997, Susanna took to bed and never left it. She also became addicted to the opioid Percocet. The director believes that Townes’s death compounded lingering grief she felt from her sister’s death. But “because she was in bed for 15 years, people in Nashville wrote her off as crazy,” Saviano said. “I wanted them to know that Susanna wasn’t crazy. She was grieving and never rebounded from it.” The director said one of the reasons she made the film was to restore Susanna’s reputation as well as to burnish the work of Guy and Townes. Susanna died before she could give an opinion about Saviano’s use of her diaries in the film. But, the director said she felt “quite confident that her stamp of approval is there. Quite frankly, I think Susanna has been guiding this whole process from the great beyond.” As evidence, she points to some odd connections between Susanna, Guy and the diaries’ narrator, Sissy Spacek, which she only discovered while making the film. Back in the 70s, Spacek had learned to play guitar from Guy’s first wife, Susan Spaw, and the actor recorded a song written by Susanna on her one and only album, back in 1983. The director believes both Guy and Susanna would have appreciated the fact that her film doesn’t sugarcoat their complicated story. “Guy wasn’t afraid of the truth,” she said. “None of them were. He would say, “Yeah, this is life. This is what it was.” Without Getting Killed or Caught is available to rent digitallyThe videos from the Russian prison hospital are almost too horrific to describe. In the worst, the victims are tied down while other inmates rape or penetrate them with metal objects, the screams and abuse recorded in bodycam footage that was later used as blackmail. Sergey Savelyev says he spent two of his years as an inmate secretly copying hundreds of videos of rape and other abuse, taking them from an internal network in a prison hospital that activists call one of the country’s most notorious torture chambers. “I was always scared,” he said in an interview from France, where he has requested asylum. “If I ever talked about what I was doing, I wouldn’t be talking to you today.” During his release from prison earlier this year, he retrieved a two-terabyte hard disk with hundreds of copied videos and other documents in an operation he called “extremely risky, the most dangerous moment”. But the truth is that he was always in peril and still is. That is why Savelyev has gone public as the source of probably the most explosive leak of secret videos and files in the history of the Russian prison system. “As long as I was anonymous but the security services knew my identity, my physical liquidation wouldn’t have caused any commotion,” he said. “Now it is much harder [to kill] me.” The revelations have prompted a reluctant investigation in Russia, where authorities have punished several officers and a top prison official has resigned in Saratov, one of several regions notorious for prison abuse. But they have also turned on Savelyev, issuing an international warrant for his arrest. “Factually, it’s an admission of guilt, a confession,” Savelyev said, calling the pressure on him “inevitable”. He now regularly receives threats. “But these kinds of instruments won’t work on me.” Human rights workers have for years documented incidents of torture and sexual abuse in Russian prisons, usually from eyewitness accounts or a rare leak of security footage. But the comprehensive, first-hand evidence delivered by Savelyev was groundbreaking, said Vladimir Osechkin, the head of Gulagu.net, the prisoners’ rights group that began publishing the videos last month. “This kind of leak of secret information … has never taken place in the history of modern Russia or the post-Soviet space,” said Osechkin in remarks from France, where he has been reviewing the data along with Savelyev and other activists. Osechkin said that a new documentary film would identify more individuals directly responsible for torture and abuse at the Saratov prison hospital. Afterwards, Osechkin said, they plan to focus on top officials from the prison and security services whom he believes were involved in a thriving trade of blackmail and the order of abuse of inmates for money. The recordings of abuse, which Savelyev said were premeditated and then handed off to prison officials or deleted, showed that “these instances of torture, including rape, were committed by order and weren’t just individual decisions”, said Osechkin. Osechkin has written a public letter to Vladimir Putin calling for an end to the “pipeline of torture”. But there is little expectation that there will be a true accounting of the kind of abuse that took place in the Saratov prison hospital or in prison colonies in Russia. The problem of corrupt officials is compounded by an honour code among prisoners that punishes the victims of sexual crime by putting them in a caste of “untouchables” regularly subjected to abuse. It is difficult to convince many to speak up. Savelyev called the Russian official reaction “weak”, saying the legal and prison system were “built upon torture” and that it may be impossible to reform. “The system looks like it needs to be burnt down and rebuilt from scratch,” said Savelyev, who spent more than seven years behind bars on drug-related charges. He says he now feels safe, although his family remains at risk in his native Belarus. They found out that he was the source of the prison leaks after his escape to France, which he says he managed to pull off despite Russian officials knowing that he had been working with Osechkin since shortly after his release this year. He escaped Russia last month by traveling through Belarus, then to north Africa and on to France, where he submitted a request for asylum. Savelyev said he was not the target of violence in Saratov, but that the systemic abuse of other prisoners was a well-known fact. After he was tapped as a reliable inmate who could work with computers, he said, he was appointed a kind of system administrator who could review files, including those shot on guards’ body cameras. That was when he began seeing videos of torture and sexual abuse. He could not recall the exact moment he decided to begin copying the files, he said, but said he was motivated by disgust and an urgent feeling that the abuse needed to be made public. “Everyone had heard about it,” he said. “But hearing about it is one thing, and seeing it yourself is a very different thing … I never had any doubt that this is what I planned to do.” Since the leaked footage had gone public, Osechkin said, other whistleblowers had begun leaking videos from inside at least four other Russian prisons. “I’m proud of that, that I’ve set an example for others with access to information,” said Savelyev, who laughed off popular comparisons to the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden. In Saratov, he notes, more than 400 inmates have now complained about torture, extortion and sexual abuse at the hands of prison authorities. “It’s a very big number,” he says. “Nothing like that has been seen before.” There is little chance that he can return to Russia or his native Belarus in the foreseeable future. But for now, he says, he feels safe. “I want to continue this,” he says. “For the first time in many years, what I’m doing brings me satisfaction. And it helps people.”School students could undertake daily Covid tests rather than quarantine at home under a “test to stay” approach being considered by Australia’s state and territory leaders. The Doherty Institute has released modelling which examines what would happen to infection numbers in a school outbreak under various scenarios. It finds that incursions into schools would be “inevitable” during rising cases of community transmission, and notes that returning students to in-person learning and keeping schools open safely has been identified as a national priority. The findings, provided to national cabinet on Friday, recommend surveillance testing to allow for early detection of positive Covid cases in schools, which would reduce the likelihood of an outbreak, and suggests that in the event of a positive case, close contacts should not have to quarantine. “We compared a seven-day quarantine of classroom contacts to a strategy called a ‘test to stay’ … where for seven days, if there’s a case in a school, their classroom contacts need to have a daily rapid antigen test before attending school, and they can continue attending school provided they keep testing negative,” Dr Nick Scott, who oversaw the schools modelling for the Doherty Institute, said on Monday. “What we found was that the seven-day quarantine and the seven-day test-to-stay were approximately equivalent in terms of infection outcomes and outbreak risk, but the seven-day test-to-stay strategy had the considerable additional benefit that there were much less days of face-to-face teaching lost.” Under a class contact “test to stay” regime, an average of 69 face-to-face teaching days would be lost, compared to an average of 256 if all class contacts were forced into quarantine. Twice weekly testing of students would also markedly increase the chances of “nipping an outbreak in the bud”, the report found, with a small increase in average school days lost, but far fewer large outbreaks. If symptomatic students were diagnosed and sent home early, there would be an average of only 10 lost teaching days per incursion. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Scott said the modelling found that in the absence of screening or any form of contact tracing or management, between 37 and 47% of incursions would “die out” given the “randomness” of Covid transmission, but between one-third to one-half of cases would result in an outbreak of between 20 and 50 infections. The report found the greatest benefit for face-to-face learning from the combination of surveillance and a test-to -stay regime would be when community cases of the disease and school incursions were highest. “Evaluation of the ability to implement school based surveillance and testing strategies is recommended as a priority, to support a safe return to face to face learning,” the report says. The Doherty Institute was also asked to look at the risks facing Indigenous communities and reported that a “reactive” vaccine approach could also help limit the spread of the disease in the event of an outbreak. It concludes that in a community of about 1,000 with low baseline vaccine coverage, a reactive vaccination program could reduce ward and ICU admissions by 47%. The release of the modelling comes as Australia rolls out its booster program to all Australians who were vaccinated at least six months ago, with immunocompromised and other vulnerable groups first in line. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said 173,000 people had already received a third dose under the booster program. “GPs, state clinics, commonwealth clinics, Indigenous medical centres, aged care and disability have been vaccinating people with boosters, so it’s a great start,” he said. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the government was still assessing whether to roll out the vaccine to children aged 5 to 11, saying Australian regulators were yet to form a medical opinion based on initial safety data from the United States. “We need to be very cautious. And I can tell you that we won’t take a further step on this unless there is clear medical advice that it should proceed,” Morrison said. “We’ll be ready to go if and when the medical experts say it’s safe to do so and we won’t be authorising a vaccination arrangement for children aged 5 to 11 until the medical experts say it’s safe for your children to be vaccinated.” Morrison said that the risk profile was different for younger children compared to the rest of the population, given the incidence of serious illness was lower. The prime minister was also asked his view on the indication from the Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, that the state would not open its borders until 90% of the over-12 population was vaccinated. Morrison said it was a “scientifically backed-in proposition” that once vaccination rates reached 80%, states could take the “next step”. “You are actually putting a price on Australians, when you continue to put heavy restrictions on your economy, once you get 80% vaccination rates,” Morrison said. On Monday, Flight Centre chief executive Graham Turner, said the company was considering a legal challenge against the WA border closure if the state did not open up once the 70% to 80% vaccine coverage was reached. Under the WA government’s transition plan, the 90% threshold is expected to be reached by late January, with estimates that the higher threshold will result in 250,000 more West Australians getting vaccinated and 200 lives saved.Three months ago, during the height of a fierce Ohioan summer, the Western &amp; Southern Open in Cincinnati opened with a brutal contest in the women’s draw. Ons Jabeur and Anett Kontaveit, two unseeded, high-class players drew each other in the first round and then for more than two hours they battled into the night. The match was eventually decided by minuscule details, Jabeur winning 6-2, 4-6, 7-5. At the time nobody could have imagined how the rest of the season would unfold for them. While the Tunisian was in the midst of a breakthrough summer and sat in the final spot in the race to the WTA Finals in Guadalajara, the year-end tournament held between the top eight players, Kontaveit’s season had become stagnant. Her defeat against Jabeur was her fifth consecutive loss. She was 27th in the race, almost 1,000 points behind Jabeur. Her unsatisfactory form had led her to a new coaching appointment that week, the former player Dmitry Tursunov. A week later she went to Cleveland and defeated five lower-ranked players to win her second WTA title. Instead of a displeasing end to the season, that victory began one of the most abrupt, unforeseen late-season turnarounds in recent memory. As summer faded, Kontaveit played with increasing authority, commanding the important points as results quickly fell her way. She won her second title of 2021 in Ostrava, demolishing three top-15 players in a row. Then she went to Moscow and won there, too, destroying Garbiñe Muguruza, the world No 5, 6-1, 6-1 en route. In Romania she outclassed Simona Halep 6-3, 6-2 in the final of the former No 1’s home tournament, leapfrogging Jabeur to qualify for the WTA Finals, which begin on Wednesday, in the process. Kontaveit has risen from 28th in the WTA rankings at the end of July to eighth, has won four titles in her past six completed tournaments and compiled a monstrous win-loss record of 26-2 since that defeat against Jabeur in August. She is the in-form player. Although the abruptness of her success is surprising, Kontaveit’s ability has been clear over the past four years she has spent as a top‑30 player. She is a premier shotmaker who takes the ball daringly early and is armed with one of the sweetest, most destructive backhands in the game. She hails from Estonia, one of the smallest countries in Europe with a population of 1.3 million. Her biggest obstacle was simple: when she faced the big players in the biggest tournaments they could count on her faltering or playing scared in the most important moments. She offers no magical reason for her transformation, except that she is enjoying her tennis more, working consistently and taking each challenge as it comes. Her run underlines that success comes at different times for everyone and that, with discipline, patience and sufficient work, just one positive result and the confidence that comes with it can shift a player’s entire trajectory. A few months before Kontaveit made her name as a junior in 2011, winning the prestigious Orange Bowl just before her 16th birthday, Jabeur became the first Arab girl to win a junior grand slam tournament, at the French Open. While some, like Emma Raducanu, can instantly break through, their decade-long trajectories show how many lessons, losses, slumps and small nuggets of progress it can take to reach the top stages. Few players can step on to any court around the world as an unknown and leave with the crowd chanting their name but such is the force of her varied, pure style of play, this is a constant feature of Jabeur’s career. She peppers opponents with drop shots, net forays, nuclear forehands and just about every other shot in the book. Like Kontaveit she has had to learn how to produce in the pressure moments but, additionally, having so many options can often be a menace. Jabeur has slowly learned how to harness her elaborate style and with every year she has grown. The fruits of Jabeur’s labour have been clear throughout another season of blazing her trail around the world. During the grasscourt season, she became the first Arab woman to win a WTA tour title. She followed her top-20 debut in August, shortly after reaching the Wimbledon quarter-final, by becoming the first Arab and north African tennis player, man or woman, to reach the top 10. Her success is all the more fulfilling because it has been achieved in her own way. She is accompanied by a Tunisian coach, Issam Jellali. She has thrived by refining her own unique, creative style instead of neutering it, as other coaches have suggested in the past, to suit the modern game. Tunis is still her official residence. In the end Jabeur’s form did not fade at all. She reached a final in Chicago and the semi-finals of Indian Wells but as Kontaveit surged Jabeur picked up an injury and was unable to compete in her final two events. After Kontaveit passed her for the final spot in Mexico, she was the first to congratulate the Estonian, whom she has known since their junior years. Despite coming from a region that is barely represented at the top of tennis, she is one of the most sporting, social and popular players in the locker room. For both players the lesson from their success is that patience is everything. While Kontaveit has been rewarded with her first WTA Finals appearance, Jabeur should take solace in the steadiness of her own rise and the certainty that, if she continues on the same path, there is so much more to accomplish.The story of Venus and Serena Williams’ rise to greatness, two legendary tennis careers propelled by the foresight of their father, has often been likened to a Hollywood movie. Now, with the release of King Richard on 19 November, it will be. Will Smith stars as Richard Williams, the sisters’ father, in a film depicting how he guided his two daughters from the public courts of Compton, California, to becoming two of the most accomplished tennis players in the history of the sport. Smith cites a famous interview involving a teenage Venus Williams, during which Richard Williams interrupts and criticises a journalist for questioning his daughter’s confidence, as inspiration for his decision to take the role: “I saw that in real time and the look on Venus’ face – the image burned in my heart because that’s how I wanted my daughter to look when I showed up,” Smith said in a press conference on Sunday. “That interview really changed my parenting at that time. “I fell in love with Richard Williams 20-something years ago. When the opportunity to be a part of this came up, that was the first thing that I remembered. I knew I wanted to show a father protecting a daughter like that to the world.” Venus and Serena Williams, who are played by Saniyya Sidney and Demi Singleton respectively, have gone on to become two of the greatest tennis players of all time, with Serena Williams winning 23 major singles titles, the open era record among both male and female players, while Venus Williams won seven grand slam titles in singles. They are both executive producers of King Richard alongside their older sister Isha Price, who played a more active role in the film’s production and was a regular presence on the set during filming. Price says that she initially brought the script to her sisters and the rest of their family, and that it took some time for them to build sufficient trust in the project. She says they wanted to make sure that the “story was told right, it was fair and it was honest, and it really displayed the integrity that we’ve always tried to have as a family”. She added: “It took some time to get there with my family because there’s a little bit of distrust, as you can imagine, being in the public eye for as long as they have.” The film premiered at the Telluride film festival in September and has received positive reviews for its storytelling and Smith’s performance. Despite the success Serena Williams has achieved across a 24-year career, she says that the experience of seeing her story come to life in a Hollywood movie was eye-opening. “Honestly, no word describes it better than just ‘surreal’, just to see these incredible actresses and everyone behind it just putting this all together about our dad’s journey,” said Serena Williams. “Because of myself and my sister, it really is just like, ‘Wow, really, OK? Are we really something?” kind of thing. It really is super surreal for me.” While their careers are being told on the big screen, they have not yet finished. During a recent interview on Jimmy Kimmel Live for the movie’s promotional run, Serena Williams said that she was “definitely” planning to play in the Australian Open. The 40-year-old has not competed since tearing her hamstring after slipping in her first-round match at Wimbledon in June. Venus Williams, also nursing an injury that forced her to withdraw from the US Open, has also previously stated her intention to compete in 2022. Venus Williams, 41, made her professional debut 27 years ago.The first week of Cop26 was a packed affair, with world leaders of the G20 group of the world’s biggest economies first meeting in Rome, then moving on to meet more than 100 other leaders in Glasgow for the initial stage of a fortnight of intensive talks. António Guterres, the UN secretary general, warned that recent optimistic assessments were “an illusion”, exhorting leaders to make stronger efforts to cut greenhouse gases. The biggest country to respond was India, the world’s third biggest emitter, which set out a target of net zero by 2070, which most regard as too late for the Cop26 goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels but some said would be met sooner. Joe Biden used his final words to take a swipe at China. The Chinese delegation seemed less perturbed, having its own issues with marshalling smaller developing countries, which are concerned that the 1.5C goal is slipping out of reach. Boris Johnson was alternately hopeful and despairing, and viewed with puzzlement at best and as clownish at worst by the rest of the world, before hopping on a private jet on Tuesday for dinner with the arch-climate denier and former Telegraph editor Charles Moore to discuss the Owen Paterson scandal (and look how that went). Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia has been working behind the scenes to stymie progress on ratcheting up ambition on emissions cuts. But by far the biggest flurry of activity in week one came from the UK hosts, who orchestrated a series of major announcements and deals on forests, finance and coal, to keep up a stream of positive news and momentum, buoying the talks while the negotiators worked on the tricky details. One particular missive, sent by the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy at 4.14pm on Wednesday but embargoed until 10.30pm that evening, tells the story of the week in microcosm. END OF COAL IN SIGHT AS UK SECURES AMBITIOUS COMMITMENTS AT COP26 SUMMIT “Cash, coal, cars and trees – to keep the world to 1.5C” was the catchy mantra set out earlier this year by Johnson’s spokesperson Allegra Stratton. Coal is a key element of this: the dirtiest fossil fuel, still in widespread use and still expanding in some countries. If coal use continues, the International Energy Agency chief Fatih Birol has made clear, the world has no hope of remaining within 1.5C. Taking aim at coal is thus essential to any successful outcome at Cop26. But within the UN process, countries are asked for their own nationally determined contributions (NDCs). In these, their use of particular energy forms can be obscured or not recorded at all. So separating out coal from other sources of energy is a key way for the UK to highlight the problem and set countries on the clean energy track needed. Thanks to a package of support from the UK and our international partners, a 190-strong coalition has today agreed to both phase out coal power and end support for new coal power plants. But here is where the UK runs into trouble. There are just over 190 countries at Cop26. Can all of them be planning to phase out coal? Or is this too good to be true? The UK’s campaign sees major banks commit to end financing coal, on top of China, Japan, Korea and the G20 commitments to end overseas finance for coal generation by the end of 2021, effectively ending all public financing of new unabated coal power. Again, this is a key goal of Cop26 – earlier this year, the G7, under the UK’s presidency, agreed to halt the overseas financing of coal, after stiff opposition from Japan. China later announced that it would follow suit, a major achievement that means all the biggest state financiers of coal in the developing world will stop funding new plants in developing countries. But it does not say anything about these countries setting up new coal plants in their own countries – they can still do so. And it does not say anything about the private sector – banks can still fund coal even if they have signed up the UK government’s other major finance initiative of the week, the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ), supposedly a $130tn (£96tn) pact by 450 banks to move their portfolios to net zero by 2050. Agreed under the UK’s Cop26 presidency, countries pledge to accelerate coal phase-out and rapidly scale up deployment of clean power generation, marking a momentous turning point in the global clean energy transition. This stream of announcements reflects the approach the UK has taken to Cop26, which has essentially two strands: the tough UN negotiations, which centre on getting countries to come forward with NDCs to reduce emissions and sorting out the complexities of the 2015 Paris agreement; and a series of deals and initiatives that are outside the technical part of the UN process but will provide a means of cutting emissions. These two strands are nothing new – there has been broad acknowledgement for years that not everything needed to cut emissions will be achieved through the UN framework convention on climate change, not least because the cumbersome processin which decisions can only be made by consensus, can easily be halted by unfriendly governments. In the US, Republican administrations with presidents hostile to climate action have been in power for 12 out of the last 22 years, and could soon be again. While Donald Trump was in the White House, withdrawing the US from the Paris agreement, initiatives from businesses and “non-state actors”, such as individual US states and cities in the US and around the world, were essential to keeping progress alive. So at Cop26 there has been a broad variety of side deals (though UK officials bridle at the term) including a US-EU led pact to cut methane emissions by 30% by 2030, which if successful would reduce warming by 0.2C; an agreement by more than 130 countries to halt deforestation by 2030; and the Glasgow emissions-cutting deals among global businesses involved in cement and steel production, which experts said would be vital to reducing emissions from those hard-to-decarbonise industries. The end of coal – the single biggest contributor to climate change – is in sight thanks to the UK securing a 190-strong coalition of countries and organisations at Cop26, with countries such as Poland, Vietnam, Egypt, Chile and Morocco announcing clear commitments to phase out coal power. That 190-strong coalition again – but this time it is referred to as countries and organisations. And we get a hint that the announcement may be less powerful than it first seemed: Poland and Vietnam are big users of coal, but Egypt, Chile and Morocco are minor users. Egypt, for example, uses just 0.1% of the world’s coal. Today’s commitments, brought together through UK-led efforts including the new ‘Global Coal to Clean Power Transition Statement’, encompass developed and developing countries, major coal users and climate vulnerable countries. This includes 18 countries committing for the first time to phase out and not build or invest in new coal power, including Poland, Vietnam, and Chile, marking a milestone moment at Cop26 in the global clean energy transition. So here is the actual point: only 18 countries are actually agreeing to phase out coal power, and they do not include 15 of the world’s biggest coal users. This statement, launched today, commits nations across the world to: · End all investment in new coal power generation domestically and internationally · Rapidly scale up deployment of clean power generation · Phase out coal power in economies in the 2030s for major economies and 2040s for the rest of the world · Make a just transition away from coal power in a way that benefits workers and communities. Take careful note of the dates for phase-out here. The 2030s for major economies is too late – they should be phasing out coal in the next decade for a 1.5C target to be possible. Germany, for instance, is targeting 2038 for its coal phaseout – much too late, experts say. And the 2040s may be just about tenable for some developing countries, but who are developing countries? Well, it turns out that Poland considers itself a developing country, despite being the world’s 21st biggest economy by GDP. And Poland will phase out coal by 2049. Technically, that means it can reach net-zero emissions by 2050. But if all countries did that, the 1.5C target would be well out of reach. That’s because of the “area under the curve”. The climate responds to the accumulation of carbon in the atmosphere. Every year of emissions adds to the stock of carbon. Scientists say we must reach net zero emissions by 2050 to have a a hope of sticking to 1.5C. But unless we also cut emissions in the short term, on the way to 2050, the cumulative emissions up to mid-century – the area under the curve if you plot annual emissions from now to 2050 – could be so high that we bust through the 1.5C target anyway. This is on top of China, Japan and Korea, the three largest public financiers of coal, committing to end overseas finance for coal generation by the end of 2021, announced in the last year during the UK’s incoming Cop26 presidency. Agreements at the G7, G20 and OECD to end public international coal finance send a strong signal that the world economy is shifting to renewables. This could end over 40GW of coal across 20 countries, equivalent to over half of the UK’s electricity generating capacity. The business and energy secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, said: “Today marks a milestone moment in our global efforts to tackle climate change as nations from all corners of the world unite in Glasgow to declare that coal has no part to play in our future power generation. “Spearheaded by the UK’s Cop26 presidency, today’s ambitious commitments made by our international partners demonstrate that the end of coal is in sight. The world is moving in the right direction, standing ready to seal coal’s fate and embrace the environmental and economic benefits of building a future that is powered by clean energy. “To meet the goals of the Paris agreement to limit global temperature rises to 1.5 degrees, the global transition to clean power needs to progress four to six times faster than at present. With coal being the single largest contributor to climate change, phasing it out and delivering a rapid, inclusive transition to clean energy is essential if we are to keep 1.5 degrees alive. “28 new members have today signed up to the world’s largest alliance on phasing out coal, the Powering Past Coal Alliance launched and co-chaired by the UK. Chile, Singapore and Durban have today joined over 150 countries, subnationals and businesses, including finance partners NatWest, Lloyds Banking, HSBC and Export Development Canada. This accounts for over $17tn assets now committed to PPCA coal phase out goals.” The Powering Past Coal Alliance, set up in 2017 by the UK and Canada, has been heavily criticised by NGOs for the weakness of its rules, which allow countries huge latitude in continuing to use coal. HSBC has also come under fire at Cop26 for having poured $15.2bn into coal from 2018 to 2020. Patrick McCully, senior analyst at the campaign group Reclaim Finance, said: “We do need to make coal history, and fast. But sadly, this new coalition replicates the failings of the Powering Past Coal Alliance. Put bluntly, the PPCA doesn’t do what it says on the tin, given that its global coal exit date of 2050 comes 10 years too late [and] the question of coal mining is simply omitted.” There has also been a 76% cut in the number of new coal plants planned globally over the last six years, which means the cancellation of 1,000GW of new coal plants since the Paris agreement, roughly equivalent to 10 times the UK’s total peak generating capacity. Today’s global agreement to move away from coal to clean power has been made possible thanks to a number of other UK-convened initiatives, including: · No new coal power: The end of new coal power construction is in sight. The launch of the No New Coal Power compact by six countries at the UN high level dialogue in September was followed by the commitments in the Global Coal to Clean Power Transition Statement. This means that by the end of this year, all new public finance for unabated coal power plants will have stopped, with investments increasingly focused instead on accelerating the transition to clean energy sources such as wind and solar power, now cheaper than coal generation in most countries. This accelerates the growing global momentum to end new coal power, demonstrated by the 76% collapse in the global pipeline of proposed coal power plants since the Paris agreement in 2015. · Supporting emerging economies: In addition, major emerging economies have announced plans to accelerate a just transition from coal to clean power. This includes a South Africa Just Energy Transition Partnership worth $8.5bn, as well as Indonesia and the Philippines agreeing a ground-breaking new partnership with the Asian Development Bank to support the early retirement of existing coal plants. Further financing announcements are expected today at Cop26. · Supporting coal-intensive economies: Countries with significant coal power generation and mining face large social and financial challenges in the transition from coal. The UK’s Cop26 energy transition council (ETC) mobilises and coordinates the assistance required to enable coal intensive economies to equitably transition from coal, bringing together 20 governments and over 15 international institutions to accelerate the transition from coal to clean power as part of a green economic recovery. For example, the energy transition council’s rapid response facility delivers fast-acting technical, regulatory and commercial assistance to countries and has already responded to 24 requests in a range of areas, including energy efficiency in the Philippines and grid management in Egypt. · Ensuring a just transition: Today the UK government has also launched a new International Just Transition Declaration, ensuring the move away from coal-high carbon industries results in a sustainable, green and fair future, and one that creates high-quality new jobs and champions local social dialogue in developing and emerging economies. Coordinated by the UK government, so far, 12 countries have signed, as well as the UK and EU Commission, covering a broad spectrum of the world’s donor funding, now driving towards a just transition for communities around the world. The UK’s announcements on coal came very late in the day for newspaper deadlines, so there was little time for fact-checking. That meant some media reported on them, only to have to backtrack later – leading to suggestions that the deals were flawed or contained loopholes. Some queries submitted by the Guardian, asking for the full list of countries involved and what exactly they were signing up to, were only answered at 7pm, which is close to our first print deadlines. Further queries were answered at 10pm, just before the embargoed story could go live online, and at 5am the next day there were still more clarifications. Some of this mess is inevitable because at a live and busy conference some countries will only ever sign up at the last minute, and the UK cannot be faulted for trying to get as many on board as possible. But it also means that if anything is unclear in the announcement, accusations of flaws and backtracking will inevitably follow. It also shows the difficulty for the UK of coordinating its Cop26 strategy across government – these announcements came from BEIS, but the Cop26 unit is the one leading in Glasgow. The coal announcements were not the only controversial news last week. The UK’s forestry announcement, of 130 countries agreeing to halt deforestation, was also criticised when Indonesia appeared to deny that it intended to enforce the goal, and critics pointed out that previous forestry agreements had failed to deliver. The GFANZ alliance was also criticised for allowing the 450 participating financial institutions – which the UK announcement noted had a combined value of $130tn but failed to note were only likely to use a small slice of that for green ends in the short term – to carry on investing in fossil fuels. Mohamed Adow, director of the Nairobi-based thinktank Power Shift Africa, summed up the frustration of many: “This week has seen a blitz of announcements from the UK [that] may generate headlines, but assessing their true worth is hugely difficult, especially at speed during a Cop meeting. Boris Johnson has been criticised ‘for government by press release’, and it now seems to extend to their management of a UN climate summit. These announcements are eye candy, but the sugar rush they provide are empty calories.” The UK’s first week as Cop26 president – although the government has been preparing for this moment for more than two years – has been lively and has marked important progress as well as some reversals and rows. The second week, when negotiators have to come up with the full text of an agreement, will be much harder. But despite the difficulties above, the problems over queueing and access to negotiating rooms, most countries spoken to by the Guardian have felt that the UK was doing a creditable job. Whether that will still be the case by next weekend will depend on the UK resolving key outstanding elements: provisions in the Paris agreement governing how countries account for their emissions; whether carbon trading should play a role in helping countries meet their emissions targets; whether countries should have to return to the negotiating table every year with better NDCs if their current plans are inadequate; and above all, persuading countries that limiting global heating to 1.5C is still genuinely possible, rather than an illusion or “hypothesis”. A Cop26 spokesperson said: “We’ve seen genuine progress in the first week with a number of commitments that are key to accelerating global climate action and keeping 1.5 alive. “We’re looking forward to productive negotiations this week to push hard and make further progress for a positive outcome for the planet.”When Black Lives Matter protests swept the UK last year, Brother Nia Imara said his phone “went crazy”. Imara is the founder of the National Association of Black Supplementary Schools (Nabss), a network of Saturday or after-schools set up to tackle the underachievement of black children in mainstream education. “I was getting a lot of phone calls from parents saying, ‘I want my child to learn their history and their culture,’” he said. The conversation in the aftermath of George Floyd’s murder led many to discover the history of the black supplementary schools movement, which began in the 1970s when black communities set up weekend schools in response to racism within the mainstream school system. Imara is hopeful that the renewed appetite for a wider curriculum will boost existing supplementary schools, but believes that above all a cash injection is needed for schools struggling to pay teaching resources and increased rents, often in gentrified areas. “Take Stormzy – it was very nice of him to fund scholarships for children to go to Cambridge, but why not pay fees to go to a Saturday school?” he said. If the rapper doesn’t fancy it, perhaps more traditional grant givers will. One of the recommendations made in July by a commission established by Formula One champion Lewis Hamilton to investigate the lack of diversity in motorsport was to support Stem teaching in black supplementary schools. Ayoade Wallace, a member of Future Foundations, a network for people of colour working in the UK philanthropic sector, argues that resourcing the supplementary education movement is part of resourcing racial justice. “As well as running Saturday schools, [many groups] are also running surgeries for migrant parents, they’re also supporting people to access other services, they’re supporting families and communities in various ways – and a lot of those setups were structures that also supported people in the pandemic, such as food deliveries,” she said. It was Ruth Ibegbuna’s experience of attending supplementary sessions in Bradford that inspired her to set up the “school of her dreams”. “It helped me with who I was and helped with the confidence when it was being knocked in my school,” the former headteacher and charity CEO said. Two years ago, Ibegbuna finally put the idea she had been nurturing into action: a supplementary school for working-class children to reignite their love for learning. Rekindle, on the outskirts of Manchester’s Moss Side, will open its doors in January for 13-to-16-year-olds on weekdays after school, with Saturday morning sessions at the city’s Whitworth art gallery. Rekindle is one of several new supplementary schools in the works, alongside a Birmingham-based venture by Prof Kehinde Andrews, author of Race, Inequality and the Black Supplementary School Movement, with the Harambee Organisation of Black Unity, and will join an established network of Manchester-based schools like the Louise Da-Cocodia Education Trust and MEaP. Ibegbuna decided that the idea needed “young people at the heart” to work. She contacted eight 16-to-25-year-olds who would become the school’s trustees. Although open to all teens from working-class communities, Rekindle is inspired by the 70s black supplementary movement. Moss Side, where the school is based, is often “unfairly stigmatised as a community characterised by crime”, explains Ibegbuna, so it was important to signify strength, but also get across that “without knowledge and critical thinking, the community cannot prevail”. Mostly over video calls, the trustees, led by their 25-year-old chair, Jesse Williams, have designed the curriculum, governance structure and safeguarding policies, and raised £200,000 in funds that has allowed them to cover the cost of hiring Rekindle’s first teacher, Nika Muthra-Shah. Over a two-day residential meeting above a bar in Leeds during August, the team, alongside “elders” Ibegbuna, Theresa ‘T’ Olaniran and Darren Crosdale, hammered out some of the finer details of the project. Many of the young trustees have known Ibegbuna for several years through Reclaim, an award-winning charity she founded in 2007 to provide leadership skills for working-class children in Greater Manchester. One describes his childhood as “growing up on council estates, sometimes homeless, growing up in hostels”. He barely attended primary school, and after time in the care system, ended up living with his grandparents. He went from bottom sets to achieving a place at Oxford to study PPE, which he attributes to discovering a love of learning outside school and mentors such as Ibegbuna. He left the course after a year – it was too much of a “massive cultural shift” for someone who was the first in his family to leave school with GCSEs, let alone go to university, he says – which has furthered his passion for ensuring that working-class kids feel as if they belong in education. An essential aspect of Rekindle is that each pupil will receive a hot meal, as well as learning cooking skills from chefs and growing fruit and vegetables. “I grew up worried about food every single day,” the trustee said, determined that the school’s cohort would not be distracted from learning by hunger. “There’s a really unhelpful distinction in this country between race and class,” Ibegbuna says. “The majority of people from Black and Asian backgrounds are working class, and yet we talk about the white working classes as if you can’t be black and brown and working class.” Lisa Eigbadon, a 21-year-old law student, agrees. “When you’re from an area that’s constantly described as deprived, instantly within education, they don’t see you for your potential, they see you for your postcode.” As a working-class black woman, Eigbadon wants Rekindle to be a space where “other young people that look like myself will know that they’re in a network of people that understand them, and won’t judge them or look at them any differently because of those things that are seen as factors or limiting”. Described as a “soulful education”, Rekindle’s curriculum will focus on critical thinking, creativity, change-making and cultural education (the four Cs), as well as providing mentors and homework support. Pastoral support and safeguarding is also a key focus, which Cara Kennedy is leading on. The 18-year-old from Moss Side has just received two A*s and an A in her A-levels, but said at one point she was nearly kicked out of school after being “let down by safeguarding”, which led to her becoming “very angry and sad”. Reclaim changed her life, she says, and taught her that she was “worthy of safety”. She says she wants to “pass that on” and foster a space where teenagers feel listened to. “When kids appear to be acting out, there’s usually a reason for it, and a lot of times in mainstream schools, they’re just labelled as a problem and put in isolation, instead of finding the root cause and addressing that,” Kennedy said. The young pioneers are committed to benefiting the community in Moss Side, but they also have big dreams to expand the idea nationally and internationally. “I feel like I’m part of a revolutionary movement,” said one. This article was amended on 10 November 2021 to remove some personal information.With a concert at the Proms, a Mercury prize nomination and widespread acclaim for her debut album, Source, Nubya Garcia has had a very good year. More importantly, the saxophonist is one of several young Black British jazz musicians bringing new listeners to the genre and serving as a role model for future players. Garcia’s fellow saxophonists, Camilla George and Cassie Kinoshi, vocalists Zara McFarlane and Cherise, and the five-piece ensemble Ezra Collective are just a handful of the other artists who have made an impact beyond the UK in the past five years or so, appearing at major festivals and on radio and television. They are in demand. Such visibility is entirely welcome when one considers that jazz, a century into its existence, can still be confusing, if not forbidding, for those listeners spooked by songs with shifting time signatures and extended solos. These artists have not abandoned the genre’s core principles of rhythmic ingenuity and complex harmony, but they often share a strong dance sensibility that reflects their lived reality as Insta-generation improvisers of African and Caribbean heritage. That means exposure to Afrobeat, dub and soundsystems, in addition to a whole internet’s worth of past American jazz greats such as Miles Davis, John Coltrane and Pharoah Sanders. Having said that, there is a notable difference between Garcia’s lithe Caribbean slant and the sturdy hip-hop snap of another rising star: pianist-rapper Alfa Mist. Meanwhile, Moses Boyd, a producer as well as drummer, investigates the hefty sub-sonics of grime with his Exodus project but negotiates a significantly more abstract acoustic realm when he appears in a freewheeling duo with the saxophonist Binker Golding. These players developed their talents in small venues across the UK capital in the 2010s, from Total Refreshment Centre in Dalston, east London, to Mau Mau in west London’s Ladbroke Grove. The musicians also ran their own nights. Empirical, a superb quartet featuring saxophonist Nathaniel Facey, held a free residency in Old Street tube station while trumpeter Mark Kavuma did the same at the Prince of Wales pub in Brixton. A collective called Steam Down turned Buster Mantis cafe in Deptford into a vibrant hub. The young multicultural audiences for these artists were built from the ground up. As with many past jazz scenes, several players have become links in a bigger chain. Drummer Eddie Hick and tuba player Theon Cross, who were part of Steam Down, also joined Sons of Kemet, one of several groups led by saxophonist-clarinetist Shabaka Hutchings, who at the age of 37 is a touch older than Garcia and co, who are mostly in their late 20s or early 30s. Infused with the incendiary carnivalesque energy of a marching band, Sons of Kemet are a formidable live act, and one that unapologetically celebrates Blackness; their 2018 album Your Queen Is a Reptile celebrated African American and Caribbean women such as Angela Davis and Doreen Lawrence. A musician who has had a lengthy association with Hutchings is the bassist Neil Charles. They collaborated in the experimental trio Zed-U some 14 years ago and the saxophonist now appears on Charles’s captivating Breathe Suite, a stylistically varied EP under his producer name Ben Marc. Although he lives in London, Charles hails from Birmingham, a city where Hutchings has also lived and another hotbed of talent in British jazz. Looming large is another forward-thinking musician with whom both have worked: saxophonist-rapper-composer Soweto Kinch. He has been a lightning rod on the local scene since the 2000s, staging jam sessions such as The Live Box and the cross-genre all-day festival, The Flyover Show, which was conceived to rehabilitate the image of Hockley, an inner-city area with a large Black population historically laid low by the twin evils of high unemployment and a bad press. Kinch, 43, whose forthcoming project White Juju responds to Black Lives Matter among other things, has legend status on the Midlands scene, and is a tireless champion of emerging talent such as the trumpeter Alex Polack, pianist Ashley Allen, vocalist Lucy-Anne Daniels and drummer Romarna Campbell. However, it is the highly gifted 24-year-old saxophonist Xhosa Cole who is currently making most waves. Winner of the prestigious BBC Young Jazz Musician award in 2018, Cole has the rich expressive range and technical skills that characterise significant soloists. His recently released debut album K(no)w Them K(no)w Us sees him put an imaginative spin on the innovative American composers Thelonious Monk, Ornette Coleman and Woody Shaw, who blazed trails in the 50s and 60s down which contemporary players still walk. Cole is finding modernity within tradition. Yet if it comes as little surprise that many Black jazz musicians are springing up in Birmingham, with its long-established African-Caribbean areas such as Handsworth (the birthplace of Cole and which includes Hockley), then it is also important to recognise that several other significant musicians have come from towns and cities with comparatively fewer people of colour. Oxford is the home of one of Britain’s greatest living improviser-composers, the astounding pianist Pat Thomas. Derby is where you’ll find the inventive vibraphonist Corey Mwamba, and multi-reed virtuoso Jason Yarde hails from Hastings. Apart from the fact that they all live outside big cities, these artists make music that falls largely, though not exclusively, in the avant-garde school of jazz (Yarde is resoundingly eclectic) and for the most part have fairly limited commercial appeal. Moreover, they are in their 40s, 50s and 60s; in other words, they do not fit the prevailing profile of British jazz that has made a splash in the past few years, which raises an interesting debate about what the image of British jazz should be. Unlike in pop, jazz musicians entering their seventh decade are not necessarily “old” and can still excel, primarily because the mastery of their instrument is a never-ending mission, and life experience a rich, raw source of inspiration. But now that the spotlight is firmly trained on the “new wave” (a powerful narrative in any business), this is a perfect opportunity to pull others out of the shadows and broaden perceptions of what we mean when we talk about Black British jazz, from where it is found to who plays it to what it sounds like. The artform has never been reducible to just one thing – and neither has Black Britain. Kevin Le Gendre is a journalist and the author of Soul Unsung and Don’t Stop the Carnival: Black British Music.It is bad enough when states break their own rules and mistreat people – but it’s when they start to change the rules that we really need to worry. Three recent stories, from three different corners of Europe, suggest that governments are crossing a new threshold of violence in terms of how they police their borders. These developments are harmful in their own right, but they also set a disturbing precedent for how countries in rich parts of the world might deal with future displacements of people – not just from war and persecution, but from the climate crisis as well. In the UK, the Home Office has quietly tried to amend its draconian nationality and borders bill, currently at committee stage, by introducing a provision that gives Border Force staff immunity from prosecution if they fail to save lives at sea. Priti Patel, the home secretary, claims this is an essentially benevolent measure: if boats in the Channel are turned around, it will eventually stop people attempting the dangerous trip in the first place. In fact, it undermines a key principle of international maritime law that makes it a duty to rescue people in distress. In Poland, the government has just passed an emergency law allowing authorities to turn back refugees who cross into the country “illegally”. It is the latest development in a diplomatic standoff with Belarus, which has cynically been encouraging people from Iraq, Iran and parts of Africa to cross into the EU, in response to sanctions imposed on it earlier this year. Poland’s hardline response leaves many people trapped in the no man’s land between the two countries. Aid agencies warn of a looming humanitarian crisis as winter sets in; at least eight people have died this year so far, mostly from hypothermia. In south-eastern Europe, an international team of investigative journalists have revealed that Croatia and Greece are using a “shadow army”, balaclava-clad plainclothes units linked to those countries’ regular security forces, to force people back from their borders. In Croatia, these units have been filmed beating people with clubs at the border with Bosnia. In Greece, they are accused of intercepting boats in the Aegean and setting the passengers adrift on life-rafts in Turkish waters. (Croatia has promised to investigate reports of abuse, while Greece denies the practice.) Just as shocking as the claims themselves is the fact that the revelations have largely been met with a shrug of indifference by EU officials, whose funding helps prop up border defences in both countries. Twelve member states are even demanding that the EU adjusts its rules so that it can finance “further preventive measures”, including walls and fences, at its external borders. Together, these stories suggest that the “push-back” – the forcing away of migrating people from a country’s territory, even if it places them in harm’s way or overrides their right to asylum – is becoming an entrenched practice. Once something that would take place largely in the shadows, it is being done increasingly openly, with some governments trying to find ways to make the practice legal. The UK’s proposal has been strongly criticised by the UN refugee agency, UNHCR, whose representative said it would “unavoidably” put lives at risk. This is not only a problem for today: it is a dress rehearsal for how our governments are likely to deal with the effects of the climate crisis in years to come. Predictions about climate-related migration are notoriously vague, and prone to hyperbole, but a new report by the World Bank projects that 216 million people could be displaced within their own countries by water shortages, crop failure and rising sea levels by 2050. Some people may well end up moving further if they face poor economic prospects or conflict and instability at home. In April, the US vice-president, Kamala Harris, said that drought and “extensive storm damage because of extreme climate” were partly behind increased migration from Central America. Unfortunately, many of our politicians are primed to see displacement first and foremost as a civilisational threat. That was the logic of Boris Johnson’s comments ahead of the launch of Cop26 in Glasgow, when he claimed – incorrectly – that “uncontrolled immigration” was responsible for the fall of the Roman empire, and that a similar fate awaits the world today. In this telling, an environmental disaster that affects us all is transformed into a question of how the wealthy and powerful can preserve their privileges. Richer parts of the world have already begun to militarise their borders, a process that has accelerated in response to the refugee movements of the past decade. In this, they are backed up by a burgeoning border security industry. A recent report by the Transnational Institute warns of what it calls “the border-industrial complex”, a growing multibillion dollar industry that ranges from security infrastructure to biometrics and artificial intelligence. The global market in fences, walls and surveillance alone is projected to be worth $65-$68bn by 2025. This, however, is a false kind of security. Restrictive and violent border control just makes the societies that wield it more authoritarian – and it doesn’t stop people moving entirely, either. What it does is force people to make more dangerous journeys, becoming even greater targets for xenophobic backlash. Countries or regions that are seen as desperate to keep people out become targets for unscrupulous neighbours who want to use the issue to exert political pressure. The ultimate result, as we are continuing to see at Europe’s borders, is a callous disregard for life. What’s required, instead – beyond action to reduce emissions – is a plan to help people adapt to changing living circumstances and reduce global inequality, along with migration policies that recognise the reality of people’s situations. Last year, the UN human rights committee ruled that governments should not return people to countries where their safety would be directly threatened by the climate emergency. As it stands, however, there is no proper legal framework for protecting people displaced for environmental reasons. A major new US study commissioned by the Biden administration recommends new laws to protect climate migrants, but it is strikingly light on detail. The next few years are likely to mark a turning point in the way our governments respond to displacement. Either they work together to build a system that protects people’s lives and dignity, and that can adapt to the changing realities of the 21st century, or their borders will continue to harden, at considerable human cost. If we want to avoid the latter, then now is the time to challenge the violent logic of the push-back, before it becomes written into our laws. Daniel Trilling is the author of Lights in the Distance: Exile and Refuge at the Borders of Europe and Bloody Nasty People: the Rise of Britain’s Far RightMy 21-year-old goddaughter, a second-year undergraduate, mentioned in passing that she watches video lectures offline at twice the normal speed. Struck by this, I asked some other students I know. Many now routinely accelerate their lectures when learning offline – often by 1.5 times, sometimes by more. Speed learning is not for everyone, but there are whole Reddit threads where students discuss how odd it will be to return to the lecture theatre. One contributor wrote: “Normal speed now sounds like drunk speed.” Education was adapting to the digital world long before Covid but, as with so many other human activities, the pandemic has given learning a huge shove towards the virtual. Overnight, schools and universities closed and teachers and students had to find ways to do what they do exclusively via the internet. Naturally there were problems, but as Professor Diana Laurillard of University College London’s Knowledge Lab explains, they essentially pulled off an extraordinary – and global – experiment. “It can’t return to the way it was,” she says. “The cat is out of the bag.” Academics who think about education recognise that not all the enforced changes have been good. Covid highlighted how critical the social aspect of learning is, and that something extra happens when students and their teacher share a physical space. The experiment also played out differently in schools and universities, in part because the benefits of “co-present” learning may vary by age. The tension now is between those who see the pandemic as an opportunity to overhaul education and those who are impatient to return to “normal”. “This is a time for schools and systems to reimagine education without schooling or classrooms,” says Professor Yong Zhao of the School of Education at the University of Kansas. Dr Jim Watterston of the Melbourne Graduate School of Education in Australia thinks the traditional classroom is alive and well, on the other hand, but that “education needs to be more adventurous and captivating” – and, above all, more flexible. Earlier this year, Zhao and Watterston co-authored a paper in which they identified three major changes that should happen in education post-lockdown. The first concerns the content, which should emphasise such things as creativity, critical thinking and entrepreneurship, rather than collecting and storing information. “For humans to thrive in the age of smart machines, it is essential that they do not compete with machines,” they wrote. “Instead, they need to be more human.” The second is that students should have more control over their learning, with the teacher’s role shifting from instructor to curator of learning resources, counsellor and motivator. This is where so-called “active learning” comes in, with a growing body of research suggesting that comprehension and memory are better when students learn in a hands-on way – through discussion and interactive technologies, for example. It’s also where the concept of “productive failure” applies. Professor Manu Kapur of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zürich argues that students learn better from their own or others’ failed attempts to solve a problem, before or even instead of being told how to solve it. Zhao and Watterston’s third proposal is that the where of learning should change – “from the classroom to the world”. With lockdown all learning went online, but it tended to stick to pre-existing timetables, and it was this temporal rigidity that caused distress and disengagement in some students, they claim. With digital tools it is no longer necessary for students to learn at the same time as each other. What’s needed, they say, is a mix of online and face-to-face learning – so-called blended learning or the flipped classroom, where students read or watch lectures in their own time, beyond the school walls, and solve problems in the presence of their teacher and peers. That decoupling of learning time and school time means that the former can expand – something that is going to be particularly important for the recovery from Covid, says Laurillard. It comes as no surprise to her that students speed up their lectures, or that lecturers have begun dividing up their presentations into five- and 10-minute video segments, or that all this was happening even before the pandemic. “There’s a lot of redundancy in a 50-minute lecture,” she says. But can you really acquire knowledge properly at speed? Woody Allen once joked about a speed reading course where he learned to read down the middle of the page and completed War and Peace in 20 minutes. “It’s about Russia,” was his summary. At the University of Waterloo in Canada, cognitive psychologist Professor Evan Risko has been testing people’s comprehension after speed-watching video lectures. Though it depends on the nature of the material, the student’s prior knowledge and the lecturer’s delivery style, his research indicates that an acceleration of up to 1.7 times has little negative impact and, of course, saves time. These are, you might say, first world preoccupations. What of those who don’t have the luxury of digital tools? The digital divide is not a new problem, Laurillard says, but nor should it put a brake on change, “because the digital world moves faster in providing access than the physical one”. She points to the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 4, which is to provide quality education for all by 2030. The only way this will happen, she says, is if teachers in disadvantaged areas receive tools and materials digitally – perhaps via massive open online courses – and then pass them on to their students in the traditional way. If even the digital divide won’t hold back the coming revolution, it seems unlikely that the classroom will ever look the same again. As Laurillard puts it: “It took a global pandemic to drive home what we’ve been saying for 30 years.” Further reading Make It Stick: The Science of Successful Learning by Peter Brown, Henry Roediger and Mark Mcdaniel (Harvard, £24.95) Building the Intentional University edited by Stephen M Kosslyn and Ben Nelson (MIT, £22.20) How We Learn by Stanislas Dehaene (Penguin, £9.99)And with that, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down: Prime minister Scott Morrison said WA premier Mark McGowan will be doing “more harm than good” with his border policy. Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner announced that the Darwin “lockout” has been extended for 24 hours, to Tuesday night. The lockdown in Katherine will lift on Tuesday night. NSW recorded 187 new locally acquired cases today, and seven deaths. Victoria recorded 1,126 local Covid-19 cases and five deaths. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 13 new local Covid-19 cases. Police arrested and charged a registered nurse in Western Australia for allegedly faking a Covid-19 vaccination on a teenager. Deputy PM Barnaby Joyce lashed out at former prime ministers Kevin Rudd and Malcolm Turnbull, calling them a “dipstick”. Adem Somyurek, the alleged architect of a vast branch-stacking operation in Victoria, gave evidence before the state’s anti-corruption commission on Monday. Rapid antigen tests will be distributed to 20 government schools across the state. They will be used to test unvaccinated students who are close contacts of positive cases at their school. The employment minister, Stuart Robert, has spoken to 4BC Radio and got stuck into Queensland’s quarantine requirements. Robert said: “I am sitting in quarantine on the Gold Coast. Home quarantine because I’ve arrived from Canberra. So I’ve arrived from the sitting of the federal parliament from the most vaccinated city on earth, Canberra, and I have come to Queensland on a plane with the defence minister amongst others. We went straight into quarantine yet if I was in New South Wales, I could fly to Mumbai and back again and go to the footy and go out dancing all night. Indeed whilst I have been in quarantine the prime minister has gone to the G20 in Rome and COP 26 in Glasgow and come home and he’s now in the Hunter Valley, connecting with Australians and yet I went to the most vaccinated city on Earth and it is still a hotspot? I mean it’s ridiculous, Scott just ridiculous.” Robert also took aim at the fact some Queensland residents won’t be allowed to return until 17 December, when the state reaches the 80% vaccination threshold. He said: It is dreadful. No government should ever have the power to decline one of its residents, one of its citizens, returning home like this. It is a wider discussion for another day but I find that simply outrageous and a complete negligence of duty by Premier Palaszczuk. Robert is a frontbencher in the Morrison government, which not only has the power to prevent its citizens returning home but exercised that power temporarily excluding citizens returning from India to prevent the Delta strain entering Australia, in a move that was upheld by the federal court. South Australia has again recorded zero new locally acquired cases: The prime minister has released a statement, offering his condolences to the family of former Victorian governor Sir James Gobbo QC: Sir James was rightly proud of his rich Italian heritage and of the multicultural nation he served. In so many ways Sir James was the father of modern multiculturalism in Australia, which stands as one of his most significant legacies. He had a deep Catholic faith and was a recipient of the Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Gregory from The Vatican. Sir James gave generously of his time to so many causes throughout his life including the Council for the Order of Australia, the National Library of Australia and the Australian Multicultural Foundation. On behalf of the Australian government, I extend my condolences to Lady Shirley and his family. A state funeral will be held next Tuesday for Sir James, who also served as the lieutenant governor of Victoria and a Victorian supreme court judge. Returning to the Northern Territory, acting chief health officer, Dr Charles Pain says that the current cluster in Darwin has been linked to Victoria via genomic testing. He said there was “quite a lot of extra work to do now” to trace all potential contacts, and urged people to come forward if they feel sick, saying they “will find out eventually.” Earlier, chief minister Michael Gunner had said it had taken a while to piece together the source case’s movements and that “there may be unknown close contacts.” NT chief minister Michael Gunnar has confirmed that there are no new cases in the town of Katherine, and that the government has decided to end the lockdown from 5pm today. He said the mask mandate will remain until Friday, however, and that people must wear masks when they cannot maintain social distancing. Some more from the new Lowy Institute podcast with Penny Wong: Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson was asked how she would reassure Southeast Asian countries about the Aukus arrangement. Wong said it required “engagement” and less emphasis on Anglosphere narratives: “Whenever we’re dealing with Southeast Asia, we have to remember the way in which historical narratives can shape people’s interpretation of events. We still have a way to go in demonstrating to the Southeast Asian nations that we’re not simply a primarily Anglo-outpost post-colonial power, and we’ve only recently had a prime minister who kept talking lovingly of the Anglosphere.” (That would be Tony Abbott.) Wong continued: “So, we have to remember that how some things are understood and received is in part informed by historical frames, and so we need to be very clear about the modern Australian narrative about who we are. Part of that on Aukus, I think is to remind people that this is ‘in addition to’ not ‘instead of’. So a partnership between the US, Australia and the United Kingdom that shares greater technology that is actually quite unremarkable. It’s what we already do. It’s been formalised into an agreement between governments. It’s not an alliance, it’s not a treaty. It’s an articulation and a formalisation of what we already do. And part of the problem with the way in which it was announced is because Mr Morrison sought to make it as big as he did, it was interpreted, I think, differently in the region.” On China, Wong said Australia’s relationship with Beijing had “deteriorated in great part because China has chosen to become much more assertive, and at times aggressive, and ... because China is engaging in coercive economic activity”. She said that was “something all of us should be pushing back on”. Wong argued there were enduring differences in the relationship that would need to be managed regardless of who was in power in Canberra - including on human rights and the South China Sea - but added that the Australian government should not inflame rhetoric for domestic political purposes. Wong said as foreign minister she would “talk much more openly about the experience of Chinese-Australians through this period”, pointing to research showing it had been “a very difficult time”. The full podcast can be found here. Northern Territory Chief Minister Michael Gunner has announced that the Darwin “lockout” has been extended for 24 hours, to Tuesday night. It comes as NT did not record a new case, but Gunner said a venue that held a Melbourne Cup party was not properly maintaining the territory’s Covid protocols, which was where the source case visited. Gunner said the lack of check-ins meant contact tracers need more time to find all the close contacts, which is why the lockout has been extended. The Bureau of Meteorology has escalated a severe thunderstorm warning for areas in greater Sydney, including the Blue Mountains/Hawkesbury, Maitland/Cessnock, Gosford/Wyong and Sydney areas. BOM says that “damaging, locally destructive winds” and “large, possibly giant hailstones and heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding are likely.” The SES is advising people to move their cars to cover, secure items around the house, and to stay indoors where possible. Labor has called on the Australian government to conduct an internal review of the handling of the Aukus nuclear-powered submarines announcement. Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, said she believed the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade had become less influential in Canberra, and she hoped that was “part of the explanation for the latest debacle”. She told the Lowy Institute podcast, The Director’s Chair: “In terms of most recent diplomatic stoush, I hope that DFAT and the national security community do undertake an internal review about what has gone wrong in terms of the Aukus announcement and the clear diplomatic problems with the French, and some of the public statements of the Americans. If it is the case that the advice was good, but [Scott] Morrison didn’t take it, then there’s clearly only an issue at the political level. But I suspect there are also things that should be learned about how this was managed in government, in terms of the advice of the department and whether that advice was influential. It’s interesting, isn’t it? The submarine announcement is grounded in a capability argument and there is a compelling capability argument [for nuclear-propelled submarines]. But as you know, when you make a decision in the national interests which you know is going to be a difficult decision to land, you have to do the whole job and you have to focus on what is it that we can do to minimise the blowback, minimise the damage to Australia from landing such a decision. Clearly, that was not done. And I hope those in the leadership of the department and the broader national security community take this opportunity to reflect on that. I think there are demonstrable failings from our leaders, politicians, some demonstrable failings from Mr Morrison, but I hope at a bureaucratic level that there is some thinking about it.” The podcast was recorded on Friday but released today. Incidentally, former Labor prime minister Paul Keating is due to address the National Press Club on Wednesday and has been scathing about the Aukus plan. So I wanted to just go back to agriculture minister and deputy leader of the Nationals, David Littleproud’s appearance on the ABC this afternoon. He was asked why Australia hasn’t moved further away from coal, especially in light of international pressure. But Littleproud stood firm in his support of coal, arguing it is needed to “keep the lights on”: We are believing in technology. We are getting back to the first principle is that it is about reducing emissions. If technology can reduce those emissions with coal and gas then why wouldn’t we invest in those technologies? The Biden Administration is taking the same trajectory as us. If we get back to first principles and all this lauded advice that comes from overseas, is to reduce emissions. You can go do that with technology. The ABC’s Patricia Karvelas brought up that Australia could immediately achieve that by elimination coal, but Littleproud said coal is essential: You have to be able to turn the lights on at night and you have to be able to turn the air conditioner on when you need it. You need baseload power and that is the challenge we have. Isn’t that the point of batteries? That is where that technology is moving but it is not to the scale that would support a reliable energy source. That is why we are moving as quickly as we can, not just investment in renewables but also in terms of carbon capture and storage. If you can reduce emissions, who cares how you do it, as long as you are reducing missions that are the first principle you want to get back to and that is what we will try to achieve with technology. Making sure we are making the investment and not just adopting here in Australia but around the world. Those men and women that are working in mines will not just have jobs today but will be in 2030, 2040 and 2050 and we will have reduced emissions, I would have thought that is a good thing. Save the Children was not alone in stressing the scale of the crisis in Afghanistan in a Senate inquiry this afternoon. Tim Watkin, director of policy and advocacy at at the Australian Council for International Development, said the worst was yet to come as winter set in. Watkin told senators: “If there is one point we want to impress upon you, it is the scale of the humanitarian crisis unfolding across Afghanistan and the urgency that is needed in response … Over half the country is living in extreme poverty; 23 million people are forecast to face acute hunger; in the middle of a pandemic, the health sector is ‘hanging by a thread’; the situation is so desperate that starving Afghans are being forced to sell their own children to feed the rest of their family. We know the Australian government is working with its counterparts on how to deal with the Taliban, but the longer we take, the more the Afghan people will suffer.” Watkin urged Australia to take an active and leading role in multilateral efforts to resolve operational challenges which are restricting the provision of life-saving aid. “That means making the case for humanitarian safeguards in the UN sanctions regime. There are precedents at the UN on similar sanctions regimes, but for Afghanistan they are not being exercised. Beyond the immediate crisis, Australia – with its international partners – should plan to preserve the development gains that have been made. Humanitarian assistance is a bandage solution: it will not replace the provision of public services which are under threat and at-risk of collapse.” Watkin also said the Australian government must strengthen efforts to support safe passage for those seeking to leave Afghanistan and increase the humanitarian refugee intake. An aid group has told a Senate inquiry that Afghanistan is “rapidly evolving into the world’s worst humanitarian crisis”. Addressing a committee examining Australia’s engagement with Afghanistan, Save the Children said more than 10 million children were in urgent need of humanitarian assistance to survive. “Without immediate action from governments like Australia, the situation will become catastrophically worse,” said Mat Tinkler, the deputy chief executive of Save the Children Australia and the director of international programs. Tinkler called on the Australian government to increase funding, with a commitment of at least $100m in new flexible humanitarian funding provided on a multi-year basis. He also reaffirmed called for the government to increase the humanitarian intake to a minimum of 20,000 places for Afghans, and support their safe passage. “We have supported a number of our own staff to evacuate and have appreciated the cooperation and support of the Australian government.” Weighing in to the contentious issue of talking with the Taliban, Tinkler said Australia should also work with other governments to determine “a common, constructive and principled modality for engaging with the Taliban both in Doha and in Afghanistan”. He said this engagement “should be grounded in and pursued with the view to ensure the protection of rights including women and girls’ rights, humanitarian access, and the provision of essential services”. The inquiry also heard from Save the Children’s Afghanistan country director, Chris Nyamandi, who joined the hearing from Kabul. Nyamandi said Save the Children had had a measure of success in negotiating access with the Taliban: “I think the biggest issue that we are negotiating on is for female aid workers to be allowed to work and we have seen positive signals on that. However it’s clear that the Taliban authorities do not have the capacity, they do not have the resources, they do not have, in some ways, the political will to move on some important pieces. There is a general sense of a lack of urgency. If children are dying here in Kabul, then you can imagine what has happened in remote districts that we do not have access to. It will be important to exert a little bit more pressure so that there is a sense of urgency on what needs to be done to save lives.” Agriculture minister and deputy leader of the Nationals, David Littleproud, is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing, squirming under questioning of the government’s climate policy. Asked if Australia is ignoring the calls of its neighbours in not setting out a more ambitious climate target, Littleproud danced around the question: No, we are acting. We took a commitment of 26- 28%, we signed up to that. We believe that we will meet somewhere closer to 35%. I think we have a lot to be proud of, there will be plenty that we’ll see from the sideline with gratuitous advice, but our record is strong. We will meet the 2030 commitment and we have a target or net zero by 2050. We have said to the world clearly that we are going to try and reach that and we have a strong record of achievement. Pushed on the matter, and with reference to the UK government’s climate change committee chair, Lord Deben saying Australia is “a real disappointment to the world”, Littleproud reproduced his line: Well, look, there is plenty of free, gratuitous advice playing around the world at the moment. But what counts is action. When you go and make a national commitment and you live up to it, that speaks louder than a lot of the platitudes that applauding around the world at the moment. We have credibility and standing in meeting our commitments and beating them. The Northern Territory has passed the 80% first dose mark today, leaving Queensland as the only state or territory yet to reach that mark. NSW is expected to hit 90% fully vaccinated today or tomorrow, with Victoria sitting on 84% double-dose vaccinated. Queensland currently has 67% fully vaccinated and 79.9% single dose rates. Western Australia is currently sitting on 64% fully vaccinated, and the ACT is on 95.1% double dosed. NSW Health have released a report on the vaccination status of Covid cases in the NSW Delta outbreak, and found that a majority were unvaccinated. The report looked at cases between June and October this year, and showed that 63.1 % of cases during the Delta outbreak reported they were not vaccinated. Over 9% reported having one dose and 6.1% were fully vaccinated. 21.7% of respondents had an unknown vaccination status. Throughout the NSW outbreak, across all ages, people who have received two doses of vaccine have substantially lower rates of Covid-19 and severe Covid-19 than unvaccinated people. However, vaccination does not completely protect people from infection and other recommended public health measures should continue to be observed. Of the 47 cases who died with Covid-19 who had two doses of vaccine, their average age was 82 years; 29 (61.7%) were residents of aged care facilities and the other 18 had significant comorbidities. Of the 30 admitted to ICU, 26 (86.7%) had significant co-morbidities and 4 had no reported comorbid conditions. An email notifying electric vehicle drivers in New South Wales that they can now apply for support on new car purchases has revealed the contact details of 400 people. The data breach occurred when an email titled “NSW EV Strategy - Rebate and Stamp Duty Exemption incentives now open for applications” from the Tax Reform Taskforce was sent out on Monday morning. Roughly 400 people who had previously expressed interest in the program were CC’d into the message making their personal email addresses visible to everyone in the chain. A sender of the message later attempted to recall the email, but by then it was already too late. The New South Wales Treasury was contacted but did not immediately respond for comment. Electric vehicle drivers in New South Wales can now apply to have stamp duty on vehicles which cost up to $78,000 reimbursed on purchases of new and used cars, while $3000 rebates are being offered on the first 25,000 EVs sold in the state. Now onto some delightful weather news, with the Bureau of Meteorology issuing severe thunderstorm warnings for large parts of Australia, and with an ‘exceptionally wet and stormy’ week of weather ahead for eastern and central Australia. Fantastic. In south-east Australia, temperatures are forecast to be between six and 16 degrees below the seasonal average, with snow above 1,000 metres expected in New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania as the cold front continues. In Melbourne, showers are expected from Wednesday through to Sunday, with a peak of up to 30mm of rainfall expected on Friday along with southerly winds of between 25 and 45km an hour. You can read more on the report from Caitlin Cassidy at the link below: Guests at a Melbourne Cup afterparty are being urged to get tested, after three people tested positive at a party to celebrate winner Verry Elleegant. The event was held at the Society Restaurant on Collins Street, and included two jockeys, owners and racing industry figures. The party reportedly complied with state guidelines, with all attendees needing to be double vaccinated. But Brae Sokolski, a part owner of Cup winner Verry Elleegant, told the SMH that guests should get tested, after he returned a negative test. It comes after two people at the Melbourne Cup tested positive last week, with calls for those who attended to get tested. The Victorian state opposition are calling for the government to introduce ‘test and stay’ policy for students. Under the current policy, unvaccinated children will be allowed to return to school after they’ve been exposed to the virus at school, after returning a negative test on day six. They will then need to take a rapid antigen test before school on days eight and 14 of their quarantine. Shadow education minister David Hodgett has called for the government to adopt an alternate approach, and allow children to stay at school while doing daily rapid antigen tests, with no quarantine: Test and stay is a successful policy that is being used in Massachussetts. If you Google it, you’ll see that policy initiative saved 48,000 in-person school days. We think it’s a good policy and it’s worth trying here. Hospitality workers are holding a “funeral” in Adelaide to protest the effect Covid restrictions have had on the industry. Marching down Hindley Street in Adelaide’s CBD as part of a staged funeral procession, marking the “death” of the industry. Restrictions on the industry won’t lift under the state’s reopening plan until 90% of the eligible population are double vaccinated, which might not happen until early next year. An unvaccinated man in his 30s has died of Covid in NSW, one of the seven people who died overnight. The man, who had no underlying health conditions, died at Royal North Shore hospital. NSW Health’s Dr Jeremy McAnulty again urged people to get vaccinated in his update: Remember, Covid has killed more than 5 million people internationally, so please book in for your jab and book in for your booster if you’re due for one. It comes as NSW is poised to hit the 90% double-dose vaccination mark today or tomorrow. Premier Dominic Perrottet called it a “momentous” day, saying: I believe the vaccination rate has been key for NSW to be able to open up safely. Perrottet said while at a Matildas football training session: We’re not just bringing sport back, we’re bringing crowds back and we’re really getting back to normality here in NSW. That’s a testament to everybody right across the state going out and getting vaccinated. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon. A quick thanks to Matilda Boseley for her typically expert blogging this morning. With that, I shall leave you in the capable hands of Mostafa Rachwani, who will guide you through the rest of the day. See you tomorrow morning! Time to catch up again with Nino Bucci, and his coverage of Victoria’s Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission. I hate to break this to you all, but the election campaign Canva graphics have begun. We should not have made the graphic design this accessible to politicians with Twitter accounts! Police have arrested and charged a registered nurse for allegedly faking a Covid-19 vaccination on a teenager. Western Australia police say the 51-year-old, who worked at a private medical centre, was administering the vaccine to a teenager. They allege that after inserting the syringe into the teen’s arm, the nurse did not insert the liquid and instead threw away the syringe, still full of vaccine. The nurse then allegedly recorded in medical records that the teen had been vaccinated. Here is what WA police have to say: It will be alleged the woman obtained approval from her employer for persons known to her to be able to attend the medical centre and be administered a Covid-19 vaccine, and for those vaccines to be administered by her. Yesterday, Sunday 7 November 2021, a person known to the nurse attended the [Perth] medical centre where she was working and arranged for their teenage child to be administered a Covid-19 vaccine. As per standard practice, a second medical practitioner – on this occasion a doctor – observed the process. It will be alleged the nurse inserted the needle into the teenager’s arm but failed to administer the vaccine. It will be further alleged the syringe, with vaccine liquid still inside, was disposed of and a false entry was made on the medical records system indicating the teenager had received the dose of the vaccine. Further, it will be alleged the nurse recorded that another employee of the medical centre had administered the dose, and not her. The woman, from Byford, was arrested yesterday at her residence and has been charged with one count of “gaining benefit by fraud”. She was refused bail and is due to appear in the Perth magistrates court today. Some more Somyurek Ibac updates from Nino Bucci: The Collins St Falcons in Melbourne are taking flight! My little heart! Queensland has recorded no new cases of Covid-19 amid concerns about potential exposure at opposite ends of the state, reports Marty Silk from AAP. Health minister Yvette D’Ath says no cases emerged after 5,879 tests in the past 24 hours to 6.30am on Monday. We’ve had zero new cases today, which is fantastic news, so well done... Queenslanders are doing the right thing and making sure that you’re socially distancing, good hygiene, wearing the masks where required, and of course coming out and getting tested. Deputy chief health officer Peter Aitken said it was relieving that no new cases had emerged in the far north after a case who triggered a lockdown in the Northern Territory was also infectious in Cairns and Mission Beach two weeks ago. The lockdown in the NT town of Katherine will be lifted on Monday, with Queensland announcing it will also lift travel restrictions on people who had visited there from 4pm. However, concerns remain about potential exposure at Toowoomba hospital linked to an outbreak in Goondiwindi in southern Queensland. Darling Downs Health restricted visitors on Sunday afternoon and D’Ath said limits would remain in place indefinitely. A dozen Canberra schools have been impacted by Covid-19 exposures and some groups of students have been told to stay home, as the ACT records 13 new infections, reports Andrew Brown from AAP. Students from select year groups at five schools in Canberra’s south have been advised not to attend school following exposures at campuses Education minister Yvette Berry told ABC Radio on Monday that while she did not know the exact number of cases that had been identified, all close contacts have been contacted by health authorities. There is still contact tracing occurring, but there is only one school that’s had infections contracted in the actual school. There were 13 new cases in the ACT reported on Monday, as the territory’s vaccination rate reached 95.1%. One patient is in hospital with Covid-19 in Canberra and is in intensive care on a ventilator. Health authorities have said there are 136 active cases in the community. There have been 1,742 cases in Canberra since the outbreak began in August. The ACT cabinet will meet later today and discuss whether to bring the easing of restrictions forward. Chief minister Andrew Barr had previously flagged that the easing, originally set for 26 November, could be brought forward to the middle of November. Those rule changes would see home-visitor limits scrapped, density limits increased and face masks used only in high-risk indoor settings. Updates from Guardian Australia’s Nino Bucci on former Victorian Labor minister Adem Somyurek’s appearance at the state’s anti-corruption commission: In case you were wondering what changed in NSW overnight, and what the new freedoms are, check out this handy explainer by the wonderful Elias Viontay below. HSC students must still wear masks during exams, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet says. New Zealand has recorded 190 new cases of Covid-19 in the community, bringing the total in the outbreak to 4541. The ministry of health announced two people with Covid-19 have died – one a recent returnee in managed isolation and the other a patient in their late 60s who was admitted to Auckland hospital on 23 October for a trauma incident and then tested positive. Investigations are under way to determine if the deaths were Covid-related. There have now been a total of 33 deaths of people with Covid-19 since the pandemic began. Of Monday’s cases, 182 are in Auckland, seven are in Waikato and one is in Northland. Another four cases emerged in Northland this morning, but due to the ministry’s cut-off time for publication will appear in Tuesday’s tally. 110 cases are yet to be epidemiologically linked to the outbreak, bringing the total of unlinked cases in the past fortnight to 700. There are 81 people in hospital, up from 74 on Sunday, and seven are in intensive care. Just over 86% of eligible New Zealanders have had at least one dose of the Pfizer vaccine, and 75% are fully inoculated. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, will update Auckland and Northland about their lockdown settings on Monday afternoon. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 13 new local Covid-19 cases overnight. Impressively, 95% of its over-12 population is now fully vaccinated. No Covid-19 in Queensland, by the way! NSW Health has released further details on the seven people infected with Covid who died in the last reporting period. Sadly, NSW Health is today reporting the deaths of seven people with Covid-19 – four women and three men. One person was in their 30s, one person was in their 60s, one person was in their 70s, three people were in their 80s and one person was in their 90s. Two people were from Albury, two people were from Sydney’s inner city, two people were from south-western Sydney and one person was from south eastern Sydney. Three people were not vaccinated, two people had received one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and two people had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. The two people from Albury – a woman in her 80s who had received one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, and a woman in her 90s who had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine – died at the Mercy Place aged care facility, where they acquired their infections. There have been eight deaths linked to an outbreak at this facility. A man in his 80s from south-eastern Sydney died at Prince of Wales hospital, where he acquired his infection. He was not vaccinated. A man in his 30s from south-western Sydney died at Royal North Shore hospital. He was not vaccinated and had no significant underlying health conditions. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. Continued from next post: Well, today it’s Newcastle, with the PM and Angus Taylor (he’s the energy, industry and emissions reduction minister, though we assume the reduction bit only applies to emissions, but you never know) turning up to announce ... wait for it... “The Morrison government, through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA), will deliver an extra $1.5 million to support Macquarie Group’s Green Investment Group, the Port of Newcastle and project partners to conduct a $3 million study on the hub’s potential,” the official media release reads. The prime minister said: Newcastle and the Hunter will be a key part of the $1.2 billion we’re investing in Australia’s hydrogen industry. By that score, we could get many more media events, dragging journalists and various minders and fixers from far and wide, if they’re going to hold a presser each time they’re dropping a cool $1.5m. As a curious aside, our sources tell us NSW government officials were all but absent from this morning’s event in Newcastle. Perhaps the feds didn’t want to have someone like NSW treasurer Matt Kean (who is still energy and environment minister) reminding all and sundry the Coalition-led state has a goal of cutting carbon pollution by half by 2030 compared with 2005 levels. The lack of a federal 2030 target is a hole Morrison and Taylor hope everyone forgets about. Oh, and NSW is also pumping $70m plus into hydrogen hubs in the Illawarra and Newcastle, giving that $1.5m outlay today some perspective. It’s pretty clear that the Morrison government is going to make the economy its election campaigning strategy. Take the flurry of Josh Frydenberg interviews this morning, as well as the front page “drop” in the Australian, and the accompanying oped penned no doubt by the treasurer himself. Presumably, it’s all about getting “the engine room firing” so that Frydenberg and Co don’t get fired by electors, come May or whenever the election is held. Faster growth might indeed by what we see, shy of some unforeseen setback like a Covid outbreak or a remnant summer cyclone sweeping through the Gold Coast, say. Last week, the Reserve Bank last week predicted 2021 could see 3% GDP growth despite a contraction of 2.5% in the September quarter. That growth should then accelerate to 5.5% in 2022 before easing back to 2.5% in 2023. The economy, in other words, could be at its growth peak around about mid-year next year – handy timing for the Morrison government. And just how far will they go to spruik the economy? Continued in next post: Sixty-six witnesses are expected to give evidence at a five-week inquest into a coronavirus outbreak at a Melbourne nursing home which resulted in 45 deaths. The inquest into the outbreak at St Basil’s Home for the Aged in Fawkner is due to begin today. The nursing home suffered a significant coronavirus outbreak during Melbourne’s second-wave outbreak in winter 2020. Some 117 residents contracted the virus and 50 died during the outbreak — 45 of them from Covid-19. The inquiry is being held by the Victorian state coroner, Judge John Cain. At a final directions hearing on Monday, the counsel assisting, Peter Rozen QC, said the witness list currently stood at 64 people, with two more expected to be added this week. Twelve of the witnesses are family members. Limits have been placed on the cross-examining of witnesses to ensure the inquest doesn’t run over time. We are on a very tight timeframe here with this. Rozen said the court had received more than 7,000 pages of material to date and the coronial brief, which was still being finalised, consisted of 12 tabbed volumes. Cain and Rozen conducted a viewing of the nursing home last month. To finish off the press conference, the prime minister has been asked if children aged five to 11 can expect to be vaccinated before the year is out. Morrison says the government is proceeding with caution, suggesting studies in the US may not be sturdy enough to base Australia’s decision on. We discussed this last Friday, the TGA and the technical advisory group on immunisation have not yet formed a medical opinion that that should proceed at this point. And the studies we revised last Friday that have led to the decision in the United States were based on a sample of some 3,000 individual cases. Now vaccinating children aged five to 11, you know, we need to be very careful. We need to be very cautious, and I can tell you that we won’t take a further step on this unless there is clear medical advice that it should proceed.... We’ve also been advised by the chief medical officer that the incidence of serious disease amongst younger children with Covid is not the same for the rest of the population. So the risk is different for children aged five to 11 to those who are older. So we’ll be ready to go if and when the medical experts say it’s safe to do so, and we won’t be authorising a vaccination arrangement for children aged five to 11 until the medical experts say it’s safe for your children to be vaccinated. Oh by the way, Morrison is wearing high-vis and a hard hat. Just in case you were wondering. Now he is being asked about Western Australia’s commitment not to open the border until 90% of the state’s over-12 population is fully vaccinated. Morrison says WA premier Mark McGowan will be doing “more harm than good”. The modelling done by the Doherty Institute makes it very clear – and that’s what was agreed in the national plan, not just once but twice – and that is once you hit 80% double-dose vaccination rates, then you’re able to move forward... Of course, there’s a big difference between 70 and 80%. When you look at the curve of the pandemic, once you hit 80% – whether it’s a low number of cases you’re going into, like would be the case in Western Australia, or a high number of cases like we’ve seen in New South Wales and Victoria – once you hit that 80% threshold, there is a scientifically-backed in position which says that you can take the next step. And the advice we have from the secretary of Treasury, from Dr Kennedy, is once you go over 80% and you keep things locked down, you are doing more harm than good to your economy. You’re actually putting a price on Australians when you continue to put heavy restrictions on your economy, once you hit 80% vaccination rates. Morrison is now talking about his recent (questionable) commitment to reaching net-zero emissions by 2050. Apparently, we are doing it “the Australian way” – which, given our track record on the climate crisis, doesn’t fill me with confidence. The prime minister says: Net zero by 2050 is not going to be achieved by legislating jobs away. It’s not going to be achieved by forcing people to do things*. It’s going to be achieved by getting the costs of the technologies that change the world down, not by putting the cost of other things up. You don’t have to put electricity prices up to get emissions down. You don’t have to sell out your economy and the jobs in your economy to get your emissions down. Australia has had a 20.8% fall in our emissions since 2005. And we’ve had a 45% increase in the size of our economy. And at the same time we’ve actually developed one of the largest LNG industries in the world, our emissions intensity has fallen by 56%... We’re doing this here in the Hunter. We’re doing it up in the Pilbara. We’re doing it up in Darwin. We’re doing it up in north Queensland. We’re doing it down in Belle Bay in Tasmania. Australia is doing it our way – the Australian way. The Australian way is not legislating jobs away. It’s not putting costs on businesses. It’s actually providing the right incentives and the right investments to make technology a reality. *Doing things like ... reducing emissions? So, Scott Morrison is out and about in the Hunter region today. So far they are just introducing the new candidate for the area. By the way, we will be hearing from SA health minister Stephen Wade at 12pm ACDT (12.30pm AEDT). He will be talking about the state’s plans to handle Covid-19 within their hospital system once the borders open. Federal health minister Greg Hunt has had to correct his tweet from earlier this morning. At first, he said the booster shots were available to anyone over 18 who had their first dose more than six month ago. In fact, it’s for those who had their second dose six months prior. News from Victoria: rapid antigen tests will be distributed to 20 government schools across the state, before a broader rollout. They will be used to test unvaccinated students – primarily those under 12 – who are close contacts of positive cases at their school. This will notionally allow them to miss just one week of school while isolating rather than two. Continued from last post: At the Senate inquiry, Hugh Poate was also scathing about the comments by the chief of the Australian defence force, General Angus Campbell, expressing surprise about the speed of the fall of Afghanistan to the Taliban. Poate told the Senate hearing into Australia’s engagement in Afghanistan today: Well, somebody who holds the highest office in defence ought to have been prepared because the rest of the country – including to the best of my knowledge every service person who served in Afghanistan – knew exactly what was happening, knew that the Taliban would again take over the country and could see that Afghanistan was falling. I mean, all you had to do was read Al Jazeera or TOLOnews and it was so obvious to everybody. So why was the chief of the defence force not aware of this? Poate added: I’m really concerned about the future of the Australian defence force if this is indicative of the leadership throughout the chain of command. Poate said the “cascade” was “facilitated” by the US move at the beginning of July to vacate the Bagram air base, leaving behind weaponry and vehicles. Campbell told a forum in early September: I don’t know of anyone who predicted, other than in the glory of 20/20 hindsight, how quickly it would occur – accelerated by, I think, some interesting force deployment choices, and also by the departure of their president. You can see Campbell’s full comments from our story in September: Hugh Poate, the father of an Australian soldier who was killed in Afghanistan, has told a Senate inquiry the killer of his son “was released as a result of the Americans making a treaty with the enemy”. Poate’s son Private Robert Poate was one of three Australian soldiers - the others being Corporal Stjepan Milosevic and Sapper James Martin – who were murdered as they played cards at a patrol base north of Tarin Kowt in August 2012. A former Afghan soldier known as Hekmatullah was convicted of murdering the soldiers. The Australian government last year said it would continue to push “as hard as we can” for Hekmatullah’s continued detention, after reports he could be released as a result of US-backed peace negotiations between the Afghan government and the Taliban. He was transferred to Qatari custody last year. However, Hekmatullah was released in recent months – shortly after the fall of the Taliban – and the Australian government is unclear of his current whereabouts. Hugh Poate was asked during the Senate hearing this morning what he thought this war should teach us about Australia’s alliance with the US, particularly in the context of the release of Hekmatullah and other prisoners. He replied: I’ve got a lot to say about that, but I will try and restrict what would take days and anger to be a little bit more mellow … Hekmatullah was released as a result of the Americans making a treaty with the enemy to release him and 5,000 other Taliban inmates. It was bad enough anyway with the revolving door – every time we would arrest somebody, invariably they would be caught again because they were let out. So those prisoners who were still incarcerated were the more dangerous ones … He had been sentenced to death - that sentence was never carried out. He’s never had to face the international criminal court for his war crime. OK! Looks like we will be hearing from the Queensland health minister for the Covid-19 update at 10am Brisbane time, 11am Sydney and Melbourne time. Oh in case you are interested, here is the video of Barnaby Joyce calling Kevin Rudd and Malcolm Turnbull “dipsticks”. As a treat. A Covid-positive woman who lied on her border entry form when entering Darwin has been identified as the source of the three-person cluster which triggered a lockdown in Katherine. Restrictions for fully vaccinated people in Katherine lifted yesterday afternoon, but unvaccinated people remain subject to stay-at-home orders until midnight tonight. Chief minister Michael Gunner said the 21-year-old was issued with a $5,024 infringement notice after she was questioned by Northern Territory detectives for five hours. Gunner said on Sunday: Don’t lie, don’t be selfish, think of others. She will pay because she lied to officials. He said her actions had “put the Territory at risk”, prompting the three-day lockdown for Katherine, 320km south of Darwin, where a close contact travelled and tested positive. Here is the full report: HOW! This is so many interviews! Scott Morrison has admitted more work is needed to increase Indigenous Covid-19 vaccine rates as the national booster rollout formally begins, reports AAP. While the national rate for fully vaccinated over-16s has passed 80%, immunisation rates among Indigenous communities are lagging. The prime minister said there was still a long way to go to bridge the vaccination gap. He told Newcastle radio: There is a challenge in Indigenous communities, particularly in [WA and Queensland] ... In NSW the Indigenous rate of vaccinations have been lifting and there’s been some rally good work there, but that is a challenge we find all around the world. Adem Somyurek, the alleged architect of a vast branch-stacking operation in Victoria, will give evidence before the state’s anti-corruption commission on Monday. The upper house MP is scheduled to give evidence each day this week other than Wednesday, with public hearings starting at 10.30am. Somyurek was dumped from the Andrews government and resigned from the Labor party in the wake of a 60 minutes/Age investigation into factional activities. He has denied being involved in branch stacking, which is not illegal but is a breach of party rules. The Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission started its investigation into the alleged misuse of public funds by the Victorian branch of the ALP the month before the 60 minutes/Age investigation was broadcast. It started public hearings as part of its investigation last month, with Somyurek featuring heavily in the evidence provided by witnesses so far. A factional ally of Somyurek, fellow MP Marlene Kairouz, gave evidence in a private hearing last week. Kairouz stood down as an Andrews government minister because of her alleged involvement in branch stacking but has denied all wrongdoing. She was permitted to give evidence in private once Ibac received “credible” evidence that appearing before a public hearing would cause unreasonable damage to her wellbeing. An Ibac spokesperson has confirmed Kairouz’s evidence will not be released in transcript form, but that parts of the evidence may be disclosed during the course of examining a witness in public examination, or in a special report on the investigation. Oh my good lord! Someone get this man a sports drink! This is like the 18th interview this morning! Victoria has also published its daily numbers, with 1,126 new Covid-19 cases overnight. Sadly, five people infected with Covid-19 have died. The NSW numbers are in and the state has recorded just 187 cases overnight. Sadly, seven people infected with Covid-19 have died. Detectives investigating the mysterious case of two campers who vanished in Victoria’s rugged high country 20 months ago are searching for a car seen in the area. They want to speak to the driver of the blue four-wheel drive – believed to be a mid to late 1990s model Nissan Patrol – or anyone who might have seen it at the time. Russell Hill, 74, and Carol Clay, 73, were last heard from on 20 March 2020, while camping in the Wonnangatta Valley. Hill left his Drouin home on 19 March and picked up Clay from her home in Pakenham in his white Toyota Landcruiser. You can read more below: Jacinda Ardern’s government is holding true to its reopening plans as New Zealand continues to notch unwelcome Covid-19 benchmarks, reports AAP. Last week, New Zealand reported more than 1,000 cases of Covid-19; a seventh of its total infections through the entire pandemic. There were also two deaths, both people with the virus who were isolating at home. Saturday’s highwater mark of 206 cases brought a worrying record hospitalisation count of 74 on Sunday and there is no indication either figure will drop soon. The outbreak remains centred on Auckland, producing more than 90% of daily cases, which will enter a 13th week of lockdown this week. This week, despite the roaring case numbers, Aucklanders are set for new freedoms. Ardern’s cabinet will meet on Monday to confirm its in-principle decision to allow retail and public facilities like libraries and museums to reopen from Wednesday, as well as increasing caps on gathering sizes. Covid-19 modeller Shaun Hendy, a physics professor at the University of Auckland, told Radio NZ that the government should reconsider: Relaxations are outpacing the vaccination program’s ability to bring these case numbers down so it may be a while until we see the peak in this outbreak ... A lot depends on this relaxation ... and potentially people’s compliance as well. Hendy said daily case counts of 1,000 or more by Christmas were “possible”. “Two hundred pelicans breeding, 20 whiskered terns, 100 grey teal, 30 black swans, one little pied cormorant … ” Richard Kingsford, a veteran ecologist, is rattling off the waterbirds he’s spotting below. He clutches his voice recorder closely to overcome the engine noise as our Cessna banks steeply, tracking the shoreline of Lake Brewster, a large lake in central-west New South Wales. John Porter, a NSW government scientist and fellow veteran bird counter, does the same, dictating the numbers and bird species he glimpses on the starboard side – while giving directions to pilot James Barkell – as we fly at 185kmh and barely 30m above the water. We’re on a three-day trip that is part of the annual waterbird survey, now in its 39th year. One of the world’s longest continuous bird counts, it’s also among the largest, spanning 2.7m sq km – 11 times the size of UK or six times California. You can read the full report below: We have been talking about the Frydenberg press tour all morning, but there is one place he has very notably not appeared ... Health minister Greg Hunt is also on the interview circuit this morning and has been asked if booster shots will be required for people to keep the freedoms given to those who have been double vaccinated: Not at this stage. it is not our medical advice. What a booster is, is exactly as the name says. It adds to your vaccination. It boosts your vaccination. It boosts your vaccination and protection. We are opening up today across the country to anyone who is six months or more from their vaccination. We have had 173,000 people in aged care and disability and older Australians who started early and come forward in the last week and a half to be vaccinated. A fast start, an early start. But the full program begins today. I think that is fantastic news. We are one of the first countries in the world after Israel to commence the booster vaccination program. Julian Assange and his fiancee Stella Moris say they are being prevented from getting married and are preparing legal action against UK justice secretary Dominic Raab and the governor of Belmarsh prison. The action accuses Raab and Jenny Louis, who runs the prison where the WikiLeaks co-founder is being held while the US is seeking his extradition, of denying the human rights of the couple and their two children. They say they have had no response to repeated requests seeking agreement that a ceremony can take place at the prison. Moris, a lawyer, linked the lack of response by British officials to the hostility towards WikiLeaks on the part of the US, where authorities were accused of plotting to kill or kidnap Assange during the years he was in the Ecuadorian embassy in London. You can read the full report below: Josh Frydenberg has been asked if the federal government will try to wait for Western Australia to hold the vote, in the hopes that an open border will increase the Liberals’ chances at another term: WA have announced their roadmap for easing of those borders, but obviously we would have liked it to have been earlier and sooner because other states are opening up at those 80% vaccination rates, and of course if people can travel more freely across the country it’s not only a good opportunity for them to catch up with family and friends, but it’s also good for the economy as well. We have seen ticket sales on airlines go off. We saw 75,000 Jetstar international seats being sold within 72 hours. Qantas sold 500,000 tickets in a two-week period. People are desperate to get around our great country, particularly as we approach Christmas. Unfortunately for people in Western Australia they’ll have to wait a bit longer. Sunrise host: The hard border to remain in place until 90% double vaxxed, the tourism industry is threatening legal action is that something you would support. Frydenberg: That’s for them, obviously it’s a high bar the Western Australian government has set. I don’t understand why Western Australia should be different to any other state and ease their border restrictions at that 80% vaccination rate. Josh Frydenberg has been asked on Sunrise if we can expect a budget in April and a federal election in May next year: Look, no dates have been set for either, but I can tell you that we’re out talking about the economy today and every day because this is what matters to people at home. The jobs are coming back, unemployment is at 4.6%, a 12-year low, it was 5.7%, when we came to government we know that job ads are 30% higher than at the start of the pandemic. We have new ... data that shows that insolvencies are 40% lower year on year, another proof point that Australia’s economic recovery is on track. Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg has been out and about this morning but before we get to him, here is what shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers had to say about his Liberal counterpart on the Today Show a little earlier: I think he’s part of the defining feature of this government. When the economy was bleeding two to three billion a week because of their failures on vaccines and quarantine, it wasn’t their responsibility. Now things are starting to improve, he is there to take the credit. Never there to take responsibility always there to take responsibility always there to take the credit. We want the economy to recover strongly. It is pleasing to see it is starting to get some momentum. Don’t forget last month in the unemployment figures 138,000 Australians lost their job, 129,000 gave up looking. It’s a mixed bag still. We want to see it recover strongly. We want to see the government take responsibility for things when they are difficult and not just when they are recovering. Australia is likely to be releasing more emissions from deforestation than reported to the UN, new analysis indicates, stoking calls for an independent review of the sector that has delivered the bulk of the country’s claimed reductions in greenhouse gas pollution. An assessment of satellite imagery of more than 50 properties in Queensland by Martin Taylor, an adjunct senior lecturer at the University of Queensland, has identified significant discrepancies between what is treated as cleared land by Australia’s National Carbon Accounting System and the Statewide Landcover and Trees Study used by the state government. “It flummoxes me – what’s going on in their models when they are missing such obvious land clearing,” Taylor said. “How can you possibly say that’s still forest … it’s so glaringly obvious something is wrong.” You can read the full report from Peter Hannam and Lisa Cox below: Former prime ministers Kevin Rudd and Malcolm Turnbull have been busy these last few weeks criticising Scott Morrison’s handling of the relationship with France. But the deputy PM Barnaby Joyce has had enough, telling Sunrise, via a very complicated horse metaphor, that the pair are real “pains in the neck”: Look, in politics ... sometimes it’s not so much how you ride the horse, but how you get off it. Some people get off it with grace and walk to the rail and sit on the rail and people go up and talk to them, but some people just can’t help themselves and they keep a foot in a stirrup and get dragged around in horse manure. And we are seeing a couple of people with their foot in the stirrup and are being dragged around in the horse mature. They have gone former prime ministers to current pains in the neck. If I walked in your studio or workplace, or your morning tea at school, or the pub calling everybody a liar, you just look at the person and say, “I don’t care what your former job is, you are a dipstick.” You can’t just walk around, brandishing those sorts of allegations. You have to have some decorum for the office you held, the nation you led, and act like it. And even if you have a concern, you know how to say it ... subtly in deference, to not create a massive problem. Because when you leave politics you are supposed to rise above politics. You are always an idealist as you walk up the hill and you’re more broadminded as you walk down the hill, but you are more broadminded with a brain between your ears. Happy carbon price anniversary! If you don’t observe it, don’t worry, you’re not alone – but on this, what would have been the 10th anniversary of the carbon price being legislated – the Greens are hoping to draw your attention to “a world of possibilities lost”. Greens leader Adam Bandt has released modelling he says shows what could have happened in the reality where Tony Abbott didn’t sweep to power and scuttle the carbon price. The modelling is based on an analysis done by the Greens, taking in projections and what happened in its first two years of operation – and we are dealing with hypotheticals here, so there is no way of knowing for sure.But Bandt says in its first year, the Clean Energy Act cut emissions by 10m tonnes. In the imaginary world where the Liberals didn’t demonise it by (falsely) labelling it a carbon tax, and Barnaby Joyce didn’t (falsely) claim $100 lamb roasts were just around the corner, Bandt says: Australia would have stopped an additional 256 million tonnes of pollution going into the atmosphere. Every tonne counts. We’ve modelled it. If the price on pollution had not been murdered on the floor of the parliament, we would have cut over a quarter of a billion tonnes extra of pollution over the last six years. In 2020 pollution would be 464m tonnes a year, compared with the 512 Mt we reached under the Liberals and the 529-585 Mt forecast under Kevin Rudd’s own poor first draft of a climate policy: If we had kept the price on pollution, we would have met the Coalition’s weak 2030 targets in 2020. Australia’s pollution would already be 26% below 2005 levels, meeting the Government’s insufficient 2030 target 10 years early. We would be ten years ahead of where we are now. Instead, Bandt says we are facing “as a country, the humiliation and shame on the international stage Scott Morrison inflicted on us these past weeks”. The Greens aren’t alone in noting arguable anniversaries – in 2019, Labor commemorated 10 years from when the Greens voted against the carbon pollution reduction scheme, which it claimed would have further reduced emissions by 200m tonnes over the 10 years. But the truth is, there hasn’t just been one moment which has led to Australia’s climate inaction, there has been many – and for the past eight years, Australians have voted in a government which has only ever promised the bare minimum on climate action. Bandt says Australia could be facing a minority parliament at the next election, which could give the Greens the balance of power – which is the point of noting today’s “anniversary”. The Liberals won’t act at all, but Labor won’t act on coal and gas unless the Greens are there to push them ... For amongst all the tales of alternative history that get told in politics, all the ‘if onlys’ and ‘could have beens’, one stark, historical fact stands out. The only time that pollution has meaningfully come down was when the Greens were in the balance of power. Fortunately, if only a few hundred people change their vote, that’s where we’ll be again after the next election. Good morning, everyone, and welcome to the new week. There’s no better way to start it than with us, coffee in hand and live blog on the screen. It’s Matilda Boseley here and let’s dive right in. Everyone in Australia aged over 18 and who had their second dose of vaccine more than six months ago is now eligible for a booster shot. Deputy chief medical officer Dr Sonya Bennett told reporters yesterday that there was “plenty of vaccine for all of us to get our booster”: For those people 18 and up who had a vaccine at least six months ago we encourage you to make an appointment and get your booster dose. Staying to date on vaccinations is even more important in NSW from today, as Covid restrictions ease further. Caps on the number of guests one can have to their home per day have been abolished, as many as 1,000 fully vaccinated residents can gather outdoors while stadiums, racecourses, theme parks, zoos, cinemas and theatres can operate at 100% of their fixed-seated capacity. Businesses will move to density restrictions of one person for every 2 sq m and fully vaccinated diners can book without number limits. As of today, schoolchildren can now enjoy music classes, excursions and assemblies but teachers who aren’t fully vaccinated will be suspended. The unvaccinated will have to wait until 15 December to enjoy any increased freedoms themselves. So now that we are up to date with all of that, why don’t we jump right into the day!Kansas City’s 13-7 win over the Green Bay Packers on Sunday was filled with hollow victories. The Chiefs’ offense continues to cough and wheeze. The Chiefs’ defense, so dismal all year, was finally able to put together a complete performance, albeit against a quarterback who looked in over his head in his first NFL start. The Packers, with a talented defense and a warlock-level coach capable of scotch-taping over even the worst holes, were competitive, even in defeat. But it was the man who wasn’t in the building who was the biggest winner. The Packers were given a glimpse of the post-Aaron Rodgers world on Sunday. The idea: intriguing. The reality: painful. This week will resonate long after Rodgers exits the game. He has revealed himself to be the kind of pseudo-intellectual who takes his medical advice from a podcast host who has spent the bulk of his life getting kicked in the head. Rodgers has altered his perception among the general public: from free-thinker to imbecile; or petulant brat to freedom fighter, depending on the reader’s perspective. Yet on Sunday, as the Chiefs sent blitz after blitz towards his overwhelmed understudy, it was Rodgers’ skill as a quarterback that was back in focus; and there everyone can agree on his brilliance. The Packers drafted Love in the first round of the 2020 draft. The team also knew that by selecting a quarterback, and not notifying their future Hall of Famer, that it was more likely than not that Rodgers was on his way out and Love would be starting by 2022 at the latest. As Sunday showed, Love is nowhere near ready. The Chiefs brought all kinds of pressure, sending five- and six-man blitzes from every conceivable angle. No team would take such a gamble against Rodgers, one of the finest blitz-beaters in the game. Against Love, the Chiefs sent blitzes on 19 of his 34 dropbacks. Love’s inability to punish the Chiefs’ blitz-heavy defense almost forced Troy Aikman, Hall of Fame quarterback and Fox’s Football Analyst in Chief, into a midgame breakdown. “If there’s no one in the middle of the field, throw it in the middle of the field,” an exasperated Aikman said late in the fourth quarter. All young quarterbacks take time to get up to speed, but it’s Love’s second year in the league. Isn’t the whole point of sitting and learning that it gives a player a better chance to perform once they come into the game? Love’s debut is in keeping with the recent history of quarterbacks who sit during their rookie season. The list of quarterbacks who were selected early and then sat for a full season since Rodgers infamously did (for three seasons) includes: - Patrick Mahomes - Jimmy Garoppolo - Brodie Croyle - Brock Osweiler - Garrett Grayson - Chad Henne - Jake Locker - Kevin Kolb - Kellen Clemens Mahomes aside, history tells us that a quarterback sits for the entirety of his first year for one of two reasons: 1) He’s backing up Tom Brady or 2) He stinks. Mahomes is the anomaly, not evidence that giving young, erratic quarterbacks more practice time will solve either their defects. During the summer stand-off with Rodgers, the Packers convinced themselves that Love was sitting because he was behind a master. Love would be good. Good enough to make it worth rupturing a relationship with Rodgers in his late prime, even. Love, the Packers believed, would be worth the wait and whatever awkwardness would arise with Rodgers. Perhaps not. Love looked chaotic in the pocket on Sunday, his feet and eyes moving at two different speeds. He completed just 19 of 34 attempts – 55% – tossing one touchdown and a rough-looking redzone interception. The Packers went scoreless in the first half, the first time the team has failed to score in a half in almost two years. That gulp you hear is the sound of every Packers executive rethinking their decisions. In 2019, the Packers made a dramatic shift on offense, moving from the Rodgers system of old to the Matt LaFleur system, which promoted the running backs and put the team’s receivers in better spots. It was a system that no longer needed Aaron Rodgers to be Aaron Rodgers. For some reason, this gave the Packers the notion that they may not need Rodgers at all. Oops. Drafting Love rather than an impact receiver or defensive player who could have helped Rodgers win a Super Bowl while he was still near his peak looked bonkers at the time. The further we gain distance from it, the more damaging and indefensible it becomes. Love may prove to be an upper-tier NFL starter one day. He has all the physical tools to be the kind of off-script creator that a quarterback needs to be in the modern game. Maybe he’ll put it all together at some point; maybe he won’t. What’s clear is that he isn’t close to being a difference-maker at this point in his career. Life with Rodgers may be frustrating and, at times, exhausting. But the Packers were offered a glimpse of the post-Rodgers landscape on Sunday. It wasn’t encouraging. MVP of the week Nick Chubb, running back, Cleveland Browns. All eyes were on Baker Mayfield and the Browns offense after the team waived Odell Beckham last week. The response: dominance. Chubb lit up the Cincy front to the tune of 137 yards and two touchdowns, averaging over nine yards a carry; Mayfield hit Donovan Peoples-Jones for a 60-yard touchdown off play-action. The final score was 41-16. It could have easily been more. This is what Stefanski wants the Browns offense to look like. Pound the defense with the run game, then take play-action shots downfield – all of it flowing through Chubb and the team’s offensive line. Whatever went wrong with Beckham in Cleveland, it’s clear that a divorce was in the best interests of both parties. The reasons remain murky, but there is good evidence that the Cleveland machine sings when Beckham is out of the lineup. Beckham will likely have his pick of the contenders once he clears waivers, allowing him to join a team that can better use his skill-set. Stat of the week Jacksonville’s Josh Allen became the first recorded player in NFL history to sack a quarterback with the same name … dropping Buffalo quarterback Josh Allen. If the Sackigami wasn’t enough, Allen also became the first player to intercept a quarterback of the same name, as well as adding a fumble recovery to the proceedings. The Jaguars pulled off one of the upsets of the season, beating a sputtering Bills team 9-6. Josh Allen – of the quarterback variety – had a poor day, while his namesake was the decisive reason in the Jags picking up the win. The only plausible conclusion: The ManningCast curse is real. Video of the week We have a new nominee for the Worst Rule In The League. The Broncos beat the Cowboys in Dallas, but they did so with help from one of the league’s iffier rules. With 12 minutes left in the third quarter, trailing 16-0, the Cowboys blocked a punt at the Broncos’ 17-yard line. A game-changer, right? Not so fast. The Cowboys touched the ball again after it went past the line of scrimmage before the Broncos recovered the block. That resulted in a first down for the Broncos rather than a turnover on downs. How or why a team receives a new set of downs for not advancing the ball beyond the first-down marker is anyone’s guess. Quote of the week “We gave the game ball to faith ... That’s the star of the game” -- John Harbaugh, Baltimore Ravens head coach. Harbaugh would probably be better off giving the ball to Lamar Jackson – again. Sunday served as another reminder that no lead is safe while Jackson is still in the game. Twice trailing by 14 points, the Ravens offense continued to churn out yards and scores. Jackson led the Ravens’ offense to 23 unanswered points, pushing the game into overtime before Baltimore were able to kick a field goal to win. After a sloppy start, Jackson accounted for three touchdowns and 386 yards of the Ravens’ total offense – a gaudy 77% of the team’s production. No team is ever all about one player but given the Ravens’ issues on defense, this is a team being carried by its offense. And that offense runs almost exclusively through its unique quarterback. Elsewhere around the league -- Don’t look now, but the Patriots are starting to figure things out. Rookie quarterback Mac Jones has not played well over the past two weeks, but it hasn’t mattered because other areas of the team have picked up the slack. The offensive line is healthy. The run game is overwhelming. The defense is certifiably feisty. Some teams work all season to discover that much-vaunted ‘identity’. The Patriots have theirs: they run the ball and play good defense. Over the past five weeks, they’ve averaged 33 rush attempts per game for an average of 138 yards. The Bills remain the most talented team in the AFC East, but they’re now tied with the Patriots with five wins on the season. -- Matt Stafford’s MVP candidacy hit a bump as he threw two interceptions in the Rams’ Sunday night loss to the Titans, who were without their star running back Derrick Henry. It was another impressive win for Tennessee, who have made a speciality of beating good teams. They’ve now seen off the Bills and Rams this season and have the easiest remaining schedule in the league. -- The 2021 Panthers illustrate how an otherwise good rebuild can be derailed if you make the biggest mistake of them all: picking the wrong quarterback. There’s talent all over the Panthers roster as well as creative, innovative coaching minds. They should be better, and yet they’re hamstrung by the Darnold Experiment. All of the sharp roster building has been undercut by the quarterback’s play, and his salary will continue to be a drag on the team’s salary cap next year. -- If you want to know how hopeless things feel in Houston right now: the Texans were down 17-6 to the Dolphins, and kicked a field goal from the two-yard line. To make matters worse: the teams combined for nine turnovers. Miami had five, Houston four. Somehow, the Dolphins won anyway. It was Miami’s first win while committing at least five turnovers since 1990. -- There aren’t many stories better this season than that of Cordarrelle Patterson. The former do-everything kick returner turned running back turned gimmick has blossomed into a legitimate No 1 receiver in Atlanta. After the Saints scored 23 unanswered points to put the Saints ahead of the Falcons with under two minutes to play, Matt Ryan found Patterson for a 64-yard pick-up to put Atlanta in field goal range. Younghoe Koo hit the game-winning kick to give the Falcons the 27-25 win over their division rivals.NHS workers in England must be legally required to get Covid vaccinations before the winter, Matt Hancock has said, in his first intervention since leaving government. Writing in the Daily Telegraph, Hancock, who resigned as health secretary in June after it emerged he had breached Covid-19 social distancing restrictions with Gina Coladangelo, an adviser with whom he was having an affair, warned ministers against delaying mandatory jabs for nurses and doctors. Hancock’s comments come as the chief executive of NHS England said the country faced “a difficult winter”, with hospital Covid admissions 14 times higher than they were this time last year. It has been reported that the government is expected to say the law will not be changed to require Covid jabs for the NHS’s 1.45 million staff in England until spring 2022. The law has already been changed to make Covid jabs mandatory for care workers in England, with the requirement to come into effect on Thursday. Hancock said: “Having looked at all the evidence, I am convinced we must require vaccination for everyone who works not just in social care but the NHS, and get it in place as fast as possible … So, as we prepare to face a difficult winter, let’s use all the tools that we have to save lives.” He argued compulsory vaccination for health staff in France proved the policy could work, with the proportion of vaccinated healthcare workers rising from two-thirds to 99% after the requirement was introduced. Hancock said: “To me, the logic is crystal clear. Medicine is founded on science, and the science of the Covid vaccine is comprehensively proven. Mandating the use of the best science isn’t controversial: it’s common sense. “There are some people who say this isn’t the way we do things in Britain. But we already mandate vaccination against hepatitis B for doctors. The British historic precedents for compulsory vaccination go back to the 1850s.” He added that getting vaccinated was a “moral duty”. Amanda Pritchard, the head of NHS England, told Sky News on Monday: “We have had 14 times the number of people in hospital with Covid than we saw this time last year and we have also had a record number of A&amp;E attendances and indeed a record number of 999 calls. “So as we look into winter, we’re very clear this is going to be a difficult winter and the things we would encourage people to do is anything they can do to protect themselves, so that’s the Covid vaccine, it’s the flu vaccination in particular.” NHS industry bodies and Labour frontbenchers have warned that legally requiring staff to take the vaccine in the run-up to winter could risk loss of NHS staff at a critical time. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said if the policy was wrongly adopted then “we risk a significant loss of a significant number of staff”. Hancock was health secretary for three years, playing a key role in the UK government’s response to the pandemic. There have been 141,805 deaths within 28 days of a positive tests reported by the Department of Health and Social Care since the crisis began in early 2020. NHS workers in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are the responsibility of the respective devolved administrations. The latest figures show 79.7% of people aged 12 and over have had two doses of the coronavirus vaccine.Adem Somyurek, the Victorian MP who has been accused of orchestrating a vast branch-stacking operation in the state, claims he denies, has admitted taxpayer-funded staff within his electorate office did political work, but that it was on a relatively insignificant scale. Somyurek, an upper house MP, is giving evidence in a public hearing as part of an Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission (Ibac) investigation into the alleged misuse of public funds by the Victorian branch of the ALP. Last year, Somyurek was dumped as an Andrews government minister and resigned from the Labor party in the wake of a 60 minutes/Age investigation into the workings of his moderate faction. Branch stacking is not illegal but is a breach of party rules. He has previously denied any wrongdoing. On Monday, he conceded he had been a “factional operator” who was involved in branch stacking, and whose publicly-funded staff did political work. But Somyurek emphasised that these activities were widespread across politics, permitted under the legislation governing the use of electorate officers, and essentially a matter of degrees. At one point, he said there were different reasons people may stack branches, but said that those who had ethnic backgrounds may rationalise it as “affirmative action by stealth”, given that “Anglo-Saxon” people who wished to enter politics had no barriers to do so. Mostly branch stacking was about protecting your electorate, or trying to be elected, he said, meaning that those who were MPs in safe electorates tried to stay away from the process. “If you’re branch stacking, you’re getting yourself into unnecessary risk,” Somyurek said. “And I’m a perfect case in point.” Somyurek’s evidence was often interrupted by counsel assisting the commissioner Chris Carr SC, or Ibac commissioner Robert Redlich QC as they cautioned him to answer questions directly. Somyurek routinely mentioned the factional activities of others when asked about his personal experience of branch stacking. “Can I just suggest that unless it’s really germane to the question that you don’t proffer gratuitous comments about others,” Redlich said at one point, after Somyurek claimed a “Vietnamese gentleman” had once given $7,000 to federal MP Anthony Byrne to pay for Labor memberships. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning During another exchange, when Somyurek started to detail the factional dealings of another politician, Carr urged him to “focus on the questions rather than the speeches you’d like to give”. Redlich also urged Somyurek to be more concise in his answers when he continues his evidence on Tuesday. He cited an exchange when Somyurek asked for 30 seconds to explain the context behind why his faction had filled out the votes on ballot papers for internal elections on behalf of 70 members, but instead spent three to four minutes on a philosophical discussion about Australians who were used to an “individualist” society, rather than the “collectivist” societies that existed among other cultures. Somyurek said that when the Victorian ombudsman did not come down harder on the so-called Red Shirts scandal, he and others within the party thought, “wow, it is carte blanche” to do as they wanted with electorate office staff. Electorate officers across the Victorian branch were pooled together to work on the 2014 election campaign as part of the scandal, which Somyurek described as the “gold standard” of rorting. While Somyurek agreed with a suggestion of Carr that he knew this meant he could not use these staff to paint his house or wash his car, he said most parliamentarians believe some factional work was permitted. Somyurek agreed when Carr asked if he accepted that as an MP he was responsible for ensuring taxpayer resources were used for public duties. “But obviously if you’re talking about party-political work we would sort of believe that’s all a part of our public duties,” he added. Somyurek said there was no government will to change restrictions regarding the use of electorate officers after the Red Shirts scandal, prompting Redlich to declare it was a “terrible indictment” on the government. It was common, Somyurek said, for all MPs to claim their full electorate office staff budget of 2.5 full-time equivalent employees, even if there was not enough electorate work for them to do. Carr showed Somyurek data relating to phone calls that were received in the electorate office for 2019, showing only 18 calls were received in the office for a three month period. On the busiest month of the year, only 56 calls, or about two a day, were received. Somyurek said he accepted staff would do factional work, such as preparing ballot papers ahead of the 2018 ALP national conference, when there was no other work to do. “Any downtime they will be using gossiping or surfing the net, they could be filling out ballot papers,” he said. But he disagreed with the suggestion this in itself was as problematic as the widespread rorting uncovered in the Red Shirts scandal, saying it was of a smaller scale, and that the “conveyor belt” of electorate work was never turned off: if there had been genuine work to do, he expected his staff to do it. Somyurek admitted he had employed “factional operatives”, including people who had recruited members, but said he had told them to limit factional work. He described the alliance between himself and other MPs, which the commission has previously heard allowed the “pooling” of staffing resources to further the work of Somyurek’s moderate faction, as “a loose alliance of independent groupings”. He said this meant he did not know exactly what was occurring in the electorate offices of those MPs, nor what each MP was directing their workers to do. Somyurek is scheduled to appear before the commission throughout this week, except on Wednesday.1) Solskjær’s treatment of Van de Beek is a mystery Donny van de Beek. Remember him? A classic No 6 or 8 of the Ajax school signed by Ole Gunnar Solskjær in summer 2020 and then, well, kind of forgotten. Not on Saturday, though, not by an Old Trafford faithful who could not believe the way Manchester City dominated. When the 24-year-old entered there was a rousing cheer – partly because he was replacing the maligned Fred, but also as this was only Van de Beek’s second league appearance and something has to change in the United XI. This 2-0 humiliation followed the same from Liverpool (5-0) in the last home match. Afterwards Solskjær complained of his players failing to find the “angles” needed to beat the City press. Then why give Van de Beek, who at Ajax and for the Netherlands has to be able to do just this, only 10 minutes? And why not give him a run in the side? Jamie Jackson Match report: Manchester United 0-2 Manchester City 2) Conte has much to ponder at Tottenham Antonio Conte saw something to build on in the heart, passion and sacrifice of his Spurs players at Goodison Park but the glaring lack of creativity in a team that has now gone 227 minutes without a shot on target in the Premier League demonstrated the extent of the work required. Harry Kane, Son Heung-min and Lucas Moura put in the effort in the goalless draw – one that could have resulted in defeat had referee Chris Kavanagh not overturned his penalty award to Everton – but had scant opportunity to stretch Rafael Benítez’s defence. “If I have to see a negative aspect it is we made many, many mistakes with the final pass,” the new Spurs manager admitted. “If we made the final pass in the right way, we could have had chances to score. Instead, with the last pass we made many mistakes.” Andy Hunter Match report: Everton 0-0 Tottenham 3) White rises above the doubters More than a few eyebrows were raised when Arsenal spent £50m to sign Ben White from Brighton but, as with at least one of their other summer purchases, the critics are starting to look daft. White is on a roll, anchoring Arsenal’s most convincing defence in recent years while offering a fresh dimension with his ability to maraud upfield. It was a run from White, stepping up to join an attack in open play, that ultimately rocked Watford and gave Emile Smith Rowe the chance to score a hard-earned winner; he also made timely interventions at the back, notably from a Joshua King volley in the second half, and increasingly looks an example of money very well spent. There will be ups and downs to come but few centre-backs in the country are operating with the 24-year-old’s level of conviction. The most exciting part is that he can only get better. Nick Ames Match report: Arsenal 1-0 Watford 4) Alisson shows set-piece weakness For years many people have criticised refereeing around fouls on goalkeepers, claiming they get too much protection from officials. Alisson has been brought up on the men in black being personal bodyguards, so must have been absolutely shocked that the decision for his own goal went against him. The Brazilian anticipated Michail Antonio’s pressure and Angelo Ogbonna’s challenge would mean a free-kick purely because there was contact. It might have put the goalkeeper off but it was far from being a criminal act from the West Ham defender. Alisson may have to expect more of this treatment for the rest of the season, as once a team spots a weakness, they will try to exploit it. Many Premier League sides put great emphasis on set-pieces and it would seem that targeting Alisson could become rewarding. The Brazilian will need to adapt his game from corners to avoid punching the ball into his own net again. Will Unwin Match report: West Ham 3-2 Liverpool 5) Havertz embodies Chelsea’s wastefulness There was a sign of things to come during Chelsea’s 1-0 win over Malmö last week. They had the chances to win more comfortably but they were not ruthless enough. Kai Havertz twice missed when he was through on goal and the German was frustrating again during Chelsea’s 1-1 draw with Burnley, who snatched a point thanks to Matej Vydra’s late equaliser. Havertz possesses so much quality, as he displayed when opening the scoring with a lovely header, but is still held by a lack of consistency. A poor miss in the second half gave Burnley hope and Chelsea, who also saw Ross Barkley and Callum Hudson-Odoi spurn opportunities, could not hold on. Édouard Mendy, astonishing against Brentford last month, is not going to save them every week. Thomas Tuchel needed his forwards to be more clinical in the absence of Romelu Lukaku. Jacob Steinberg • Match report: Chelsea 1-1 Burnley 6) Lightweight Lampard would be wrong for Norwich Norwich have a very big decision to make. Daniel Farke was dismissed on Saturday evening after their first Premier League win of the season, implying the decision was made before the match. Such planning would also indicate they have someone lined up to replace him. The favourite for the role is Frank Lampard, which would at least show some long-term thinking, rather than selecting one of the old guard in a bid to beat the drop. Farke’s replacement will know the club are likely to go back down and their role will be to accept relegation with dignity before preparing for a Championship campaign. Lampard struggled to organise a talented Chelsea squad in the Premier League and failed to bring up an expensively-assembled Derby team when in the second tier, making him a big name without the CV to back it up. He would be an underwhelming choice given Norwich’s needs. Will Unwin Match report: Brentford 1-2 Norwich 7) Smith pays price for Villa’s lack of depth When Aston Villa spent the £100m they pocketed for Jack Grealish on a trio of new signings – Danny Ings, Emiliano Buendía and Leon Bailey – their chief executive, Christian Purslow, talked up the idea that three players for the price of one could parachute them towards the European places. Eleven games in and five straight defeats later, such ambition looks misplaced. Injuries to key players such as Ings have hurt them but there is a plain absence of strength in depth. It is easy to lay the blame on Dean Smith, who was relieved of his duties on Sunday, but the reality is that for his final game in charge the bench was stocked with academy graduates. He turned to Jacob Ramsey, 20, Cameron Archer, 20, and Keinan Davis, 23, in a bid to turn the tide but none are game-changers, and Smith paid the price. Ben Fisher Match report: Southampton 1-0 Aston Villa 8) Forshaw’s fortitude a lesson to Maddison Hats off, Adam Forshaw. After two years spent sidelined with a serious hip injury the Leeds central midfielder is back in Marcelo Bielsa’s first team. Forshaw unexpectedly began the 1-1 draw with Leicester and impressed immensely on his first League start since August 2019, reminding everyone why Gareth Southgate once seemed on the verge of calling him into the England squad. “I really didn’t think that Adam was going to be able to do this,” said Bielsa. “It’s a prize for perseverance and a message for all those who seek to try to imitate his behaviour in a similar situation.” Meanwhile Leicester’s James Maddison, once destined to be among the first names on Southgate’s team sheets began on the bench. When, late in the second half, Maddison finally stepped off it he displayed decent touches but he evidently needs to do much more to convince Brendan Rodgers to put him back in Leicester’s starting team. Perhaps he could do with some of Forshaw’s resolve? Louise Taylor Match report: Leeds 1-1 Leicester 9) Vieira is improving veteran McArthur Patrick Vieira has rightly been praised for his transformation of Crystal Palace into an exciting side. One of the key components has been the arrival of Conor Gallagher, whose dynamic work with and without the ball in central midfield has re-energised the team. The Chelsea loanee’s efforts have, however, overshadowed the work of his central partner James McArthur. The metronomic midfielder turned 34 last month and one might be forgiven for thinking he would not find a place under Vieira. Instead the Frenchman named him captain and McArthur has started all 11 Premier League matches this season. His experience is allowing Gallagher the freedom he desires when Palace go forward. On Saturday, he picked a fine pass to create Wilfried Zaha’s goal. McArthur has more than 300 Premier League appearances but Vieira seems to be improving him – another indication of the manager’s fine work. Will Unwin • Match report: Crystal Palace 2-0 Wolves 10) Magpies denied by rule that feels unfair Newcastle were let down by the law at Brighton on Saturday. Callum Wilson would surely have fired into an empty goal to claim their first win of the season if he had not been tripped by Robert Sánchez as he raced clear in stoppage time. The goalkeeper was sent off for the last couple of minutes but his villainy paid off because, instead of a simple scoring chance, all Newcastle got was a free-kick 25 yards from goal against opponents who were allowed to reorganise. It was, then, yet another case where the referee should be authorised to award a penalty even though the foul took place outside the box. Justice would be better served with such an amendment to the rulebook. Paul Doyle Match report: Brighton 1-1 NewcastleA cabinet minister has said she backs a ban on MPs having lobbying-based second jobs after Owen Paterson’s departure from parliament, in the run-up to a Commons debate on wider allegations of sleaze that Boris Johnson is not expected to attend. Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the international trade secretary, said she would support a plan considered by the Commons standards committee for MPs to be barred from paid lobbying on behalf of commercial interests, as Paterson did. Trevelyan told Sky News: “I think the question of MPs having jobs that involve lobbying perhaps should be looked at again. But, across the board, I don’t think we should have a removal of the ability to maintain a second job, because it brings a richness to our role as members of parliament.” Johnson would be likely to not be in the chamber for the Monday afternoon emergency debate, and would instead watch it on television and allow Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Commons leader, to speak for the government, Trevelyan added. Saying she did not know for certain the arrangements for the debate, called by the Liberal Democrats, Trevelyan said: “My opinion would be that no, he shouldn’t be there. He will no doubt – as we all do – have the House of Commons on in his office as he’s dealing with many, many other issues that only a prime minister that can deal with. “He will get a briefing of the key issues raised by colleagues from across the house later on, I believe that the (Commons) leader and other ministers will be well placed to take the dispatch box this afternoon.” Trevelyan also confirmed the Commons Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, is to make a statement on the wider issue of MPs’ standards and the way complaints were investigated, after a government-prompted vote to overturn the punishment faced by the Conservative backbencher Paterson for breaking lobbying rules, a decision then rapidly reversed. Paterson quit his seat on Thursday when the government U-turned. The debate on Monday, Trevelyan said, would mean “concerns from many colleagues” around the issue of whether the standards system had a sufficiently full method for appeal. She added: “I understand the Speaker of the House will also be making a statement later on to identify how we can move forward to help solve that issue.” MPs are permitted to work as consultants but are generally not allowed to lobby directly on behalf of the organisations they work for. Paterson was found to have broken the rules “egregiously” in lobbying for two companies, including the clinical diagnostics company Randox, which won huge government contracts for Covid-related work. Allegations of corruption against the government widened over the weekend after the Sunday Times reported that all 16 of the Conservative party’s treasurers, excluding the current incumbent, had been made peers with each donating an average of £3m to the party. Asked if the claim was correct, Trevelyan said: “I don’t have the statistics in front of me,” adding that she had not seen the article. However, she defended the wider system, saying it would be wrong to stop rich people from going to the Lords: “People are put forward for peerages for all sorts of reasons, and I don’t think that someone who happens to have been an extremely good businessman, and made a great deal of money through business activity, usually also an enormous amount of philanthropy, amazing people of all political colours, that they should be barred from going to the House of Lords.”Osebol is a village in Värmland, a province in Sweden. It stands with its back to the broad, beautiful Klarälven (clear river) and is surrounded by pine forests. Its population has shrunk to 40 and most of those who remain are middle aged or old. It is the kind of forgotten place that can be found all over the region. With its modest, red-painted wooden houses, logs stacked under the eaves against the cold dark that is always coming, its mosquitoes in the summer, mud in November and its long, unforgiving winters, it is an unlikely subject for a bestseller. Yet in Sweden, the voices that have come from this ordinary little village have become like an existential meditation on what it is to be alive, to be human, creatures living in time while the river runs on and wolves howl in the woods. I know Värmland because I married a half-Swede and for the last 30 years – this pandemic year aside – I have been there each summer and winter. To me, a visitor, the area retains its Carl Larsson romance. It means lakes to swim in, woods to forage mushrooms and get lost in, crayfish parties, wild strawberries, soft twilights, silence. The writer Will Dean moved to Sweden and he transforms Värmland’s endless forests and harsh winters into the menacingly grand guignol setting for his twisty thrillers. But Marit Kapla, originally from Osebol, has made her undramatic little patch of Earth into a microcosm of life. Its specificity allows it to be universal. Kapla, editor of a cultural magazine in Gothenburg, has talked to almost all the remaining 40 inhabitants of Osebol. It is their stories we read in the book, as one by one they speak about their past and their present. The men who have spent their lives working with trees (cutting them down, transporting timber), the home help, the stonemason, the artist, nurse, teacher, the couple who worked with unaccompanied minors from Afghanistan, the women who stayed at home with their children. Many of the voices belong to people who were born in Osebol, like their parents and grandparents before them, but others are from those who have fetched up there from the Netherlands, Poland, East Germany, Hungary, Silicon Valley. Each voice is given equal weight. Garrulous, taciturn, gossipy, warm-hearted, reserved or matter of fact, a character speaks and then they slip quietly away. No one is introduced or given a context; the name of each speaker and their date of birth (and sometimes death) is in small type at the foot of the page. It is easy to run on from one speaker to the next without realising immediately that the voice has changed and we are in a different consciousness. Crucially, the text is laid out like a poem, or like a river, with line breaks and wide margins. We do not read the words as if they were shaped narratives; instead, we listen to them like something caught on the wind. Sometimes, there are only a few short lines on one page, like this: Looking out of the upstairs window at Klarastrand I saw a salmon swimming just below the surface But for the most part the words are not poetic (“It’s just/a bloody valley,/sort of… ”). Some of the people whom Kapla records have adventures to tell (war, domestic violence, depression, cancer, the flight from persecution, staring into life’s abyss). Some talk of feminism (dislike of), racism, class division, poverty. But the majority stay with the small and everyday, the thingness of things: pea soup, knitting itchy woollen stockings as a child, elk in the woods, chanterelles, the work of stripping bark from timber with an axe, wind in the trees. The final words come from a character who is talking about bullfinches: It’s so beautiful Where there’s rime-frost on the branches. They sit there getting warm When the sun rises. They’re just like red apples. Why is this so moving and so strangely beckoning? I think precisely because Osebol bears witness to ordinary lives. It gives us, unmediated, the voices of people who are usually unheard and invites us to pay attention to small things. It’s also a book that has come at just the right moment, when we’re ready to listen to it, because it’s about the many meanings of home, something we’ve come to value more during the pandemic, and what it is to put down roots and belong. As a character says when talking about why he loves Osebol: “That’s where I’ve lived.” The village is dwindling. Many of its inhabitants are in their 80s or 90s and some have died since they talked to Kapla. If the book feels continuous and renewing, like the Klarälven that runs through the reminiscences, it also reads like an elegy to a world that is fading. Perhaps one day Osebol will only be a ghost village, where once upon a time men and women worked and loved and watched the seasons passing and put wood on the fire and told their stories. • Osebol: Voices from a Swedish Village by Marit Kapla (translated by Peter Graves) is published by Allen Lane (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe wife of a man who is believed to have been killed by sharks off Australia’s west coast has paid tribute to a “wonderful father” . Paul Millachip, 57, who is understood to have been from the UK, was last seen in the water on Saturday by two teenagers who witnessed what they believed was a shark attack off Port Beach in North Fremantle, Perth. The ABC reported that, according to witnesses, Millachip was swimming next to the dinghy in which the teenagers were travelling when a tiger shark and a great white shark attacked him. On Sunday, the police said it was apparent the attack had been fatal and the search for Millachip had been called off. His wife, who did not wish to be named, told Australian broadcasters of her gratefulness for the efforts of teenagers on a nearby boat who helped raise the alarm. She said: “A special mention to those young lads in the boat for what they did in what must have been an absolutely terrifying experience for them, so my heart goes out to them and I thank them for what they did. “Rest in peace, Paul. He died [doing] what he enjoyed doing the most, which was exercising. He was a wonderful man, a wonderful father, and he loved his exercise.” She added both their families were currently overseas and said she was grateful for the support from her local friends. “I also just wanted to say thank you to all of our friends here in Perth for all the support and love that you’ve shown us and that’s really appreciated because both of our families are overseas and obviously we’ve been talking to them as well, but it’s hard because they may not be able to travel here to be with us,” she said, adding she was also appreciative for the work of police and other emergency services. “We’ve been through in quite a lot of detail what they’ve been doing and how the search has panned out, and they’ve been extremely thorough and extremely professional and we’re really, really grateful for that. “I wanted to thank also the eyewitnesses – there’s a number of eyewitnesses who have given very, very valuable accounts and that’s helped piece together what’s happened, so we can be very clear that it was actually Paul involved. “It came out of the blue. But it did happen, you just have to deal with it.” Acting Inspector Troy Douglas previously said the father of two was a regular at the beach and a pair of goggles believed to belong to him had been recovered. He added: “Inquiries will continue based on anything that is washed up or anything that’s found in the future, but at this point the marine search is suspended.”Ecologists involved in the multibillion dollar plan to raise the wall of Sydney’s main water reservoir say their input detailing the threat to endangered species in the world heritage-listed region was either watered down or ignored altogether. The claims – made in separate evidence presented on Monday to a NSW upper house inquiry into the state government’s plan to raise the Warragamba dam wall at least 14 metres – raise fresh questions over the independence of the environmental impact statement (EIS) prepared for the project. Rachel Musgrave, a former primary assessor for biodiversity surveys and analysis for the EIS, said she had resigned out of concern her accreditation as an ecologist might be at risk if she had signed off on the draft report as proposed. At stake for the proponent, the state government’s WaterNSW, was the prospect of at least $2bn in costs of offsetting the likely damage caused by inundating as much as 6,000 hectares in the Blue Mountains world heritage region to Sydney’s west. The raised wall itself may cost as much as $1.6bn. Musgrave said she was worried the consultants hired by WaterNSW wanted her to interpret the impacts of the wall raising as “indirect” rather than direct to reduce or eliminate the cost. She said she was also overruled on issues, including the terminology used in the EIS. “As I felt that the changes were not immaterial – these were substantive changes to the impact assessment – and I requested that my name be removed … from the report”, she said. The request was refused, so Musgrave resigned rather than put her qualification in peril: “We have certain obligations and our code of conduct as an accredited assessor.” A second ecologist, Ross Crates, an expert on the critically endangered regent honeyeater, told the committee his findings had been “watered down” by the consultants he and Musgrave were working for. Crates, a postdoctoral fellow at the Australian National University, said there were as few as 350 of the birds left in the wild, with the majority of them in the Blue Mountains region. A survey of about one-fifth of the proposed impact site had identified a minimum of 21 of the birds and seven nests, he said. “There has been significant editing to the wording that I initially proposed for the upstream biodiversity assessment reports” in the EIS, Crates said. “That has been significantly diluted presumably to water down the envisaged impacts of the proposed development.” Words such as “will” were altered to “could”, he said. Crates said he was also concerned the EIS had been designed to exclude a major area – between zero-2.78 metres and 10.25-14 metres above the current maximum flood level – from calculations for offsets. “This will be a huge area of mapped important regent honeyeater habitat that would not be offset in the current offset calculation strategy,” he said. Steve Douglas, an ecologist who made an independent review of the draft and final versions of the EIS, said “there’s multiple instances of selective editing to favour the proponent’s interests”. “[They] essentially dilute the impact and make it look not as significant as it is,” he said, adding he agreed with Crates about the “inability of offsets to achieve what they’re intended to” including for endangered plants. Guardian Australia approached the western Sydney minister, Stuart Ayres, for comment. His office forwarded the request to WaterNSW. “The Warragamba wall-raising proposal’s EIS process is strictly governed by multiple legislative and procedural parameters and subject to state and commonwealth government review to ensure the assessment and consultation work was fully compliant and meets the highest standard,” the spokesperson said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Adam Searle, one of the Labor MPs on the panel, said the work done by the ecologists “had been reported in a way that they didn’t agree to”. It raised questions “whether [the consultants] edited the evidence to the advantage of the proponent [WaterNSW]”, instead of operating at arm’s length as it should, he said. Justin Field, an independent NSW MP and chair of the committee, said the evidence heard was “extraordinary”, including that there had been inadequate resources allocated to obtaining expert studies into the project’s damage. “The NSW government has continued to dodge questions about this project saying all will be revealed in the final EIS,” he said. “Now we see the final EIS and there are few clear answers and the integrity and adequacy of the entire EIS has been called into question by subject matter experts.” Harry Burkitt, the general manager of the Colong Foundation for Wilderness, said “the reason the Warragamba EIS leaves so many stones unturned is because there is a group of cockroaches under every rock”. He said the evidence strengthened the case for the state’s planning minister, Rob Stokes, to review the whole EIS process. The government should instead focus on alternative measures to reduce flood risks in the Hawkesbury-Nepean floodplain rather than raising the dam wall, he said. The EIS is open for comment until 29 November.It will be “impossible” for Nigeria to meet its target of vaccinating 40% of its population by the end of the year because Covid is not being taken seriously, health experts have warned. Fewer than 1.5% of the country’s 206 million population has been fully vaccinated. But with more people killed in conflict last year and substantially more recorded deaths from malaria than Covid in Nigeria, experts believe it is further down the list of concerns for many in the country. In September, the World Bank’s International Development Association approved a $400m (£300m) credit to speed up Nigeria’s Covid vaccination programme. The money, the World Bank said, was for safe and effective vaccine acquisition and deployment. Days later, the World Health Organization announced a strategy to help poorer countries achieve 40% vaccination coverage by the end of 2021, although WHO Africa regional director Matshidiso Moeti said that was unlikely in Africa. “At this rate, the continent may only reach the 40% target by the end of March 2022,” said Moeti. The feasibility of Nigeria’s vaccination plan was questioned when it was announced in January by Faisal Shuaib, head of the country’s primary healthcare agency. Now, it looks impossible, said Prof Isa Abubakar Sadiq, director at the Centre for Infectious Diseases Bayero University Kano. “The number of vaccines available in the country will not be enough for all those who would come forward,” said Sadiq. “If we are to achieve the target, we need more doses to be available and people need to be mobilised to come forward and take the vaccine. Not enough people are coming forward to even take the available vaccines. People are not taking the disease seriously because the severity is not as projected. The risk perception is not as it should be.” At the start of the pandemic, experts predicted that Covid would have a devastating impact on Nigeria, with global repercussions across the continent and the world, a result of its strained health care system, the size of its population and its mobility. But reported cases and deaths have remained comparatively low. Since the outbreak began there have been 212,500 confirmed cases, with 2,900 deaths, according to Nigeria’s Centre for Disease Control. There are under 5,500 active cases. Most quarantine centres and isolation wards that opened in the first few months of the outbreak have closed. Malaria kills an average of 216 Nigerians a day, according to the minister of health, Dr Osagie Ehanire, and 3,326 people were killed “as a result of insecurity” in 2020, an analysis by the Cable, a Nigerian online newspaper found. The government’s swift response to the Covid outbreak was initially applauded. Protocols designed to check the 2014 Ebola outbreak in neighbouring west African countries were quickly modified and deployed. Airports were closed and travellers were subjected to basic health screenings before other countries initiated these measures. An initial two-week lockdown in the states of Lagos, Abuja and Ogun imposed on 30 March lasted five weeks. Two weeks later, the National Human Rights Commission said, law enforcers had killed 18 people since lockdown began, while Covid had killed 12. The low case rates came despite public indifference or reluctance to follow Covid safety rules. Mobile courts trying violators of lockdown were often overcrowded. Churches and mosques routinely disregarded the lockdowns and Covid protocols. Doubts and conspiracy theories about vaccines have deterred many. The government quickly learned that it was impractical to keep 206 million people, 40% of whom live beneath the poverty line, at home for extended periods. During the second and third waves of Covid, lockdown was not an option. The government’s food and palliatives relief supplies meant to alleviate hunger during the lockdown, never made it to those who needed them most. When angry youths protesting police brutality broke into the public warehouses stocked with Covid relief supplies across the country in October last year, they accused the government of hoarding the goods. Mistrust in the government’s handling of the pandemic is widespread. The northern state of Kano reported huge numbers of infections while pressuring the federal government for funds to fight the outbreak. But numbers dropped immediately after funds were approved. When reports emerged of inflated prices of electronic thermometers and other medical supplies being procured by government agencies, these suspicions were all but confirmed. The low infection rates, despite widespread disregard for Covid protocols, have left experts baffled. “No one knows for certain why this is the case,” said Sadiq. “Some have attributed it to the fact that most people here have received BCG vaccines for tuberculosis, or to living in a malaria-endemic zone. Some say it might be because of the young age of the population. These are just hypotheses. I just think we are undertesting.” The WHO has said that six in seven cases go undetected in Africa. Nigeria has conducted only 15.8 tests per 1,000. The authorities remain committed to increasing vaccination figures. Nearly 9m doses have been administered, with the US donating 4m doses of Moderna in August. From December, government employees without proof of vaccination or a negative test will be barred from public buildings. Their numbers may be negligible in the country’s population, but the ruling was a sign that the government is desperate to move closer to its target.Biden administration plans to get US companies with 100 or more workers to vaccinate their staff or bring in regular tests have been welcomed by public health groups but slammed by Republicans and trade groups, who claim government overreach with negative economic consequences. Such divided reaction to the rules announced last week mirrors much of America’s problematic vaccine rollout, where social and political headwinds have seen vaccination take-up slow down worryingly. US vaccination rates are some of the lowest in industrialized countries where the vaccine is readily available. Subject at least to a temporary stay issued by a circuit court in New Orleans on Saturday, the new rule from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Osha) will take effect on 4 January. It requires that large companies either ensure employees have been vaccinated or regularly administer Covid-19 tests and require masks at work for those who refuse to get the shot. The rule will affect an estimated 84 million workers. The Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services also issued a rule requiring healthcare workers to be vaccinated by the same deadline, with no option for weekly testing rather than vaccination. That will affect 76,000 providers and more than 17 million workers. The administration also extended a deadline for federal contractors to comply with the same sort of rule – vaccination without the testing option – from 8 December to 4 January. “Too many people remain unvaccinated for us to get out of this pandemic for good,” Joe Biden said in a statement. But the rules sparked new backlash from Republican lawmakers and conservative groups who described the measures as unconstitutional. Republican governors or attorneys general in 15 states plan to file lawsuits against the mandate, according to the Associated Press. “This rule is garbage,” South Carolina’s attorney general, Alan Wilson, a Republican, said, according to the AP. “It’s unconstitutional and we will fight it.” Celebrating the Saturday ruling in Louisiana, the state attorney general, Jeff Landry, said: “The president will not impose medical procedures on the American people without the checks and balances afforded by the constitution.” While courts have largely declined to block state and local vaccine mandates, the federal government “has more constraints on it than state and local governments do when it comes to public health and vaccination”, said Lindsay Wiley, a public health law professor at American University. On whether the Osha rule could be overturned, Wiley said: “It’s difficult to predict, in part because the environment has become so politicized.” Plaintiffs could also seek to file lawsuits in circuits with conservative judges appointed by Donald Trump, Wiley said. Lawrence Gostin, a global health law expert at Georgetown Law, tweeted earlier this week that “Biden is on rock-solid legal ground. He’s acting to protect the US workforce and will get us all back to normal sooner.” But groups such as the National Retail Federation (NRF), the country’s largest retail trade group, condemned the Osha rule because they said it places an unreasonable burden on businesses during the holiday season, which for many ventures is the busiest time of the year. The NRF is requesting an extension of the deadlines, though Edwin Egee, a vice-president of the group, did not provide a preferred date. “NRF members have for months taken extraordinary efforts to distribute the vaccine, to incentivize the vaccine. We have been, and will continue to be, very much in favor of the vaccine and its efficacy,” Egee said. Republicans have also warned that the vaccine requirements could cause employees to quit. If faced with a mandate, 11% of the unvaccinated said they would be most likely to get the vaccine and 46% said they would opt for weekly testing, according to an October survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). More than a third of unvaccinated workers said they would quit if their employer required them to get a vaccine or get tested weekly. But that amounts to just 5% of all adults in the US. “When we are looking at the bigger picture amongst all adults … it’s a pretty small share of the population,” said Lunna Lopes, senior survey analyst for KFF. There is evidence that workers often opt to get vaccinated rather than lose their jobs. For example, Houston Methodist hospital required 25,000 workers to get a vaccine by 7 June, the Conversation, a non-profit news organization, reported. Before the mandate, about 15% of employees were unvaccinated. By mid-June, that had dropped to 3%. David Michaels, a former Osha chief now a professor of public health at George Washington University, argued the new rules would help businesses who wanted to institute requirements but were constrained by state and local rules or feared litigation. “This actually allows employers to do what they want to do and blame the federal government,” said Michaels, who has advised the Health Action Alliance, a coalition of corporations such as Starbucks and Amazon and non-profits such as the CDC Foundation and the Ad Council aimed at promoting Covid-19 vaccination and prevention. The rules will make the workplaces safer, Michaels said. “The retail industry should give a gift to the American people and start to be supportive of vaccination requirements,” Michaels said. “That’s the only way that we will save lives and return to normalcy. It’s outrageous to ask for an exception to a public health measure.”The United Nations special rapporteur on the right to health has called on the US supreme court to uphold the right to abortion in America or risk undermining international human rights law and threatening that right elsewhere in the world. The special rapporteur, Dr Tlaleng Mofokeng, is one of just a handful of global observers whose mandate is to travel the world defending human rights. Mofokeng has argued in a brief filed in a US court that overturning abortion rights would violate international human rights treaties ratified by the US, including the convention against torture, should women be forced to carry pregnancies to term. In an interview, Mofokeng told the Guardian she could have filed a brief on abortion rights, “in any other court, in any other abortion case,” globally. However, she chose the US courts because of the direct threat posed to abortion rights in the supreme court’s upcoming session. “We have this joke among us that when the US sneezes the rest of the world catches a [cold],” said Mofokeng. “So we know that politically that what happens in the United States… does have an impact in precedents elsewhere in the world.” Mofokeng’s brief was filed ahead of oral arguments in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, a case advocates fear will undermine abortion rights nationally. Dobbs poses a direct threat to Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 case that established a Constitutional right to abortion based in privacy. Roe invalidated dozens of state abortion bans and restrictions, and allowed people to terminate a pregnancy up to the point a fetus can survive outside the womb, generally understood to be about 24 weeks gestation. A full term pregnancy is 39 weeks. “If that gets overturned, it has catastrophic implications, not just for the US,” said Mofokeng, who said she feared overturning Roe would embolden global attacks on reproductive rights. Mofokeng is also a practicing doctor and well-known sex-positive author in South Africa. Most often, she goes by “Dr T”, an informal title which underscores the empathy in her academic analysis. Her most recent UN report outlined the challenges Covid-19 posed to reproductive rights, and how colonialism continues to affect global policies on reproduction, from sterilization to abortion bans. “It means that even those people who are conservative, who are anti-rights, in any country in the world, will actually now start referencing the US court as an example of jurisprudence that should be followed,” said Mofokeng. “And this is why this is so dangerous”. In Dobbs, the court will consider whether Mississippi can ban abortion at 15 weeks gestation. For the court to uphold Mississippi’s law, it would require the court to rewrite standards that determine whether abortion restrictions are constitutional. Advocates fear that could once again allow states to severely restrict or ban abortion. A majority of the court’s nine justices would need to agree to rewrite such standards. Conservative justices hold a 6-3 supermajority on the court. Many observers view the court’s decision to take the Mississippi case as an ominous sign. About six in 10 Americans believe abortion should be legal in “all or most cases”. “If Roe … [were] overturned, many US states will implement bans or near-bans on abortion access that will make individual state laws irreconcilable with international human rights law,” the brief argued. “This would cause irreparable harm to women and girls in violation of the United States’ obligations under the human rights treaties it has signed and ratified.” While the US has not ratified several United Nations treaties, it has ratified the convention against torture, which Mofokeng’s brief argued would be violated if states were allowed to ban abortion. “The denial of safe abortions and subjecting women and girls to humiliating and judgmental attitudes in such contexts of extreme vulnerability and where timely health care is essential amount to torture or ill treatment,” Mofokeng’s brief said, citing a 2016 report by the rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Conversely, Mofokeng’s brief argued, contrary to Mississippi’s assertions, that “the right to life emanating from human rights treaties does not apply prenatally,” and that the “overwhelming trend for the past half-century has been toward the liberalization of abortion laws worldwide”. Further, since the court has accepted the Dobbs case, it also allowed a six-week abortion ban to go into effect in Texas in September, effectively allowing the nation’s second largest state to nullify Roe within its borders. Experts estimate that if Roe were overturned, roughly two dozen US states mostly in the south and midwest would immediately ban abortion. Such bans would have immediate and direct consequences for women and people seeking abortions. In one recent analysis, the Guttmacher Institute found 26 states are certain or likely to outlaw abortion should Roe be overturned. In just one example, that would require a woman seeking a legal abortion in Louisiana to travel to Kansas to access care. “The rise in global anti-gender and anti-women’s rights is such that people will grasp at anything that seems to make their case solid,” said Mofokeng. And, she said, the case before the supreme court now relies on “non-medical, non-scientific” misinformation. “It means we have a risk of now having global jurisprudence – or at least influences in the global world – using jurisprudence that’s ill-informed. And that’s very dangerous,” said Mofokeng. “To undo the court’s decisions takes decades, sometimes a lifetime – and that’s why it’s dangerous.”Australian writer-director James Vaughan’s debut feature is a strange exercise in tone and atmosphere. For sure, there are characters who wander around and do stuff – but almost nothing of consequence happens. This film is almost aggressively deadpan and oblique, to a degree that’s almost admirable so long as you feel it’s worth spending 82 minutes of your time watching a cinematic experiment. As one of the characters, a videographer in his 20s named Ray (Fergus Wilson), says about his work: “It’s all real, unless none of it is. It’s all smoke and mirrors.” Indeed, Smoke and Mirrors would be just as good a title, and about as randomly appropriate as the generic title it has already. In the early section, Ray wanders around Sydney with a young woman named Alice (Emma Diaz) he seems to barely know, and on a whim they end up camping together in the bush. At the campsite, they meet a recently widowed man and his young daughter, and the dad offers up a wry monologue on the decline of Australian cultural life. A little bit of awkward fumbling between Alice and Ray fails to blossom into sex, and then the scene shifts swiftly back to Sydney. Some time seems to have passed and Ray and a friend have car trouble. They find themselves in a wealthy part of town full of art-stuffed villas for a job interview with a family who want Ray and his buddy to film the wedding of the eldest daughter (Amelia Conway). A neighbour is playing droning atonal music that makes the whole interaction feel like a horror movie before the gory part kicks in. And yet nothing happens, although the camera, as if guided by Ray’s viewpoint, does delight in zooming in on the shapely buttocks of women in the scene or even marble statues. Meanwhile, there’s an undertow theme about Australian history and colonialism, but like Alice and Ray’s romance, or Ray’s car’s engine, that sort of splutters and dies away. The way Vaughan and his team film and edit the movie, using lots of still long takes, suggests we’re either supposed to think it’s all comic or profound. In the end it’s neither, but not uninteresting. • Friends and Strangers is available on 10 November on Mubi in the UK and screens at the Sydney film festival.In a pandemic that has meant keeping 2 metres away from one another whenever possible, it appears that physical contact is beginning to return. Even handshakes are making a comeback: one poll found younger people were shaking hands again, although older generations are more uneasy about it. “We are wired to respond to emotional touch,” says Francis McGlone, a professor of neuroscience at Liverpool John Moores University. “My analogy is that [touch is] like a vitamin – if we are depleted, there are consequences in terms of our physical health. I make the same argument about the C-tactile afferents – the nerve fibre that evolved in all social mammals to provide the reward associated with close physical contact. When the fibre is stimulated, it does a number of measurable things – it lowers heart rate and it lowers cortisol, the stress hormone.” It’s one reason, he says with a laugh, he believes so many people got pets during lockdown: “That’s the brain recognising ‘I need to touch something’.” For the pet-less, touch-starved, skin-hungry among us, physical contact is a welcome thing. Even before the pandemic, we were living through a “crisis of touch”; perhaps the enforced distance of the past 18 months has made us realise how vital touch is after all. For the people whose jobs rely heavily on touch, it’s been a particularly difficult time. Here’s how they are navigating its return. Anna Fortes, nurturing touch therapist and cuddle workshop facilitator I haven’t run any group workshops since the first lockdown: it’s still too early, and it doesn’t feel responsible yet. Some of those who come to me are nervous around touch, they want to get more comfortable with it, and some are desperate for it; they don’t have enough of it in their lives. I still run one-to-one sessions, but for a long time I didn’t. With touch, very often there’s a backstory. For some, it’s purely about being in an unconditional space where somebody caring is holding their hand while they talk. For others, it might be that they had a childhood full of neglect, and now they just want to be held. I have, for two hours, sat with my arms around somebody in full foetal position and just held them. Slowly they just unfolded. Touch is the primary form of bonding, so without contact, even in a subtle way – we’re still talking on the phone, we can still go for walks, but we haven’t touched – there’s something lost. Touch is all about happiness, relaxation and stress reduction. It is about that feeling of connection to others. Even if it’s a simple handshake, there’s a bond. When I think about what is lost on a friendship level, and on a society level, I do feel sad about it. Some people who have come to see me said they hadn’t been touched for nearly two years. The touch in the sessions, and the connection that comes with it, have been very important to them. I also get a joy out of it, I get the benefits of the oxytocin. I did really miss it. Heather Randle, Royal College of Nursing public health lead for general practice nursing Having gloves on makes quite a difference. From the nurse’s point of view, you don’t feel as if you’re actually making that contact with the patient. We do quite a lot of things that reassure – hold their hand if they’re upset, or put your arm around them – but we were encouraged to keep our distance as much as we could. My daughter-in-law really struggled with it: she works in a hospital and said that, with a dying patient, she felt really awful because she was holding his hand through a plastic glove. We’ve had to learn to stand back from patients, which is difficult. At the beginning, we were wearing a full gown, a pair of gloves, a mask and a visor, so there was a complete barrier. When we started to understand more about how the virus is transmitted, and we started the vaccines, the guidelines were eased. You get close to patients if you need to – for a smear test, for example, or a vaccination – but we still keep distance where we can. And actually, some patients are scared and don’t want you in their space. Sometimes, you have a really upset patient that you have to try to console in a different way; you have to verbalise your reassurance or your empathy. Touch is fundamental to the connection between a nurse and patient, to make them feel that you hear them, and that you understand what they’re going through. We definitely missed it. I think touch was something we took for granted, and now it has become something we don’t take for granted any more. Joyce Connor, makeup artist I believe the feeling of touch really helps when you’re feeling low. Touch is a big part of my job. The skin prep – cleansing, moisturising and massaging someone’s face – is such a lovely, relaxing feeling. People love touch. Even someone just putting their hand on your shoulder gives you that good vibe, and I think a lot of people missed that. We weren’t allowed to work until the middle of August last year, although I did a lot of teaching online. To begin with, I was nervous going back. I’d wear a mask and a visor; I was washing not just my hands, but my arms as well. People would arrive with their mask on and they didn’t remove it until I was about to do their makeup. I tried to stand to the side of people more, instead of directly in front of their face. I do a lot of weddings and, instead of the big wedding parties that used to be in the room getting ready, it was just me and the bride. It never made me question what I do because I love it. The first time I had my makeup done, it made me feel so good, and I’ve always wanted to give that feeling back to others. A lot of people want to feel someone touching their face. Getting their makeup done by someone else made them feel special. Catherine Quinn, president of the British Chiropractic Association This time last year, people were saying: “You’re the first person to have touched me, outside my family [since the pandemic began].” That’s a privileged position to be in; it’s such a big deal to people that haven’t been touched for so long. It was frustrating not to be able to be hands-on. Over Zoom, I was showing patients stretches which try to mimic the care I would usually give, but sometimes what they really needed was for me to get into those muscles and use my hands to do the manipulations and the soft-tissue work. We advised that practitioners return to urgent care at the end of May last year, and by the middle of June most chiropractors were able to go back to seeing all patients. We had an enhanced infection-control procedure, we had PPE that we’re still wearing – gloves, masks, aprons. I wanted to make sure that I was creating a safe space, because when people come in to see the chiropractor, they’re usually in a bit of pain, so that makes them nervous and anxious anyway. With touch, it’s always important to remember individual differences. Some people really don’t like being touched, but for the majority, I think that power of being hands-on is a really important part of our role as chiropractors. We spend years developing that fine-touch technique. If you’re gentle, but firm and in control, that can be really powerful for a patient. Katie Light, facialist and bodywork therapist and founder of The Light Technique I think many of us were lacking in touch anyway, but more so through lockdown. I’ve really noticed how much emotion and stress people are going through and how much they have been holding that in their bodies. I’ve found that I’ve been doing more of a nurturing touch than a deep-tissue-style massage; people are wanting gentleness more. The facials that I do all involve massage, for people who hold a lot of tension in their face and jaw. A lot of people have been clamping down and holding their breath, so their jaw is really tight, which affects the neck and shoulders. A lot of young people, going back to school, have been coming in with these issues. When clients returned after lockdown, some hadn’t been touched for months. It was a real shock to the senses, so there was a lot of emotion. In a lot of the treatments I do, I have been holding people’s hand just so that they feel held. We’re going to see more conditions and problems come up over the next year or so, because people have really had a lack of support. We’ve started asking ourselves questions of what we need, and what we have been lacking. During lockdown, it was really strange for me not to have that physical contact through work. It made me aware of how much I need to have that contact with people. As soon as I got back into it, I thought, “this feels so good”. Danny Barnes, director of SB Sports Massage and Rehabilitation From March to July last year, we could operate over Zoom but we postponed hands-on treatment. It was frustrating. There were clients in need of manual therapy, but we just couldn’t do it. I think patients were initially cautious about coming back, but the feeling of touch and being hands-on straight away puts the client more at ease. It breaks down that barrier, particularly the barriers that everyone’s become used to over the last couple of years. I don’t think it’s any coincidence that we always end up building a really good connection with our patients. There are multiple uses of touch. It gets the client feeding back to you on how it feels to be taken through a movement. When we’re educating people in the gym with rehabilitation, sometimes you’ve got to be hands-on, making sure the client’s aligned properly, from a biomechanical point of view. We find that massage helps break down the pain cycle. If someone’s coming in and they are very tense or they’ve got pain, manipulating the tissue doesn’t necessarily make it heal straight away, but it breaks that pain cycle, and the client feels better at the end of the session, whether it’s just by warming the area or increasing the circulation, or the release of endorphins and just making them feel relaxed. There’s a reason why, if you bang your knee for example, your natural reaction is to rub it. It’s built into us. If the patient feels better at the end of a session, they’re going to be more adherent to doing their exercises and following what we advise. Dale Hollinshead, hairdresser and director of Hazel &amp; Haydn, Birmingham I still do haircuts for the people whose hair I cut when I first qualified, and you create a unique relationship with a client. They come to you, they confide in you, and it’s difficult when suddenly it feels as if there is distance between you. Before the pandemic, most clients would have a hug or a kiss. It’s as if you’re seeing a family member, and not hugging them makes you feel slightly uncomfortable. Hairdressers were one of the first [professions] to reopen after the first lockdown. We had clients who really didn’t care about the situation – I was struggling to make them wear masks – but we also had people who were almost shaking with nerves and anxiety because they were so worried. In certain situations, you can’t avoid being face-to-face – if you’re cutting a fringe, for example. I got used to working around a mask quite quickly; getting to know new clients took longer, and it was harder, but masks weren’t a massive inconvenience. Cutting hair is very personal; you’ve got your hands all over somebody’s head. Half of a haircut, I think, is about connection, and I would say that a large percentage of the reason people come back is because of that relationship.The government is said to be considering reducing university tuition fees in England from £9,250 to £8,500. The reason? Not concern for the plight of students or struggling young graduates. That would be uncharacteristic, to say the least. No, it is interested in cutting them because it wants to save money. On the face of it, this sounds strange. How can cutting fees, paid by students to universities, be a way to cut government spending? The answer is worth spelling out, as it touches on an abiding myth about England’s system of university funding. Most people assume that making students pay for their education must save public money. The introduction and subsequent hiking of fees was rationalised using the language of economic “sustainability” and “fairness”: why should ordinary taxpayers bear the cost of an education from which graduates derive the primary benefit? But, as with the politics of austerity more broadly, this rationale was bogus. The influential and apparently progressive appeal to “fairness” fails not least because indebting a generation of students has not substantially reduced the cost of higher education to the taxpayer. Just as savings from the coalition government’s cuts to benefits were outweighed by the amount paid to private contractors to carry out the notorious “fit-to-work” assessments, it was already clear by 2014 that the regime of high university fees was likely to cost the government more than it saved, mainly due to the large and growing proportion of graduates unable to repay their debts. Thus we arrive at the seemingly paradoxical situation in which reducing student fees can be embraced as a cost-cutting measure: less money lent out and never repaid. Needless to say, the government is not proposing to replace universities’ lost income with public funds. That explains the Tories’ sudden interest in lowering fees. But it raises a bigger question about austerity: if it doesn’t save public money, why do it? It’s not only incompetence, although there is plenty of that around. It is, as it has become customary to point out, ideological: a political choice bound up with a particular, neoliberal vision of society and the individual. This explanation is not, however, at odds with a more material one. It’s tempting to think that when governments’ ideological commitments lead them to do things in the name of saving money that end up costing more than they save, they are doing something irrational or self-defeating. But what is self-defeating from the point of view of “the economy” or the “public purse” may be very good indeed for the people who really matter: the individuals and companies that stand to profit from the dismantling of public goods and their subjection to a market logic. These are pies that are home to many a politician’s finger. Who cares about the state of public finances when your investments are doing well and a lucrative life-after-politics is only a revolving door away? The reforms that introduced tuition fees were never about fees alone, but about a broader project of marketisation. As with other besieged public services such as healthcare, this project seeks to expand private sector involvement while encouraging public bodies to behave more like private businesses. The point of replacing central funding with student fees was to force universities to compete for income (undergraduates), something which proponents of the fees regime insisted would “drive up standards”. The architects of the present system always anticipated that some institutions would go bust (coyly termed “market exit”), and that new, private “providers” would take their place. Despite various attempts to expedite this process, private and for-profit universities have yet to appear on any significant scale; but as with the NHS, the role of the private sector in “delivering” services within theoretically public institutions has greatly expanded. Over a few short years, marketisation has transformed higher education to a degree that is difficult to appreciate from the outside. The competition for fee income has subordinated university life to a never-ending student recruitment drive. Ever-increasing resources are ploughed into vanity building projects and branding initiatives, while support services are cut or outsourced. The academic workforce is increasingly placed on casual contracts, with departments hiring and firing according to the latest projections for student numbers. While a handful of senior managers and professors rake in six-figure salaries, most staff have seen their pay fall by 20% in real terms since 2009 as their workloads have spiralled. Students, living under mountains of debt, grasp at a thin consumer power as the only kind available and wield it against their teachers. In a sector often regarded – and not entirely without reason – as relatively cushy, the human cost is considerable. Stress and mental illness are rife among students and staff alike (a recent report found the mental wellbeing of workers in higher education to be significantly lower than the wider population, with more than half showing signs of depression). Simply reducing the level of fees won’t solve any of this, since it leaves the underlying system untouched – as it is intended to. It won’t necessarily produce any financial benefit at all for students, many of whom will end up paying the same amount out of a reduced notional total (paying £30k of a £50k debt, for instance, is no different to paying £30k of £45k). But it will squeeze universities, which will recoup lost income however they can, most likely through hikes to already eye-watering rents for student accommodation. So here is yet another paradox: high student fees are at the root of all that is wrong with universities; yet reducing them, without changing the fundamentals of the current system, won’t help. Meanwhile, the only thing that would help – a reversal of marketisation and a return to higher education as a free public good – seems further away than ever. If there is little to celebrate in the prospect of a fee reduction, some of the government’s other cost-cutting ideas for higher education are worse. A less eye-catching measure currently being considered is to lower the threshold at which graduates begin repaying their loans from about £27,000 to £23,000 (the terms of student loans can be changed retrospectively whenever the government sees fit, a scenario that Martin Lewis, founder of Money Saving Expert, has called a “breach of natural justice”). Like the recent rise to national insurance and the end of the £20 “uplift” to universal credit, this is a quietly brutal policy that will hit people for whom every penny and pound counts, for whom every little hurts. Lorna Finlayson teaches philosophy at the University of EssexTelevision Black joy is, to me, ubiquitous and everyday, not rarefied or anomalous as the term itself may sometimes imply. It simply is, in spite of a lot and despite a media landscape that often suggests otherwise. This is why I will forever sing the praises of Michaela Coel’s 2015 series Chewing Gum, a show synonymous with Black joy not just because of its hilarity, but its ability to depict joy in the everyday, the mundane and even the difficult. Set on a council estate, it remains unlike many depictions of Black working-class life in Britain that predate it, resembling Black British coming-of-age as myself and many others know it to be: chock-a-block with laughs, nights to remember and great friends. YA *** Art A Black British renaissance compels us to not only look at what is new, but renew our interest in the old. Over the summer, the photographer Ajamu X put on the exhibition Archival Sensoria at the Cubitt gallery. As an artist he treasures intergenerational dialogue, creating a living archive where young Black queer people can flick through and encounter ourselves through time. New portraits were hung so as to gaze down on installations of videotapes, old rave flyers and sex toys, while contact sheets traced Black gay life in the 80s and 90s. On one of those contact sheets lay this image of two Black gay men at Pride in 1992. This image captures the intimacy and joy in Black queer communities, the love between these two friends, and the love Ajamu has for them. It reminds me that I create joyful Black art myself, waving my phone and snapping photos in the gay club every Saturday night. JO *** Comedy Sometimes Black joy is just about letting go and having a bit of a laugh – so where better to find it than a comedy club? FOC It Up (FOC is short for Femmes of Colour) is a side-splitting night that exclusively shines a light on the comedic work of women and non-binary people of colour. It’s a mainstay for Black British comedians including Sophie Duker, Athena Kugblenu and Thanyia Moore. Founded in 2018 by the turquoise-haired comic Kemah Bob, FOC It Up is shaking up the British comedy scene from London to the Edinburgh fringe. MFC *** Book The best stories recognise that, in every life, joy and pain sit side by side, which is why I’m wary of literary attempts to homogenise the lives of Black people in either direction. However, when all you ever hear about is pain, artistic expressions of joy become essential. Literature restores the balance that history disrupts. Girl, Woman, Other by Bernardine Evaristo is the best book in recent years to have embodied the idea that there are as many ways to be joyful as there are to be Black. Polyphonic and nuanced, it celebrates the lives of Black British women rather than commiserating with them, which is a crucial – and rare – distinction. SC *** Music There is no rhythm without the corresponding blues, but Enny’s breakout single Peng Black Girls (featuring Amia Brave) shows that true joy can be found in feeling seen. With humour and warmth, the south-east London rapper’s tribute to her homegrown inspirations (“Want a fat booty like Kardashians? (No) / Want a fat booty like my aunty got, yo”) thrives on a summer beat, reaching out to her area code with a rallying message as simple as it is stirring: “We gon’ be all right, OK, all right, OK.” With Black visibility still regularly mediated through colourist notions of beauty, Peng Black Girls is a welcome reminder to celebrate each and every shade. JWHenry Braimah was a colonel in the British army who fought in Burma during the second world war. His story largely went unacknowledged until his great-granddaughter Saeeda Amidu, a pupil in east London, uncovered it for a school project. “I’m really happy to get to know that one of my relatives fought in the war,” she said. “It did make me feel differently about remembrance because mostly it’s the white British soldiers who get remembered; they don’t really talk about all the black and Asian soldiers who fought in the world war.” She wasn’t the only one. Students at Eden girls’ school in Walthamstow and Falinge Park high school in Rochdale have uncovered their families’ and local communities’ untold stories of black and Asian war heroes as part of a project called Remember Together, before Armistice Day on 11 November. The project, supported by the charity British Future and the Royal British Legion, aimed to bring people from different backgrounds together and celebrates the service and sacrifice made by servicemen and women of all creeds and colours. The students interviewed family members reached out to locals through flyers, and asked people at their mosques. They documented the stories they found on their school websites and in short films for social media. The war veterans included Maj Nawab Khan, who is thought to have been one of the most decorated men in the Indian army; Ahmed Din, who attended the Queen’s inauguration in the UK in 1953; and Fazal Karim, a soldier who won more than a dozen medals, was captured and tortured in Burma, and upon release came out with communist ideologies. Vacas Ahmed, a teacher who led the project at Falinge Park, said: “The project brought history to life for our students. It shows how our past shaped the diverse community that they live in today.” Maimunatu, a student at Eden girls’ school, said: “Lots of people still don’t know about the millions of soldiers from Asia, Africa and the Caribbean who fought for Britain. I’d like other people to know that our great-grandfathers served alongside theirs. It means remembrance is something for all of us.” Dr Avaes Mohammad, a teacher at Eden, said: “Until we did this project, some students didn’t know that they had a great-grandparent who fought in the war. It’s made them think about their history, and why we pause to remember it each November. And I think it’s made them think differently about their identity too.” Steve Ballinger, the communications director at British Future, said: “We hear a lot about how commemorating our history is difficult and divisive. But it can also bring people together – especially when we think about the history that is shared by people from different backgrounds.”According to research by Aviva, British households spent £6.6 billion on purchases they no longer use during the pandemic. Did you make a hasty purchase during the pandemic that you regret? Perhaps it was a treat that is now gathering dust, such as a DIY equipment, a bike, a hot tub, a bread maker, or gym equipment? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.There were clear skies and a bright new dawn at London Heathrow for its biggest customers, British Airways and Virgin Atlantic, which took off simultaneously in a show of solidarity on Monday morning, flying west with planes fully loaded with passengers as the US finally opened its borders to foreign visitors again. Setting aside a longstanding rivalry, the planes took to the skies just after 8.50am – more than 600 days since the US travel ban was introduced – in what the bosses of the two airlines described as a “pivotal moment” for the battered industry. Both airlines have reported huge losses and laid off thousands of staff during 20 months of restricted travel. For both airlines, US markets constitute the biggest part of their business – almost 40% for BA, with six flights scheduled on Monday to New York JFK, while 10 of 21 Virgin flights taking off are for America. Speaking before the flight, the Virgin chief executive, Shai Weiss, described it as “a tipping point”. Vaccinated US visitors have been able to travel to Britain since the summer, when the UK lifted quarantine restrictions, but airlines are increasing their schedules and there are full planes this week for the first time. To underline the significance for anyone who missed it, the BA check-in at Heathrow Terminal 5, the cabins and even the air bridge from the gate to the plane were festooned with American flags. BA and Virgin used their most fuel-efficient models, A350s, after both airlines retired their famous 747 jumbos early as a cost-saving measure during the pandemic. BA flight 001 took off on the northern runway, with Virgin flight VS3 rising into the air exactly in parallel. The BA chief executive, Sean Doyle, told passengers over the tannoy: “This is a real moment of celebration. I know how much today means to you – some have not seen your loved ones for two years, others have not been able to do business.” He also told them that flight BA001 was powered by a blend of 35% sustainable aviation fuel [SAF] – the largest mix used yet on a commercial flight, while remaining emissions would be offset, via wind and solar power projects. “In the years ahead,” Doyle said, “we envisage all our long-haul flights will be powered by SAFs.” It was a reminder that aviation still has plenty of challenges ahead. For now, though, some optimism has returned. Friends and family were some of the first to book to fill planes this week, the airlines said, with planes across Virgin’s US departures 98%-full until Wednesday. Doyle said there had been significant bookings too from corporate customers and small businesses, dispelling the idea that business travel was dead. Bankers in particular had booked to fly back, boosting the revenues from premium cabins. But holidaymakers have also filled the front ends, according to the BA Holidays managing director, Claire Bentley: “People are upgrading, treating themselves.” City breaks had generally not been sought after during the pandemic, for those who did try to get away despite the testing requirements and travel restrictions, she said. The US east coast’s biggest city has long been its best seller, though, and is coming back fast: “New York is in a category of its own.”I hope that a publisher will continue to update Bradford’s Crossword Solver’s Dictionary. But I’m not at all sure how anyone can. Anne R Bradford, who has died a few days before what would have been her 91st birthday, did not leave an Excel file of words used in crosswords to indicate some other words. Her medium was the lever-arch file. And she had a commonsensical method for identifying which words are in fact used in real-life puzzles. She solved about 20 of them every week and made notes. Commonsensical, but time-consuming. To make sure she hadn’t missed any definitions that setters had not yet used, she also read new editions of various dictionaries as they emerged. It is, I think, impossible to imagine the inside of such a mind as Anne’s; I feel I can call her Anne since we became correspondents after we did an interview in 2011, saving the name “Bradford” for the book. She won 1973’s national Scrabble championship and was a serial finalist in the Times crossword championship. She wrote a book about Harry Whittier Frees, photographer of animals dressed as people, and curated Drawn By Friendship, a collection of Victorian postcards. Among other things, she ran an employment agency for women, worked as a school secretary and brought up the four children she had with her husband, Francis. But it’s for the dictionary that she is treasured by solvers. Since 1986, those in the know have whispered to friends who have become stuck: don’t waste time with a thesaurus, you need a Bradford’s (or a Longman’s Crossword Solver’s Dictionary, as it was originally and less excitingly titled). If you’re ever stuck, sensing only that the definition is “hat” and knowing there are umpteen hat words in the language, Bradford’s will make the problem go away – and, because it’s a solver’s book and not a thesaurus, will also remind you that a hat may be a metaphorical job. The book couldn’t exist had she not decided to add “cataloguer of clues” to her many hats, and it might not have happened had she not got stuck on a clue by Ximenes in the Observer in 1957 and started assembling the thing for her own benefit. A rival publisher once inquired how to go about assembling a book like Anne’s and was told: “It’ll take you about 40 years.” That was a while back. The Bradford’s that Anne leaves us with was the product of 64 years of solving, annotating and collating. We’re lucky that Ximenes stumped her, albeit temporarily. • In 2013, Anne told the Lady magazine some of her favourite clues. They included “Cake-sandwiches-meat, at Uncle Sam’s party (8)” for CLAMBAKE. • Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.From sourdough starters to the ubiquitous banana bread, the UK’s obsession with food was never more obvious than during lockdowns, but that enthusiasm has been heightened by the pandemic, say the producers behind MasterChef, as the long-running TV competition marks its 500th season globally. Watched by more than 1 billion people worldwide, the series has curried favour with more viewers than ever as “the world, not just the nation, are so much into food and cooking”, according to Monica Galetti, a judge on MasterChef: The Professionals. “During lockdown … we were all stuck at home making things over and over again,” said Galetti, “and [when watching the show] people were saying: ‘Oh I could make that.’ It was things we could all relate to at the time, the cooking!” MasterChef was the third-most-watched programme of 2020 on iPlayer, with 22.2m requests, beaten only by the dramas Normal People and Killing Eve, as locked-down UK audiences sought culinary inspiration and experimented with skills such as breadmaking. Its executive producer, David Ambler, said: “People really want to show off their food. You could say ‘it’s only cooking’ but the amazing thing about food is that everyone’s food story is unique to them and that’s something the audience relate to. “Food is incredibly emotionally powerful … if you lose touch with relatives or your grandmother dies … these things live on and are passed down through our food. So it is laden with emotional resonance, even though it’s something seemingly so simple and so everyday.” He said lockdown reinforced the fact there “is something primordial … in each plate of food; there is a story and an internal drama from the humblest food situation, whether it be chopping an onion or burning toast.” The format airs in about 200 global territories, and Spain recognised the increased resonance food had during lockdown by creating MasterChef Seniors, which has been picked up by other countries. Emily Randall, format manager at MasterChef’s parent company, Banijay, said the Spanish had begun thinking about how important older people were in terms of food culture, with “grandparents teaching us to cook and passing down traditional recipes”. The show was “a sort of thank you to the older community who’d been isolated and more vulnerable than ever last year”. She went on: “With MasterChef you’ve got the ingredients that everyone in the world can relate to: we can all cook to one degree or another. And it’s life-changing, which I think is even more apparent in the last couple of years … people wanting to do something different with the time that we have.” Last year MasterChef was the first big BBC show to return to production under new Covid-19 restrictions. Now, embarking on its 50th season in the UK, the show’s longevity lies in its ability to “evolve [as] food habits change”, said its creator, Franc Roddam – the film-maker behind Quadrophenia and Auf Wiedersehen, Pet. He came up with the format in order to “democratise fine food” after a ribbing about British cuisine by the actor Mel Brooks. MasterChef began on the BBC in 1990 and was rebooted in 2005. Then the most-cooked dish was pancetta-wrapped monkfish or chicken. Now Banijay says that veganism, “clever things done with eggs” and crispy fish and chicken skins are popular. Ambler added: “The food constantly reinvents itself. We’re filming the amateur series at the moment [and] five of the dishes John [Torode] and Gregg [Wallace] had never seen before.” Over the years the contestants and judges, as well as the food, have become more diverse. And there has been a greater focus on sustainability, with 75% of productions donating leftover food to charity, contestants using sustainable fish and reducing waste, and the German version using a 100% recycled set. Despite offering no formal prize, 1,700 contestants have taken part in UK versions of MasterChef and the show has created stars such as the Wahaca founder, Thomasina Miers, as well as spawning celebrity, professional and junior spin-offs. Ambler said another version was “possibly in the pipeline” in the UK but not yet confirmed, while Randall revealed there were “some really exciting ideas” about a potential global iteration of the show and “untapped potential” for a teenage version. Roddam would like to see the UK show scale up and use previous contestants as mentors. He also thinks MasterChef is “a little undervalued because it’s been around a long time.” Not unlike a bowl of ripe bananas during a pandemic. MasterChef: The Professionals starts Monday 8 November on BBC OneNicaragua’s authoritarian leaders, Daniel Ortega and Rosario Murillo, appeared to have secured another five years in power in an election that the US president, Joe Biden, condemned as an undemocratic “pantomime”. In the early hours of Monday, Nicaragua’s supreme electoral council said Ortega, a one-time revolutionary who has governed continuously since 2007, had received 75% of votes, with about half of the 1.3m ballots counted. During a rare public appearance on Sunday, Ortega, a former Marxist guerrilla who helped defeat the US-backed Somoza dictatorship in the 1970s, painted the election as a choice between the peace and economic stability he claimed to offer and the conflict, chaos and “terror” of the opposition. “This is a historic battle,” declared the 75-year-old Sandinista, who was seeking re-election alongside his influential vice-president and wife, Rosario Murillo. Critics, however, said the election, which followed a punishing six-month crackdown on Nicaragua’s fractured opposition in which all of Ortega’s main challengers were detained, was a sham. “The arbitrary imprisonment of nearly 40 opposition figures since May, including seven potential presidential candidates, and the blocking of political parties from participation rigged the outcome well before election day,” Biden said in a statement on Sunday. “Long unpopular and now without a democratic mandate, the Ortega and Murillo family now rule Nicaragua as autocrats, no different from the Somoza family that Ortega and the Sandinistas fought four decades ago,” he added, vowing to use “all diplomatic and economic tools at our disposal to support the people of Nicaragua”. The centre-left president of neighbouring Costa Rica, Carlos Alvarado Quesada, said his country would not recognise the result and called for the release of Nicaragua’s political prisoners and negotiations that might lead to the re-establishment of democracy. Spain’s government rejected the elections as “a mockery” that did not reflect the genuine will of the Nicaraguan people and accused Ortega of imposing “a repressive and authoritarian regime” on the Central American country. The European Union said the anti-democratic election completed “the conversion of Nicaragua into an autocratic regime”. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, called western calls to reject the election result “unacceptable” while Venezuela’s foreign minister, Felix Plasencia, hailed what he called a “historic day of democracy” in Nicaragua. Experts believe Ortega’s determination to win, whatever the reputational damage, reflected his fear of losing power and being prosecuted for alleged crimes against humanity as a result of a deadly 2018 crackdown on student-led protests in which more than 300 people were killed. “He has shown that political survival outweighs any possible internal or external pressure. It was a matter of life or death for him to ensure re-election on Sunday,” said Tiziano Breda, a Central America specialist at Crisis Group.The detained Chinese journalist Zhang Zhan has been nominated for a Reporters Without Borders (RSF) press freedom award for courage, recognising her work reporting from Wuhan in the early weeks of the pandemic, as calls grow for her release. The former lawyer turned citizen journalist was convicted in December of “picking quarrels and causing trouble”, a ubiquitous catch-all accusation frequently used against journalists, lawyers and dissidents in China. Zhang was sentenced to four years in jail. She had already been in detention since her initial arrest in May 2020, and has been on hunger strike. Last week, her family said the 38-year-old was “close to death”, amplifying global calls for her immediate release. In its nomination on Monday, RSF said Zhang had withstood “constant threats from the authorities” in order to livestream her video reports from Wuhan’s streets and hospitals and show the harassment to which families of Covid-19 patients were subjected. “Widely shared on social media, her reporting was one of the main sources of independent information about the health situation in Wuhan at the time,” it said. Zhang, who was among a number of journalists arrested in Wuhan but was the first convicted, was accused of having sent “false information through text, video and other media through the internet media such as WeChat, Twitter and YouTube”, and having “maliciously speculated” during interviews with foreign press, according to the indictment sheet. RSF’s nomination noted claims made by Zhang’s lawyer in the days after her conviction that she had been shackled in her cell and force-fed. “There is currently a great deal of concern that she could be subjected to further torture and ill-treatment,” said RSF. Zhang is being held in Shanghai. Last week, her brother said on Twitter that she was severely underweight and “may not live for much longer”. He said Zhang, who is about 5ft 10in (177cm) tall, weighed only 6 stone 4lbs (40kg). The RSF east Asia Bureau head, Cédric Alviani, said Zhang was a symbol of journalism in China under growing government oppression and regulatory restriction. “Zhang Zhan represents the hope of the Chinese people that some will keep doing journalism,” Alviani said. “That they go where something happens and keep reporting. The Chinese people, like every person on Earth, crave information on what’s happening around them.” RSF was among a number of NGOs calling for Zhang’s immediate release. Alviani said the conviction should be dropped but that at the very least, given the immediate health concerns, she should be released on humanitarian grounds. “The Chinese regime should never have judged her,” he said. “She should be celebrated as a hero – she risked her life going to Wuhan at a moment when no one really knew what was going on.” Zhang was nominated for the prize for courage, one of three press freedom prizes, alongside Kay Zon Nway, a Myanmar journalist who was jailed for 124 days after she was arrested in February while livestreaming an anti-coup protest; Patricia Devlin, who has faced personal threats while reporting on organised crime and paramilitary activities in Northern Ireland; and the Nicaraguan weekly newspaper Confidencial, which has been repeatedly raided and its journalists targeted by authorities under Daniel Ortega’s government. “These men, women and media outlets fight with courage and determination against converging forces that undermine journalistic independence,” said the RSF secretary general, Christophe Deloire. “The RSF awards is a tribute and above all a support for all those who embody journalism’s ideals.”Singapore’s high court has stayed the execution of a man convicted of smuggling heroin, following outrage among rights groups who said he had learning disabilities and the sentence was a violation of international law. Nagaenthran K Dharmalingam, a Malaysian national, was arrested in April 2009, when he was 21, for attempting to smuggle 43 grams of heroin into Singapore. The drugs had been strapped to his thigh. He was sentenced to death the following year and, having spent more than 12 years on death row, was told he would face execution on 10 November. The sentencing has been widely condemned by international groups including Human Rights Watch, the International Federation for Human Rights, Anti-Death Penalty Asia Network and Amnesty International. An online petition in support of Dharmalingam has attracted more than 62,000 signatures. According to campaigners, it was disclosed during the trial that Dharmalingam has an IQ of 69, a level recognised as indicating a learning disability, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. His supporters say there is evidence that Dharmalingam was forced to courier drugs as a victim of human trafficking. The Malaysian prime minister, Ismail Sabri Yaakob, has written to Singapore’s prime minister, Lee Hsien Loong, to ask for leniency in his case, according to Malaysian media, while the EU’s delegation to Singapore has issued a statement calling for the execution to be stopped. More than 200 family members and friends of prisoners who have lived on death row in Singapore have also called for Dharmalingam to be spared, and for the death penalty to be abolished. “There are no words to describe the pain of having a loved one on death row. Perhaps that is why we don’t often speak of it, and our suffering goes unnoticed,” they wrote in an open letter published by the Transformative Justice Collective. “Nagen’s family has been unable to visit him for two years, during the pandemic border closure, and with two weeks’ notice that their worst nightmare has arrived, they have to scramble to see him through a glass wall for just a few days before the date of execution.” “Many people on death row in Singapore – like Nagen and our loved ones – come from very challenging circumstances, and have led difficult, troubled lives which have entangled them with the drug trade. Often, as a result of their marginalisation, they find themselves in desperate and compromising situations.” A group of eight British MPs and peers has written to the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, requesting she make urgent representations to her counterpart in Singapore “urging them to ensure that an intellectually disabled victim of trafficking is not executed after what may amount to a grave miscarriage of justice”. Singapore has some of the world’s harshest drugs laws, and the death penalty is mandatory for anyone found guilty of importing more than 15 grams of diamorphine. However, amendments passed in 2014 granted the court discretion to impose a life sentence rather than the death penalty if the defendant was only acting as a courier and “was suffering from such abnormality of mind as substantially impaired his mental responsibility for his acts and omissions in relation to the offence”. Rights groups say that executing someone with an intellectual or psychosocial disability is a violation of international laws and standards. The European Union’s delegation to Singapore issued a statement calling for Dharmalingam’s sentence to be commuted to a non-capital sentence. “No compelling evidence exists to show that the death penalty serves as a more efficient deterrent to crime than imprisonment,” it said. During a hearing on Monday, Dharmalingam’s lawyer argued that executing Dharmalingam, a man with learning disabilities, would violate Singapore’s constitution. The high court ordered a stay of execution pending the hearing of an appeal to the court of appeal, his lawyer, M Ravi said. It is not clear when the appeal hearing will take place. Emina Ćerimović, a senior disability rights researcher at Human Rights Watch said in a statement last week that the sentences were “disproportionate and cruel, and deserve global condemnation”. Rachel Chhoa-Howard, Amnesty International’s Singapore researcher, added: “Taking people’s lives is a cruel act in itself but to hang a person convicted merely of carrying drugs, amid chilling testimony that he might not even fully understand what is happening to him, is despicable.” In a statement last week, Singapore’s ministry of home affairs said Dharmalingam “was accorded full due process under the law, and was represented by legal counsel throughout the process. His petition to the president for clemency was unsuccessful.” Dharmalingam was caught trafficking 42.72 grams of diamorphine, it said, “equivalent to about 3,560 straws of heroin. It would be sufficient to feed the addiction of about 510 abusers for a week,” it said.Activists in Indonesia have called for a thorough investigation after an explosion outside the home of the parents of a prominent human rights lawyer who represents those involved in the West Papuan independence movement. The blast occurred outside Veronica Koman’s parents’ house in Jakarta on Sunday morning. If it was a targeted attack, it would be the first instance of bombs being used to target those working on issues relating to West Papua outside of the region, according to human rights groups. Police said they were investigating and did not confirm whether the explosion was caused by a bomb. A letter was left at the time of the explosion, according to Amnesty International, which claimed to be written by “a militant who defended the nation”. “If the police and [security] forces in the country and abroad cannot arrest Veronica Koman … we were called to scorch-earth wherever you hide, including your protector horde,” the letter said. Michael Hilman, a Papuan human rights activist, said at a virtual press conference that Koman’s family had been repeatedly subjected to intimidation and threats. Separately on Sunday, another of Koman’s relatives was sent a package containing a dead chicken alongside a letter that said “anyone who helps to hide Veronica Koman will end up like this”. On 24 October, Koman’s parents’ house was subject to an arson attempt by unknown assailants. The National Commission on Violence Against Women (Komnas Perempuan) condemned the terrorism perpetrated against the family. It said: “We also recommend the Indonesian police immediately investigate the case and ensure the legal process can be carried out properly in order to break the chain of impunity and prevent recurrence.” According to Komnas Perempuan, the families of female human rights defenders are often targeted with intimidation. “ At a certain point, the efforts that have been made, the attacks that have been carried out both online and offline, actually show a fairly severe level of torture, which can actually be anticipated by the state in the context of the state providing protection,” she said. Koman’s case is the latest in a series of incidents targeting human rights defenders, the media were told. Other figures recently targeted include the activists Haris Azhar and Fatia Maulidiyanti, who investigated politicians who have mining businesses in West Papua. Both are subject to criminal investigations after being reported to the police by the minister for maritime affairs and investment, Luhut Binsar Pandjaitan, one of the politicians who was mentioned in the document. “This is evidence of discrimination and brutality on the Papua issue. Human rights violations, violence, crimes, are used to cover up other crimes in West Papua,” Azhar said. Chief of the press division of the Bureau of National Police, Brig Gen Rusdi Hartono, said the explosion outside Koman’s parents’ home was being investigated, as were other incidents targeting human rights defenders. “All incidents concerning citizens’ rights will be handled by the police,” he said. Koman, an activist and lawyer, was appointed as the key advocate representing the National Committee for West Papua (KNPB), the most significant Indigenous youth movement in the Pacific region, focusing on nonviolent protest supporting independence. In 2019, Indonesian police charged Koman for allegedly spreading provocation and fake news on social media after she reported police violence against anti-racism protesters in West Papua. Since then she has remained in exile due to safety concerns. Koman continues to work on West Papua issues from abroad, helping Papuan human rights activists advocate for thousands of internally displaced people in the region who had to flee for safety due to the conflict between the Indonesian military and Papua liberation army. West Papua, formerly Irian Jaya, is Indonesia’s easternmost province, annexed in 1965 through a controversial referendum. Since then, a low level of insurgency has arisen across the region. Thousands of people in the highland have been displaced. In recent violence, two babies were killed. The United Liberation Movement of West Papua blamed the Indonesian military; the police spokesperson Ahmad Mustofa Kamal accused the liberation army.Nine months ago I was not yet a bleary-eyed dad juggling work and two baby boys, but I did know a second baby was imminent. What should’ve been a happy milestone was quickly blunted by a boomeranging lament – that there would be no taking any paid parental leave for me, a gig worker. When my first was born, just before the pandemic, I was a freelance writer in the throes of an MFA program. My wife decided it was more cost-effective to stay home with our son than return to work; soon after Covid forced everyone inside, local daycare options vanished. And even though our son was thriving in preschool and my work wasn’t drastically affected by stay-at-home precautions, a second child – blessing and all – was still a nervous endeavor that was going to demand so much more of me. Still, for all of my agita about the challenge ahead, I was still well equipped. I write from anywhere (the kid’s room, the car), keep odd hours and that flexibility meshes well with diaper changes, school runs and bedtime stories. I can stay on the grind and contribute at home. I’m fortunate, sure, but I’m still killing myself to live. And it’s not just me. Working American parents are stretched thinner than ever. In the past half-century the share of working moms has jumped from 51% to 72%, according to Pew Research; almost half of two-parent families include two full-time working parents. And yet despite this trend toward balanced parenting the US remains the glaring exception among 41 resourceful countries that offer a national paid parental leave mandate. A 2019 congressional survey estimated 16% of private-sector workers qualified for family leave, and even then a recent Ball State University study found that only 5% of new dads take two or more weeks of leave. The figures are even more discouraging when you zero in on race. And yet there’s no question that part-time workers – 11% of whom have access to family leave, according to the Department of Labor – have it hardest. In a country that is increasingly pivoting toward a gig economy, this patchy social safety net should be an acute concern. Only nine states and Washington DC mandate paternity leave – and even then it isn’t paid. The Family and Medical Leave Act gives parents unpaid leave for public agency workers and employees who have worked at least one year at private companies with at least 50 employees. That’s even as the benefits of paid leave have been well established for decades – most obviously in kids who grow up to be happy and self-assured. But paid family leave is good for the economy too, as workers with access are much more likely to return to their jobs and strengthen the overall labor force. You’d think a president whose origin story derives from his being there for his kids after his wife and infant daughter were tragically killed in a car accident would have an easier time making a case for paid family leave. But it had been a sticking point in Joe Biden’s Build Back Better bill, with the terms going from 12 weeks to four weeks to out entirely (for Dino Senator Joe Manchin) to back in the fold when the bill narrowly survived a House vote last Friday. The haggling persisted even as Ball State researchers also found that 86% Americans supported some form of paid family leave, with participants on average pushing for 13 months off. When the Atlanta Braves utility player Ehire Adrianza took paternity leave before game six of the World Series, Braves fans mostly cheered – probably because it didn’t cost them the championship. Of course some will find demands for paid family leave laughable, especially coming from a parent who didn’t push. Last month Joe Lonsdale, a smirking tech venture capitalist and father of three, gaslit the Twitterverse after pronouncing any prominent man who takes six months off with his newborn was “a loser”. It was a not-so-subtle jab at the US transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg, who continues to draw harsh criticism for exploiting the 12 weeks of paid parental leave he receives from the federal government after he and his partner, Chasten, welcomed twins in September. “This idea that both parents should get maternity and paternity leave at the same time is a little weird,” quipped Joe Rogan, also a father of three, on a recent podcast episode. But then again that figures. Rogan just scored a $100m deal from Spotify – which, incidentally, offers its employees six months of paid parental leave regardless of gender. (“And we strongly urge you to take it,” the company tells prospective workers.) Lonsdale and Rogan’s considerable fortunes don’t just buy home help on demand. (Tellingly, Ball State researchers found high-income-earning fathers were most likely to take leave.) It assumes not just that moms must bear the majority of infant caregiving, but also that they don’t need or aren’t deserving of undivided physical or emotional postpartum support. It assumes that same-sex parents can’t be overwhelmed, too. And it assumes childbirth to be a fairly straightforward affair. It dismisses the mounting challenges for women who choose to start their families after 35 (the start line for “geriatric” pregnancies), and altogether overlooks the childbirthing risks for black women – who are four times more likely to die from pregnancy-related causes than white women, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Beyoncé, Serena Williams and Allyson Felix have been candid about their struggles. Meghan Markle, who has been just as open about her own pregnancy trials, made personal appeals to lawmakers on both sides of the aisle. Given the broad, bipartisan public support for paid family leave, it’s especially galling that pro-choice championing, family values-espousing conservatives and progressive Democrats were so obstinate about this. Even four paid weeks off makes a massive difference for workers like me. My wife and I committed to a home delivery. As we inched closer to the due date I promised to begin winding down my workload, but as a creative contractor running a small business, that’s easier said than done – and then not done at all when work got really nuts. The further we sailed past our due date, the more the frustration built. Ten days later I was finally forced to hit the pause button when the baby arrived and was immediately rushed to the hospital. While he lay in a NICU bed, there was still a toddler back home who’d be waking up any minute expecting a wardrobe change and a hot breakfast. If it weren’t for family rushing in from out of state and the profound generosity of so many friends and neighbors, I don’t know how we’d have made it through. Finally, just before Halloween, we brought the baby home to a hero’s welcome; his brother, dressed as Iron Man with hands outstretched, shouting “Gimme!” A baby in the hospital, Tony Stark back home, pets to feed, dishes to wash – this is a heaping plate in the best of times, let alone with the extra pressure of urgent work deadlines. But for the moment gig workers and small business owners who survive by eating what they kill have no choice but to press ahead with their jobs and react to the new additions to the family as they come. Now comes the hard part: reconfiguring routines, redrawing responsibilities, reckoning with the increased diaper flow, setting up the rest of the nursery – when all I’d rather do is take a nap. In a world where paid family leave is the norm it’s past the time the US did better by its working parents.Chinese officials are sceptical of claims that Cop26 commitments will keep global heating below 2C, and want other countries to focus on concrete actions rather than distant targets in the final week of the talks. They feel that China, the world’s biggest emitter, is doing more than it is given credit for, including plans to peak coal consumption by 2025 and add more new wind and solar power capacity by 2030 than the entire installed electricity system of the US. “There has been a lot of criticism of China’s attitude in the media, but many of them are based on incomprehension or misunderstanding,” said Wang Yi, a senior adviser to the Chinese delegation. During the first week of the UN climate talks in Glasgow, China has been portrayed at times as a reluctant laggard in the effort to keep global heating to 1.5C. The US president, Joe Biden, said it was a “big mistake” for his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, not to show up. China’s climate plan disappointed many because it contained no fresh ambition, and the country was notably absent from alliances to reduce methane emissions and phase out coal. But Wang, a key consultant on China’s decarbonisation strategy and five-year plan, said his country had delivered a policy framework and detailed roadmap to cut emissions, while other nations were congratulating themselves on vague long-term promises. He is sceptical of a recent estimate by the International Energy Agency and others that the pledges made in Glasgow could constrain global heating to 1.8 or 1.9C. “Based on our research, I can’t see evidence that we can reach 1.9C,” he said. “But whether we are now on course for 1.9C or 2.7C, the main point is that we should focus on concrete action.” Wang expressed frustration that the scale, depth and details of China’s climate actions were not appreciated. “Unfortunately, China cannot change the China narrative,” he said. “To reach our targets, we have outlined a change to our entire system, not just in the energy sector but across society and the economy. Nobody knows this.” China has released five documents detailing plans to achieve its dual goals of peaking carbon emissions in 2030 and reaching net zero by 2060. “If you read those reports you can find all of our actions, but nobody reads everything,” he said. As an example, he said the working guidance document on carbon peaking and neutrality outlined a strict control on the increase of coal consumption during the 14th five-year period and then a gradual reduction during the following five years. “That means China will peak coal consumption around 2025, though that is not a line you will see in the document. You need to interpret it and nobody [outside China] can do that.” Similarly, he said the government 1+N policy system provided a roadmap of 37 tasks that the country needed to take until 2060 on areas ranging from legislation and policy to technology and finance. There will be another 30 documents published in the coming year that break down actions needed in key sectors, such as building and transport, as well as major industries including steel and chemicals. “No country has issued so many documents to support its targets,” he said. “It’s a holistic solution, but nobody knows.” China’s two different targets pose very different challenges, he said. “The peaking issue is easy. More difficult is how to achieve neutrality … We are in transition. Our concern in the future is not that China is too slow, but that it is too fast.” He said the recent power shortages in China proved how serious it had been in shutting down overcapacity in its coal sector. Every decision had major consequences. “Our coal-fired plants have a life of 10 to 12 years. If we shut them down, who will pay for the stranded assets? Who will employ the laid-off workers?” Decarbonisation is already under way. By the end of this decade, the government plans to reach 1200GW of wind and solar power, which would exceed the entire installed electricity capacity of the US, he said. The final week of Cop26 will tackle the most contentious issues on the climate agenda. For China, the priority is to finalise the Paris rulebook, which will determine how money should flow across borders in support of decarbonisation, forest protection and other climate actions. As at previous Cops, China will also push wealthy nations to make greater financial contributions to developing countries, which have done least to cause the climate crisis but suffer most from its consequences. Wang pointed out that the 2009 promise of $100bn (£73bn) a year in climate finance had yet to be realised and far more than this would be needed in the future to accelerate the pace of decarbonisation. “China would like more effort on supporting developing countries,” he said. “If we are going to aim for 1.5C instead of 2C, then there has to be an increase in the funds available to make that happen.” Much remains to be done, but negotiation teams have less capacity than at previous Cops. Wang said China’s strict Covid regulations had pared down the entire delegation. “When we go back, we will have to isolate for 21 days,” he said. “So our negotiating delegations this time is just 50 people, compared with several hundred in Paris.” He said Xi Jinping was not attending for the same reason. The fact that the Chinese president only sent a printed statement rather than a video was widely reported in the media as a snub, but Wang said this was incorrect because China had suggested a video message but the UK hosts felt it was not permitted. China has been hesitant about pushing for a 1.5C target, which would require far more drastic actions. Wang recognised that small island nations may insist on this ambitious goal, but said it should not be to the detriment of other objectives. “1.5C is possible, but it would carry a cost, social and economic. If we cannot solve these problems equally, especially for developing countries, then it is not a real target.” “We are all in the same boat, but different cabins,” he said. “Some live in a big space and eat too much. We need balance.”I was once told to slap sage between my palms before using it in cooking. In doing so, apparently, the tiny glands filled with volatile substances on the leaf’s moleskin surface burst and their scent is released. So I slapped, until I mentioned this advice to someone else, who happens to be a gardener. “Slap if you like,” she laughed, “but a gentle press is all that’s needed to release the meaty-musty scent.” This, according to author Harold McGee, is actually a chemical defence against any threatening insect that may brush past. The cook and gardener Carla Tomasi always brought bunches of sage and rosemary from her garden near Rome to the studio when she gave cooking lessons. So much so that their combined smell is Carla. Together in a pot, the silvery-green sage and evergreen rosemary needles were gorgeous, and sent up another wave of volatile molecules, sweet eucalyptus and spiced moth balls every time anyone brushed past. It was satisfying to pull leaves from the woody stems when we needed them, almost like having a garden. We often dipped sage leaves in batter and fried them, or warmed them in butter with ravioli, while handfuls of chopped rosemary went into pasta and bean soup, braised chicken and rabbit, and the rest. At the end of the lesson, Carla would encourage me to wrap the cut ends in a damp kitchen towel bun and take the remaining bunches home, which always felt a bit like having Carla sitting on the kitchen counter. This was also a reminder and responsibility. What to do with the sage, whether from Carla, on a plant from the shop or in a bag from the supermarket? Use one or two leaves, and let the rest dry? The first thing is to make tea, which, according to Claire Loewenfeld’s precious herb book, is a universal remedy for all ills, but then sage, or Salvia officinalis, does derive from the Latin salvus (“salvo”) – to save. Maybe the most delicious way to use a lot of sage is to dip the leaves in batter and fry them (any loss of curative powers due to hot fat, offset by the healing powers of fried food). Another answer is to make pesto. Pesto, as in a generic pounded sauce, rather than a more specific recipe (pesto alla Genovese, for example). A world of possibilities, rather than a recipe, which can be summed up like this: pound or blend herbs or leaves with nuts, maybe some garlic, too, add oil and grated cheese in proportions you like, then use as you like. This is a possibility that came about because the resourceful maker had sage and pistachios. Having said that the joy of pesto is its improvisational nature, guidelines can be helpful. Especially with sage, which not only has a strong, penetrating smell, released by brushing and intensified by pounding, but is also astringent, which is what makes it so good with meat, and fat, as well as nuts such as pistachios, whose milky nature is a perfect match. While the general guideline for pesto is 2:1 leaves:nuts, with sage it is the other way around, so 30g sage leaves, 60g pistachios, a small clove of garlic and a little olive oil, all pulsed or pounded until you have a rough paste: 120-150ml oil and 40-60g grated parmesan are suggestions, but taste and see what you think, then stir or pulse briefly again. Sage and pistachio pesto is great on toast, stirred through boiled potatoes and beans or on top of soup, notably pumpkin and white bean. It is best, though, on pasta, the heat of which wakes the scent like a dangerous insect and carries it in strings or ribbons or twists (most shapes work). Pasta with sage and pistachio pesto Serves 4 1 big handful (30g) sage 60g pistachios 1 small garlic clove 120-150ml olive oil 40-60g parmesan, grated Salt 400-500g pasta, short or long 1 small potato, peeled and diced (optional) In a food processor, pulse the sage, pistachios, garlic and enough olive oil to make a rough paste (how rough depends on you). Add the rest of the oil and the cheese, and stir, or pulse briefly again. Scape into a large bowl. Alternatively, in a mortar, pound the the sage, pistachios, garlic and enough olive oil to a rough paste. Add the rest of the oil and the cheese, and stir or gently pound. Scape into a large bowl. Bring a large pan of water to a boil, then add salt. Cook the pasta, and potato, if using, until al dente. Either lift directly into the bowl, or drain, saving some cooking water, then tip into the bowl. Toss thoroughly, adding some cooking water if you feel it needs loosening. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoA French court has recognised “turbine syndrome” after a couple complained their health was damaged by living near a windfarm. In what is believed to be the first judgment of its kind in France, Belgians Christel and Luc Fockaert were awarded more than €100,000 in compensation by the judge in Toulouse. The couple claimed they experienced a range of health problems including headaches, insomnia, heart irregularities, depression, dizziness, tinnitus and nausea for more than two years, insisting these were caused by six wind turbines set up 700 metres from their home at Fontrieu in the Tarn, southern France. The turbines had been installed in 2008. However, it was reported that the couple’s health problems started five years later. The Fockaerts believed this was because woodland between their property and the nearest turbine was cut down. They singled out the noise, which they said was “comparable to a washing machine continually turning”, and the “white flashing lights” on the turbines, as particularly detrimental to their health. “We didn’t understand straight away, but little by little we realised the problem came from the turbines,” Christel Fockaert said. “The turbines flash every two seconds … we had to have outside lights to counter the effect of the flashes.” The couple moved away from the area in 2015 and said their health problems disappeared shortly afterwards. Doctors failed to find any health problem, but a court expert said turbine syndrome had been previously identified by scientific research. However, an Australian study found sickness attributed to wind turbines is more likely to have been caused by people getting alarmed at the health warnings circulated by activists. Researchers said it was “essentially a sociological phenomenon” and that giving it a name like “wind turbine syndrome” and “vibro-acoustic disease” was a key feature in its spread. Other peer-reviewed studies in Europe, Canada and the US have also debunked the alleged “syndrome” – that is not medically recognised – suggesting it is adverse publicity, opposition to the turbines or the power of negative expectations and suggestions that might be making people feel sick. The Fockaerts’ case was originally thrown out of court in January last year but they appealed, saying the judge had ignored the experts’ reports they had commissioned and instead had gone to see for themselves but had spent only an hour at the site of the complaint. The energy companies Sasu, Margnes Energie and Sasu Singladou Energie, which run the park, were ordered to pay €110,000 in compensation to the couple and were reported to have since changed the lights and speed of the six turbines. Alice Terrasse, the couple’s lawyer, told French television: “It’s an unusual case and as far as I know there has been no precedent.” The ruling is expected to spark a flood of complaints, but Terrasse warned against others seeking to profit from the Fockaerts’ victory. “This case cannot be reproduced. This (wind) park caused an unusual nuisance because of its configuration but each case is different and should be examined differently.” She added that the judgment should serve as a warning to those companies setting up windfarms to reflect carefully on their impact on the local population. Emmanuel Forichon, of the environmental collective Toutes Nos Énergies - Occitanie Environnement (All our Energy - Occitanie Environment) said the ruling was “important and brave”. “We already consider environmental issues and biodiversity, and occasionally the impact on landscapes, but not enough the issues of human health. This could create a jurisprudence and, above all, make the regulations evolve,” he said.A land defender from Pará, in the Brazilian Amazon, said armed men attacked a forest community she defends while she was at the Cop26 talks in Glasgow. Claudelice Silva dos Santos, a Cop26 delegate and nominee for the 2019 Sakharov prize, said she had received a phone call sounding the alarm after about 30 pickup trucks arrived at the São Vinicius camp at the Tinelli farm in Nova Ixipuna, home to about 80 families, at about 3pm local time on 3 November. Police in Marabá said they were investigating the incident. Local news reports said the workers’ union transported some of the injured to hospital, but it was not known how many people were injured. Witnesses said many people fled as the men set fire to tents before rounding up those who could not leave, putting hoods on their heads and forcing them into a lorry where they were beaten. Some people were thrown off at the side of the road a long way from the settlement and elderly people were left tied up on anthills. Some villagers hid in the forest, while the fate of others was unclear. One witness, who did not want to be named, said her brother had been tied up and taken away and a woman who had been left on the road had told her that “[the men] were hitting everyone a lot and my brother has a crack in his head and his mouth split open. We don’t know where they are.” Another said: “I heard shooting and everyone started running in all directions. I saw that they were setting the camp on fire, I saw six motorcycles on fire … there were many children, elderly people just thrown in the forest.” Dos Santos said: “This case has been going on for decades. The dispute was about to be resolved and the land given back [to the community]. This is not the first attack but people were assured there would be no more violence. “For more than 10 years, these workers have been there, resisting for their land rights and … ranchers simply arrive here and want to kill everyone,” said Dos Santos, who fought against illegal logging with her brother, José Claudio Ribeiro dos Santos, and sister-in-law, Maria do Espírito Santo, before they were killed in the area in 2011. Dos Santos said the attack followed a campaign of harassment by local ranchers against the São Vinicius community, who are subsistence farmers. “Police and local authorities know about the threats but have done nothing to protect the community,” she said. She said the attack came a day after police from the Marabá municipality told the community there would be no conflict before a legal process concluded the Tinelli claim to a disputed area of about 1,690 hectares (17 sq km) on the 4,900-hectare farm (49 sq km) was illegal. That area is awaiting formal designation as a settlement for the community. At Cop26 more than 120 countries covering more than 90% of forests endorsed a pledge on deforestation, committing to work to halt and reverse forest loss and land degradation by 2030. Brazil was among the signatories.I stopped by my friend Rashi’s house yesterday, but she was asleep. She still lives with her parents, and they were delighted to see me and hear news of the outside world. Honestly, I kind of got stuck talking to them for twenty minutes until Rashi woke up and we could hang out. I didn’t mind too much. I’m a millennial, and a lot of my friends still live with their parents. In fact, I’ve met many new friends, including Rashi, through their parents. By new, I mean extremely new. Rashi, for example, is five months old. Though we are decades apart in age, we have the best time. We sit down, or we walk around the room, and she stares at me with big, curious eyes and laughs at the slightest eyebrow move. She is pleasant company, with her bold fashion choices, consistent snacking and napping habits, and general lack of trying. It’s hard to describe why it’s so easy to love being around her and my other baby friends, except to say that Rashi just kind of … is. Parents-to-be have confided in me more than once that they worry about their social lives and relationships in the early and notoriously hectic years of a child’s life. They agonize over their friendships changing and growing distant when they become a parent. They fret that they may even lose those friends in a haze of childcare and sleepless nights. I tell them what they should worry about is that I will prefer their children’s company to theirs. It’s a fair warning, you see, because that is what keeps happening. My friends create these very odd and completely charming little people that are dependably easy and fun companions. Meanwhile, the kids’ poor old parents continue to get more depleted and world-weary as life does its thing. Life’s “thing”, as you already know, is coming up with an ever-increasing number of ways to grind us all down to dust. Many of us enjoy tiny versions of regular things. We make keyrings of the Eiffel Tower, want three sliders instead of one big tedious burger, and lose our minds for teacup pigs. Look at the gachapon vending machine boom in Japan, where people go wild for toy versions of everyday objects! I’m not saying I want a vending machine that churns out a variety of adorable babies, but I’m not saying I don’t want that either. Probably best to keep doing what I’m doing, which is borrowing other people’s children. I don’t want one for keeps, you see. That’s way too much work. Bedraggled new parents with a haunted look in their eye frequently complain that nobody told them how hard it would be to raise a child. What I think is, then how come I know? What I say is, want me to take her for an hour? I have a work meeting on Saturday; it’s about a podcast. Perhaps that fact about me – the fact that I agreed to a work meeting on the weekend – makes you think you know the kind of person I am. A rise-and-grind, no-time-off, “wake up, beauty, it’s time to beast” kind of hustler. You’re mistaken. I am lazy to a fault, and I love that about me. The reason I’m hauling myself out of bed to meet a podcast producer at 10am on a Saturday is that said producer’s two-year-old daughter has a dance class in the park at that time, and he mentioned it to me. “Let’s chat then!” I suggested at once. “In fact,” I lied, “that’s my only window”. The producer seemed fine with it, if a little surprised. And we will discuss a podcast idea; sure, why not? I’ve been meaning to dominate that space for a while now, and I’m curious to know what plans he has for me to unseat Joe Rogan. But actually, something a lot more enjoyable and engaging to me is watching tiny children twirling around in the leaves, making hilarious eye contact as they shake their little selves way off the beat, toppling over and getting back up again. Thank goodness for other people’s children! Maeve Higgins is the author of the forthcoming book Tell Everyone on This Train I Love ThemTom Coult’s new Composer in Association role with the BBC Philharmonic commits him to three substantial works over the next three years, the first of which, Pleasure Garden, received its premiere here. The violin concerto, a co-commission from the orchestra and Salford University, and written to celebrate the recent opening of the RHS Garden Bridgewater in Salford, invites listeners to explore the relationship between nature and music, and debate the future of our green spaces. Coult explained in brief programme notes that he had steered clear of any attempt to “tell a story”, though the four sources that inspired each respective movement are entertaining tales in their own right, ranging from 14th-century organetto player Francesco Landini performing to a group of increasingly unruly birds, to the time Salford’s Worsley New Hall attempted to dye the orange, ore-stained Bridgewater canal blue to mark the visit of Queen Victoria. The logic of Coult’s musical ideas alone wasn’t always enough to give the piece obvious direction, particularly through the first movement where green shoots of life from the violin were pruned vociferously by vertical stabs of orchestral sound. Much of the remaining three movements featured slower-moving textures, methodically crafted yet bewitchingly original. Coult’s writing is strongest when elaborately unravelling a sound’s constituent parts. The music has a Takemitsu-like quality in that regard, to which Coult adds his own mischievous touches. Violinist Daniel Pioro was an assured soloist, switching with ease between an embedded near-tutti role, and his position as the orchestra’s sparring partner. Swiss-Australian conductor Elena Schwarz, in her debut with the orchestra, made her way carefully through Kurt Weill’s rarely performed second symphony. The piece sees Weill in transition, moving away from orchestral music and towards the stage, and the Philharmonic’s soloists added just enough of the jazzy swagger that would come to define his later work. Schwarz’s fleet-footed presence on the podium was better suited to the evocative strains of Ravel’s ballet Mother Goose, which brought some gorgeous playing from the Philharmonic – special mention for harpist Clifford Lantaff, equal to the varied demands set by Ravel and Coult. You’d be hard pressed to find a more lovely end to a programme than the conclusion of Ravel’s score, where Sleeping Beauty is awoken by her Prince Charming. • Broadcast on Radio 3 on 10 November and then on BBC Sounds until 9 December.Musings Before the falling summer sun The boughs are shining all as gold, And down below them waters run, As there in former years they roll’d; The poolside wall is glowing hot, The pool is in a dazzling glare, And makes it seem as, ah! ’tis not, A summer when my life was fair. The evening, gliding slowly by, Seems one of those that long have fled; The night comes on to star the sky As then it darken’d round my head. A girl is standing by yon door, As one in happy times was there, And this day seems, but is no more, A day when all my life was fair. We hear from yonder feast the hum Of voices, as in summers past; And hear the beatings of the drum Again come throbbing on the blast. There neighs a horse in yonder plot, As once there neigh’d our petted mare, And summer seems, but ah! is not The summer when our life was fair. Poem of the week visited the work of poet and philologist William Barnes some while ago, to enjoy one of his famous Dorset-dialect poems. These deserve the attention they’ve increasingly received, but it’s worth remembering that Barnes also wrote many poems in “national English”, and interesting to ask what their relationship might be in terms of diction and approach. In these poems, too, he sought a specifically English idiom. Do they “pale in comparison” with the vigorous, phonetically spelled dialect? I was struck recently, when reading a group of Barnes’s poems in one of the older Oxford anthologies, by the individuality and freshness of the non-dialect lyrics such as Musings. The first stanza is particularly vivid. Soft alliterative effects complement the imagery of light and heat. The sun is “falling” – a plainer but more dramatic verb choice than “setting”. Autumn’s onset seems not far away but the sun’s power is still strident. The observation moves beyond the aestheticism of those boughs “shining all as gold” to the ordinary but striking description of a poolside wall as “glowing hot” and a pool that almost hurts the eyes in its “dazzling glare”. The waters under the boughs “run / As there in former years they roll’d” and the contrast between “running” and “rolling” water hints at the running-on of time which has changed the speaker’s circumstances. The next stanza shifts to evening, an evening that evokes other long-lost evenings in its “gliding slowly by”. Then “the night comes on to star the sky” (a lovely and surprising use of “star” as a transitive verb). The different kinds of movement express the more drastic change for the speaker to a season “no longer fair”. The details of this negation are not imposed on the external scene: no pathetic fallacies are committed. Night has arrived in the third stanza, and the sounds of what might be a harvest celebration intrude. There’s a significant change of personal pronoun, from “my life” in the first two stanzas to “our life” in the last. It may or may not relate to the “girl” remembered, in happier time, “standing by yon door”. That third stanza, perhaps the least cohesive of the three, is written entirely from the shared perspective. The drumbeat carried on the “blast” may have military rather than harvest festival associations: even the horse, no longer “our petted mare”, might be about to be conscripted. Barnes, while a patriot, was no supporter of British colonial expansion. But these shadows of war might simply originate in the psychological state of the speaker, his sorrow souring the noise of others’ pleasure to aggravation and foreboding. Overall, reticence seems an important quality in this poem – and perhaps it’s an imported one, too, related to the non-dialect idiom. It underpins the very title, Musings, which tells us so little. No Romantic claim of melancholy or desolation is declared, although the poem’s tone is almost elegiac. But those parenthetical exclamations of loss, “ah! ’tis not” and “ah! is not” break through the smooth surfaces. They belong to heightened but natural speech and show that emotional authenticity doesn’t depend on the use of all-out dialect. There’s no clear instance of a too-literary diction draining this poem of life. But it’s worth sampling a full dialect poem in the context of Musings, and comparing effects. Tokens, which can be read here, is also a poem concerning loss, and here the imprints of the past on the present are observed in minute and wonderful detail. “Green mwold on zummer bars do show / That they’ve a-dripp’d in winter wet; / The hoof-worn ring o’ ground belo / The tree, do tell o’ storms, or het …”) That such detail can have earned its place in a lyric poem undoubtedly depends on the earthiness and precision of a rich dialect. But I’d still like to see Barnes valued more often for his achievement in both kinds of writing.JD Sports has described the covert filming of its executive chairman, Peter Cowgill, as “highly irregular and potentially illegal” and denied any wrongdoing after the footage captured a meeting between the businessman and his counterpart at Footasylum, the trainer retailer. JD bought Footasylum for £90m in 2019, but the deal became the subject of a review by the competition watchdog. Last week, the Competition and Markets Authority ordered JD to sell Footasylum, after concluding the takeover had reduced competition for high street shoppers. The video recording, which has been seen by the Sunday Times, has sparked a fresh investigation by the competition regulator. The footage reportedly shows Cowgill sitting in his car with Barry Bown, the executive chairman of Footasylum, in a car park near Bury in Greater Manchester in July this year. There is no audio on the video. During its review, the CMA had instructed that while meetings between bosses of the two companies were allowed, confidential or commercially sensitive information should not be shared. But in a statement released on Monday morning, JD Sports said Cowgill and Bown had known each other on a “business and personal basis for 25 years” and that that it was “not unusual, or in any way suspicious or illegitimate, for them to meet from time to time, including in relation to the ongoing review by the Competition and Markets Authority”. “JD firmly believes that its actions in participating in this meeting do not amount to wrongdoing or a breach of the order and does not see how it would be reasonable to accuse JD of such,” it said. The sportswear company hit out at what it claimed was “highly irregular and potentially illegal covert surveillance undertaken by a third party for their own interests”. “Any suggestions with regard to corporate governance breaches are totally refuted,” it added. However, the competition regulator is understood to have seen the footage of the bosses’ meeting, and is in the process of investigating whether it constitutes a breach of the interim order. “These rules are put in place to protect consumers and other businesses operating in that market as we investigate a merger. We take compliance very seriously and thoroughly investigate any potential breaches,” a CMA spokesperson said. “Where there is clear evidence that a breach has occurred we do not hesitate to take action.” JD said it had already notified the CMA about the discussions of the July meeting, and its purpose. A person with knowledge of the matter suggested that the information was passed on before the Sunday Times report was released. JD Sports said it was still committed to dividing its executive chairman role into two positions – chairman and chief executive – before the company’s next annual general meeting in 2022 and was strengthening the board, including with a new independent non-executive director appointed in September. A second non-executive appointment was imminent, the retailer added.Several people still missing after the collapse of a partly constructed luxury apartment building in Lagos a week ago are now thought by officials clearing the debris to be dead – to the anguish of families at the site still searching for answers. Only 15 people have survived, with 42 people found dead as of Sunday morning, in yet another deadly building collapse that has caused outrage in Nigeria and calls for recriminations against government and regulatory authorities. At least seven people are officially recorded as missing, although many more could be unaccounted for. The collapse of the 21-storey high-end apartment block, which killed the owner of the real estate development along with scores of construction workers and labourers, has fuelled anger and a renewed focus on potentially deadly malpractices and alleged corruption within Lagos’s booming property development industry. Excavators at the scene continued to hack through the debris a week after the collapse and more than three days since any living survivor was found. “Anyone that is found now, I think it is likely they would have already died,” said an official of the Nigerian Emergency Management Agency at the scene on Sunday, speaking on condition of anonymity. Yet families hopeful of retrieving the remains of their loved ones say the rescue attempt has itself been dysfunctional and could have killed potential survivors. A relative who spoke on condition of anonymity said his 25-year-old brother was working as a labourer on the site, earning less than 40,000 naira (£72) a month. “If life had any value in this country, wouldn’t they [rescue workers] have been working through the night? I got here at 7am this morning. They didn’t start work until 9am,” he said. Others said that it took hours after the collapse occurred before rescue workers arrived at the scene. Witnesses said they saw workers watching YouTube videos to work out how to use the excavators to save lives, with the machines at times scooping up blood and body parts from the debris, before medical workers from the Nigerian Red Cross placed them into bags for possible identification. “See how aggressive they are? See how they are using caterpillars [excavators] on the site?” said Oladele Aina, a construction worker from a nearby partly constructed apartment block, worried that the machines could harm any remaining survivors or dismember corpses. “They don’t know what they’re doing at all.” An expert on urban planning in Lagos, who spoke on condition of anonymity, condemned the rescue efforts. “Building collapses happen semi-regularly, this has been an issue for years and years now. Not only is it that the government doesn’t act against this issue; it doesn’t seem like there has been any tangible improvement in the rescue operations after these terrible collapses. “So we aren’t preventing the collapses and we aren’t learning how to save lives,” he said, with other experts saying heat signature equipment could have been used to locate people who were trapped. State authorities have set up an independent panel to investigate the cause of the collapse, with Lagos’s governor, Babajide Sanwo-Olu, conceding “mistakes were made from all angles”. A six-member panel of experts had been appointed to “bring closure to this event and ensure that justice is served”, he said last week, with three days of mourning declared in Lagos between Thursday and Sunday. Yet the inquiry has done little to temper anger oversuspected malpractice and corruption by a nexus of government officials and rich property developers. What caused the building collapse has not been determined. The head of the Lagos State Building Control Agency, Gbolahan Oki, was suspended by the state government following the collapse. He had earlier told reporters the building only had approval for 15 storeys, not 21. Labourers waiting at the site said it was common for subpar building materials to be used to cut corners. The deputy governor confirmed last week that the development site was sealed in June this year for four months after it was discovered there were some problems in the construction process, before its approval was regranted. Yet questions remain over whether the development was subject to proper scrutiny before it was reopened or whether failings were overlooked. Since the collapse, anger has built against the owner of the property, Femi Osibona, a prolific property developer in Nigeria who began his career in east London. Osibona was killed in the collapse, with his distraught friends identifying his body when it was retrieved on Thursday. Ikoyi, where the collapse took place, is one of the most affluent parts of Nigeria, replete with both old and newly constructed luxury apartment blocks with flats selling for as much as millions of dollars. The collapse has also brought into focus the conditions of workers and labourers on construction sites across Lagos, and particularly in Ikoyi, and whether authorities have failed to regulate the property industry or can be trusted to.Clare was 16 years old when her schoolfriend, David, died in a motorbike accident. On the day of the funeral, in the summer of 1979, she spotted Andrew, his brother, for the first time. Although they didn’t speak that day, it was love at first sight for Clare. “I was completely besotted straight away. I still feel the same way now,” she says. They lived in a small village in Worcestershire, and the community was devastated by David’s death. “It was a very traumatic time, especially for the young people. We were all so shocked by what had happened,” says Clare. She and David’s other friends rallied around Andrew, to make sure that he was coping. Clare regularly cycled past the place where he restored old cars in his spare time to say hello. Andrew admits he “fancied her” but wasn’t sure he was ready to date. “I’d seen her once before my brother’s accident and liked her but hadn’t thought much about it. After he died, the loss was a lot to take on board. I was so hurt,” he says. That autumn, they met at a nightclub after some of David’s friends invited Andrew out. “They were looking after me. Otherwise I would have been sitting at home alone,” he says. He and Clare spent the evening dancing together to Donna Summer and Rod Stewart. “He was wearing a fetching zip-up cardigan and Oxford bags. I thought he looked gorgeous,” she says. Later that evening, Andrew dropped Clare at home in his MG Midget. “My mum said I raved about the car more than Andy,” she laughs. At the time she had been dating someone else. “I’m not sure how happy he was about me driving her back,” says Andrew. That relationship ended soon after, and Andrew and Clare became an official couple. In 1981, they bought a derelict cottage in a nearby village, which they hoped to live in after their wedding the following year. It wasn’t renovated in time, so they spent the first nine months of married life living in a caravan. “They were the baked beans years,” laughs Clare. “We had no money, no running water, no shower and no toilet. It was a test of our relationship.” Clare joined the civil service, and later trained as a lecturer in business studies, while Andrew joined his family’s engineering business. They had two children, born in 1985 and 1988, and moved to their current home in Worcestershire in 1987. Despite settling down very young, neither of them had doubts. “I think a lot of people thought it wouldn’t last. But if you really love someone you can do it, whatever age you are,” says Andrew. They also believe that coping with the tragedy of David’s death at a young age helped them to face the peaks and troughs of life. “We both had hit rock bottom,” says Andrew. They have since supported each other through further family bereavements, including the loss of Andrew’s parents in the mid-90s, and Clare’s mum in 2006. “Anything that came along, we dealt with it together.” In 2004, they bought a house in France and Andrew spent a year away renovating it while Clare stayed in the UK. “Andy really needed a change and I completely supported the idea,” she says. From renovating houses to their shared passion for old cars, the couple have “grown up together” and make decisions as a team. “If we don’t agree straight away, we find plan B. We found a way of sorting things out without rowing,” says Andrew. They admire each other’s determination. “She’s very practical and we support each other as equal partners. We see the funny side of things and bounce off each other,” says Andrew. Clare agrees. “Laughter is the glue. Andy also has amazing inner strength. When I’m ready to throw in the towel, he just carries on and it keeps me going.” Clare says that Andrew’s brother, David, is never far from their thoughts. “He brought us together. We’ll always be grateful to him.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.Good morning. Organisers of what turned out to be one of the deadliest live music events in US history are facing mounting questions about why the rapper Travis Scott continued performing when first responders were already dealing with a mass casualty situation. Eight people aged from 14 to 27 were killed and dozens injured at the Astroworld festival in Houston on Friday night, when fans were crushed against the stage. Lawyers representing some of those who were injured have begun to file lawsuits. According to the Houston Chronicle, which reviewed videos and social media, people had begun to collapse by 9.39pm. Soon after, the show’s promoter agreed to stop the performance. Yet Scott appeared to complete his set, the newspaper reported. The artist finished at 10.15pm – 36 minutes after the disaster was already apparent. Analysis by the Washington Post also suggested the concert continued for about an hour after audience members first appeared to be in distress. Who were the victims? Franco Patino, 21, John Hilgert, 14, Brianna Rodriguez, 16, Rudy Peña, 23, Jacob E Jurinek, 20, Axel Acosta, 21 and Danish Baig, 27, have been named so far. Were many people injured? Hundreds of people, including a 10-year-old child, suffered injuries. Seventeen people were taken to hospital, including 11 in cardiac arrest while more than 300 people were treated in a field hospital. Cop26 legitimacy questioned as groups excluded from crucial talks The legitimacy of the Cop26 climate summit has been called into question by civil society participants who say restrictions on access to negotiations are unprecedented and unjust. As the Glasgow summit enters its second week, observers representing hundreds of indigenous, environmental, academic, climate justice and women’s rights organisations, warn that excluding them from negotiating areas and speaking to negotiators could have dire consequences for millions of people. Observers act as informal watchdogs of the summit – the eyes and ears of the public during negotiations – to ensure proceedings are transparent and reflect the concerns of communities and groups most likely to be affected by decisions. But their ability to observe, interact and intervene in negotiations on carbon markets, loss and damage and climate financing has been obstructed during the first week, the Guardian has been told. “The level of restrictions was unprecedented,” said Sébastian Duyck, from the Centre for International Environmental Law. “It’s alarming, because the relationships we build at the start of Cop are crucial to the work we do after.” “Without our voices this risks the creation of rules that will continue to violate human, territorial and spiritual rights of indigenous peoples,” said Eriel Deranger, an observer for Indigenous Climate Action. Virginia victory gives Republicans glimpse of future without Trump Prominent Republicans are seizing on the victory of Glenn Youngkin in the Virginia gubernatorial race last week to call for a realignment of the party that would move beyond Donald Trump and his “big lie” that the 2020 election was stolen. While most Republicans remain either in lockstep with, or silent about, the former president’s campaign of misinformation surrounding his defeat by Joe Biden, a number of voices have begun tentatively to argue for a reboot. Chris Christie, a longtime confidant of Trump, nonetheless called for the party to move beyond the former president’s obsession with the last election. “We can no longer talk about the past and the past elections – no matter where you stand on that issue, no matter where you stand, it is over,” said the former governor of New Jersey and candidate for the Republican presidential nomination. “Every minute that we spend talking about 2020 – while we’re wasting time doing that, Joe Biden, Kamala Harris, Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer are laying ruin to this country.” Trumpism without Trump appears to be gaining ground among Republicans in the wake of Youngkin’s success in a state that has been trending Democratic. Trump, however, is hinting at another bid for the White House, and with his threat still hanging over the party that he will endorse primary challengers to anyone who defies him, many Republicans continue to act with extreme timidity. Liz Cheney condemns ‘false flag’ Capitol attack claim seen in Tucker Carlson film In an apparent swipe at the Fox News host Tucker Carlson, the anti-Trump Republican Liz Cheney said on Sunday it was “dangerous” and “un-American” to suggest the deadly assault on the US Capitol on 6 January was a “false flag” attack. Conspiracy theorists say “false flag” attacks are staged by the government to achieve its own ends. A documentary produced by Carlson for the Fox Nation streaming service, Patriot Purge, contains such a suggestion about the Capitol attack. Five people died around the events of 6 January, when Trump supporters stormed the Capitol in an attempt to overturn his election defeat by Joe Biden. Trump was impeached for inciting the attack but escaped conviction when sufficient Republican senators stayed loyal. What did Cheney say? She said: “It’s the same thing that you hear people saying 9/11 is an inside job. It’s un-American to be spreading those kinds of lies, and they are lies.” Did she vote to impeach Trump? Yes and she is one of two Republican members of the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack. In other news … Republicans have condemned a new Covid mandate for large companies claiming it could have negative economic consequences. However, Biden’s plan to get US companies with more than 100 or more workers to vaccinate their staff or bring in regular tests have been welcomed by public health groups. A missing teenage girl was rescued in the US after she used a hand gesture that signals distress or domestic violence to capture the attention of a passing driver. The 16-year-old was spotted travelling inside a silver Toyota near London, Kentucky, about 150 miles south-east of Louisville, on 4 November. Senior figures in Iraq believe a brazen drone attack on the home of Iraq’s prime minister, Mustafa al-Kadhimi, marks an unprecedented escalation between the country’s leaders and Iran-backed militant groups attempting to overturn last month’s election. The world’s only openly gay top‑flight men’s footballer says he would be “scared” to play at the World Cup tournament in Qatar next year because of the emirate’s harsh ban on homosexuality and legal penalties ranging from flogging to lengthy prison terms and execution. Stat of the day: Tesla shares fall by 9% after Elon Musk’s Twitter poll backs sell-off plan Tesla’s Frankfurt-listed shares fell about 9% in early trading on Monday as investors prepared for the chief executive Elon Musk’s proposed sale of about a 10th of his holdings in the electric carmaker after his Twitter poll. Musk, the world’s richest person, tweeted on Saturday that he would offload 10% of his stock if users of the social media network approved the proposal. The poll attracted more than 3.5m votes and 57.9% of people voted “yes”. As of 30 June, Musk’s shareholding in Tesla came to about 170.5m shares and selling 10% would amount to close to $21bn based on Friday’s close, according to Reuters calculations. Don’t miss this: The return of touch – after almost two years without it In a pandemic that has meant keeping 2 metres away from one another whenever possible, it appears that physical contact is beginning to return. Even handshakes are starting to make a comeback. “We are wired to respond to emotional touch,” says Francis McGlone, a professor at Liverpool John Moores University. “My analogy is that [touch is] like a vitamin – if we are depleted, there are consequences in terms of our physical health. For many people, social distancing and lockdowns left them bereft of physical contact. Here, touch experts explain why it is so essential. … Or this: I sold my eggs for an Ivy League education – but was it worth it? An increasing number of women are selling their eggs for as much as $20,000 a cycle to cover essential costs – but some have found other motivations and others have experienced negative consequences. “It wasn’t until I was matched with a family, met them, [and] spoke with them that I realized the impact,” said Jordan Whaley Finnerty, who has donated four times. “You don’t realize the lengths couples have to go through to have children.” Being exposed to the parents’ gratitude changed her mind. Now, the goodwill of element, not the money, is her favorite part. Climate check: Republicans’ Cop26 hopes undermined by colleagues’ climate disdain A handful of Republican members of Congress have arrived at the UN climate talks in Glasgow in an attempt to portray the party as engaged on the climate crisis, with this message already badly undermined by colleagues back in the US who have downplayed and even dismissed the impacts of global heating during the summit. “Republicans care deeply about the environment and preserving it for future generations,” insisted John Curtis, a Republican congressman from Utah. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: SpaceX toilet leak forces astronauts to use diapers on trip back to Earth Astronauts who were due to leave the International Space Station yesterday will have to use diapers on the way home because of a broken toilet in their SpaceX capsule. The Nasa astronaut Megan McArthur described the situation as “suboptimal” but manageable. High wind off the Florida coast prompted SpaceX to delay the return of four astronauts who have been in orbit since spring. The good news for the American, French and Japanese astronauts was that their return is projected to take eight hours rather than 20. That means they will have to spend considerably less time wearing and using diapers. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThousands of vulnerable people struggling with personal debts could lose access to free specialist face-to face help as a result of a government shake-up that seeks to move more services online, advisers have said. Some areas could have more than half of their debt adviser workforce made redundant, with local debt advice charities forced to abandon in-person services or even risk closure as a result of the plans to put debt advice services out to tender. Despite funding for debt advice increasing from £51m a year pre-pandemic to £77m, from April the bulk of the money will go to three national call centres, while cash for local services that provide face-to-face help will be halved. Advisers say the shift away from in-person appointments will especially hit vulnerable clients at a time when personal debt is soaring as a result of rising energy and food bills and the end of furlough and debt payment holidays. Nearly 4 million low-income households in the UK are behind on rent, bills or debt payments, up threefold since the pandemic hit, according to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. Clients with complex problems – including debt, housing issues and mental illness – who struggle to access or navigate online services will be particularly at risk. One local adviser said complex cases had soared in the pandemic and now made up roughly two-thirds of their casework. Debt advice groups say that although the bidding process is ongoing, leaked estimates suggest West Yorkshire’s advisers could be cut from 32 to 11, South Yorkshire’s from 28 to seven, and Hull, East Riding and North Lincolnshire’s from 18 to four. Under current arrangements, the Money and Pensions Service (MaPS), an arms-length government agency, funds nine regional grants for face-to-face debt advice provided by a network of local providers and national charities such as Citizens Advice. Under the new tender, three national contracts for a mix of face-to-face and digital and phone services will be issued covering the north, Midlands and south of England, with separate arrangements for national call centre and online-based advice. There are concerns that small, local advice providers that rely on the MaPS funding for the bulk of their income may have to drop face-to-face services or close entirely. Many know they are not included in any of the tender bids, and do not have the size or resources to compete for the tender individually. “The impact will be catastrophic,” said Sylvia Simpson, the chair of Leeds Debt Advice Network. She anticipates that all three independent advice centres in Leeds will lose MaPS funding, and the number of specialist debt advisers in the city will be reduced from nine to three. MaPS says its proposed new advice framework amounts to the “most significant investment in debt advice in England ever made”. It insists there is no evidence that face-to-face advice delivers better outcomes than digital or phone alternatives, and says under the new system face-to-face services will be maintained for people who need them. Craig Simmons, the head of debt policy and strategy at MaPS, said: “With demand for debt advice expected to grow, a new approach is essential so that more people can access expert, free-of-charge debt advice more easily. We also want to make sure that there is good provision of MaPS-funded advice accessible throughout England, including in those areas which may currently be underserved.” The shadow work and pensions secretary, Jonathan Reynolds, said: “Families are facing an incredibly difficult winter because of a Conservative-made cost of living crisis, [and] tax hikes. Unbelievably, just as more people will need to turn for help, the government are overseeing devastating cuts to debt advice services.” Although practically all advice appointments were conducted by phone or online during pandemic lockdowns, advisers say this made dealing with complex cases far more time-consuming and complicated. Advisers have called for the tender process to be rerun with a fresh emphasis on the importance of in-person services. “It’s clear face-to-face advice needs more funding, rather than current funding being shifted into call centres,” said Ray Davies, a Unite union rep at Citizens Advice in Hull.Patience is a virtue – but how much is there at Everton? The new Everton manager Jean-Luc Vasseur’s appeal for patience following his team’s 1-0 defeat by Brighton might be seen as optimistic. “The project is long and we need to be patient”, he said. One league game is not enough time to get a team up to speed with a new philosophy but it is hard to see why Vasseur will be afforded time when his predecessor Willie Kirk wasn’t. Before Saturday’s loss to Brighton, Everton dropped points against Manchester City, Chelsea and Arsenal and, while it had been hoped they would be more competitive against those sides, it was perhaps naive of the club to expect a team that had undergone wholesale changes in the summer to go toe to toe with squads that have a much more established core. Everton face a problem that any team attempting to break into the top three will face; it takes time to build up a squad of players able to compete at the top, year after year, and it takes time to embed those players. In many ways Kirk has paid the price for an attempt to buy fast success. SW City win for first time since opening round The main talking point this season has been Manchester City’s poor form. It is their worst start to the WSL but the manager, Gareth Taylor, has now started to steer their campaign back on track. At the weekend City recorded a 4-1 win over struggling Leicester City, despite going 1-0 down after a minute. They are seventh and, despite it being early in the season, are unlikely to win the league now. But if their results continue to improve they could still target that all-important Champions League qualifying top-three spot. “We’re in a good feeling,” Taylor said. “I think it was really important for us to get points on the board like we have.” SR Chelsea’s Fleming continues good form Olympic champion Jessie Fleming maintained top form in Chelsea’s 1-0 win over Aston Villa, scoring the only goal of the game. Her effort may have been a straightforward one, a late tap-in past Hannah Hampton, but it added to her impressive stats this campaign. Fleming has two goals, one assist and an 85% pass rate success after six matches. The young player is developing well at Chelsea and manager Emma Hayes acknowledged as much post-match. “[Villa] sit really low and you have to work hard to drag them out of the spaces,” Hayes said. “We did that really well in the first half with the runs from Jessie. The movement from Beth [England] was also good.” SR Spurs show the importance of a plan Tottenham’s first point from seven games against Manchester United put them third in the league and is a big milestone for the north London side. True, Manchester United are not as formidable in attack as they have been in recent seasons, with Leah Galton and Kirsty Hanson struggling to make an impact, but Tottenham look a well-organised team with a plan all the players understand. It is not the teams splashing money on transfers that look most likely to break into the top three. Instead it is Tottenham and Brighton, two clubs reaping the rewards of having recruited managers, in Rehanne Skinner and Hope Powell, who understand how to get the best out of their players. As a former assistant coach with the national team and former England manager respectively, both are used to doing just that. SW Birmingham still without a win Unlike Leicester, who are bottom, Birmingham have experience in the WSL but seem to be on a downward trajectory. A match against Reading presented the perfect opportunity for the club to gain valuable points with their opponents just one place ahead of them in the table before the match. They managed to hold Kelly Chambers’ team off until the second half but then conceded three times. Scott Booth was appointed ahead of the season to change the club’s fortunes but instead they seem to have regressed further. It may be that only Leicester can save them from relegation and there will be a tasty fixture for fans when the bottom two face each other next month. SR Captain Kim reaches half century The stars in Arsenal’s squad make it easy to overlook the consistent and dependable captain Kim Little. However, she made her presence felt in their 4-0 win over West Ham as she scored twice to take her WSL tally to 50. She became one of the select group, also including her Arsenal teammate Vivianne Miedema, to reach the milestone and did so in 98 games. The former Scotland international was modest post-match, telling Sky Sports: “Most importantly we got the win and the three points … We want to make sure we don’t concede and I think we’ve got that mentality right now.” Arsenal have scored 50 goals this season across all competitions, to match Little’s mark. SRThe names Tesla, Renault and Volvo mean nothing to Pierre*. He has never heard of an electric car. But as he heads out to work each morning in the bustling, dusty town of Fungurume, in the Democratic Republic of Congo’s southern mining belt, he is the first link in a supply chain that is fuelling the electric vehicle revolution and its promise of a decarbonised future. Pierre is mining for cobalt, one of the world’s most sought-after minerals, and a key ingredient in the batteries that power most electric vehicles (EVs). He says his basic wage is the equivalent of £2.60 ($3.50) a day, but if he works through lunch and puts in hours of overtime, he can make up to about £3.70. Not that lunch is worth waiting for: he claims he is given just two small bread rolls and a carton of juice. “The salary is very, very small. It gives me a headache … The mine makes so much and we make so little,” he says. If he takes a day off, he says money is deducted from his wages. If he is sick and misses more than two days in a month, more money is cut. “You can’t even argue. If you do, you’ll be fired,” he says, squatting on the dirt floor of the bare brick shack he rents. “The relationship between us and the [mine] is like a slave and a master,” says Pierre. Stories of the harsh and dangerous working conditions endured by miners in the DRC’s informal, or artisanal, cobalt mines – of child labour and miners being buried alive as tunnels cave in – have provoked an international outcry in recent years, forcing the western technology and automotive brands that rely on the mineral to look for ways to source “clean” cobalt, free from human rights abuses. Some companies in the cobalt supply chain have promised to stop sourcing from artisanal mines and instead get the mineral from large-scale industrial mines, which are seen as a safer option both for workers and corporate reputations. Pierre is not working at an artisanal mine, however. He is employed, via a subcontractor, at Tenke Fungurume mine (TFM), one of the country’s biggest industrial mines, which is 80% owned by the Chinese company China Molybdenum(CMOC). An investigation by the Guardian has found that some workers, often employed through subcontractors, allege they are victims of severe exploitation, including wages as low as 30p an hour, precarious employment with no contracts, and paltry food rations. In a number of mines run by Chinese companies, workers made allegations of discrimination and racism reminiscent of the colonial era. The Guardian has tracked the cobalt supply chain from TFM and other industrial mines through a number of refiners and battery makers to some of the world’s leading electric car manufacturers, including Tesla, VW, Volvo, Renault and Mercedes-Benz . While the cobalt supply chain is highly complex, all these car manufacturers identified by the Guardian can be linked to one or more of the industrial mines named by the Guardian through a small number of key refineries and battery makers. Many EV brands have made public commitments to “responsible sourcing” of minerals, and some – notably Tesla – are using innovative ways to achieve this. Nevertheless, the Guardian’s findings suggest how far the sector still has to go to ensure the shift to clean energy is not tainted by claims of workers’ rights abuses. As delegates meet at Cop26, the UN climate change conference in Glasgow, the transition from petrol to EVs is being talked about as a key step in reducing carbon emissions. Global sales of passenger EVs – excluding hybrids – are expected to soar from 3.3m in 2021 to 66m in 2040. In the UK, that growth will be driven by the government’s ban on the sale of petrol and diesel cars from 2030. Last year, about 70% of the world’s cobalt came from the DRC and the vast majority of that – 93,000 out of 100,000 tonnes, according to Benchmark Mineral Intelligence (BMI) – came from large-scale industrial mines. Although some battery and car manufacturers have reduced the amount of cobalt in their batteries, BMI says the volume of sales of cobalt into the sector will rise four or fivefold over the coming decade. The World Bank estimates that demand for cobalt production will increase 585% by 2050. That should be good news for people in southern DRC, where the majority of the cobalt mines are located, but a report launched today by UK-based corporate watchdog Raid and Congolese lawyers from the Centre d’Aide Juridico-Judiciaire, says many multinational mining companies – and the subcontractors they hire – create poorly paid jobs that keep workers in poverty. “Cobalt is an essential mineral for the green transition, but we must not turn away from the abusive labour conditions that taint the lithium-ion batteries needed for millions of electric vehicles,” said Raid director Anneke Van Woudenberg Kolwezi is the DRC’s cobalt capital, a city so defined by mining that some communities sit on the rim of the giant craters that have been excavated in search of copper and cobalt. It is mining on a massive scale, highly mechanised and dependent on cutting-edge technology but powered by thousands of workers – more than 10,000 at TFM – who, like Pierre, are employed as mineral processors, drivers, mechanics, welders, security guards and general workers. In the last 15 years, Chinese companies have begun to enter the mining business, buying out North American and European companies so that they now control the majority of the cobalt and copper mines in southern DRC. And with this change, Congolese workers say, has come abuse, discrimination and racism. They say they are insulted, in some cases beaten, and claim they are paid less than Chinese workers who do the same job. They allege that Chinese supervisors disregard their experience and put production before safety. “We’re being treated in a very bad way by the Chinese. I’m a victim of assault myself. I was slapped across the face four times,” says Mutamba, another worker at TFM. One Congolese worker at TFM described sitting through a two-hour meeting in Chinese, only to be given a two-minute translation at the end. “We feel humiliated and embarrassed,” he says. “The way they are treating our people, you can’t believe. We are just expecting them to have respect for human life, instead of using people like slaves.” Over the course of the investigation, workers interviewed by the Guardian said they deeply resented the way they were treated, but felt powerless to protest. “It’s a shocking situation, but I can’t leave the job because there is no other choice,” says one. “Where can I get another job?” A spokesperson for CMOC, which majority owns TFM, said the company adheres to a number of international labour conventions and local labour laws. Since it acquired the mine in 2016, CMOC said it has contributed an average of £296m a year to the country’s revenue. “We are devoted to providing a safe, healthy and decent work environment to all employees and attach great importance to protecting the rights of employees,” the spokesperson said. Mining for cobalt and copper is a vital source of income for DRC’s government and creates tens of thousands of jobs – with good wages for many – in a region with few other employment opportunities. But in some mines the majority of workers – almost 70% at TFM, for example – are hired through sub-contractors. The use of subcontractors can leave workers in an extremely precarious position: often hired on short-term contracts, or no contract at all, with limited benefits, low pay and the threat of termination always hanging over them. Josué Kashal, a lawyer for Centre d’Aide Juridico-Judiciaire, a local organisation that represents miners, says the use of subcontractors can lead to the big mines being able to avoid accountability. In his small office in Kolwezi, Kashal shows the Guardian a list of what he claims are more than 50 subcontractors that have been used by the Kamoto Copper Company (KCC) mine, which is owned by the Swiss commodities and mining giant Glencore. “Glencore is using many subcontracted workers, so employees depend on the subcontractor, not Glencore. This way they don’t have responsibility and can end a contract at any time,” says Kashal. While some workers said they hoped to get hired directly by KCC, saying it offered better wages than other mines, 44% of KCC’s workers are employed through sub-contractors. The price is paid by men like Luc. “I started on £80 a month while working as a security guard at KCC. Then KCC terminated the contract with the subcontractor and I suddenly lost my job, along with 600 other guards,” he says. Luc was recently rehired by another security firm at the mine, but says he is still earning less than £140 a month. “The main companies are treating the subcontractors well, but the subcontractors don’t treat workers well. The mining companies are benefitting a lot, not the local people,” he says. Glencore said KCC only uses sub-contractors for specialist work or temporary contracts and monitors compliance with the terms of its contracts. “In 2021, KCC became aware that employees of a global contractor company, whose contract ceased due to the reduction of project activities during the Covid-19 pandemic, did not receive their wages to the end of their employment term. In this instance, KCC engaged with the contractor … and the employees received the correct payment,” a spokesperson said. In June 2020, Tesla signed a long-term deal to source cobalt from Glencore for its new “giga-factories” in Berlin and Shanghai. Tesla did not respond to multiple requests for comment, but in its latest impact report, the company says it procures cobalt only from producers in the DRC that meet its responsible sourcing standards. To avoid its material being “contaminated” by cobalt from other sources as it passes along the supply chain, it is “stored in clearly marked, segregated areas of the plant and is toll processed on lines dedicated for Tesla”, the report says. Two mineral experts told the Guardian this process is likely to be rigorous. Covid has compounded the already poor labour conditions endured by many workers. The community of Kawama stretches along one side of the main road south of Lubumbashi. On the other side stands the Congo Dongfang International Mining (CDM) mine and refinery. When the pandemic started, many CDM workers were confined to the mine for three months until the Congolese government compelled the company to release them. Koffi, who worked at the mine as a security guard, told the Guardian he shared a hall with 80 others, with two workers sharing a mattress laid on a wooden board and propped up on bricks. “I felt like a prisoner. I didn’t have any freedom,” he says. In interviews with the Guardian, some CDM workers say they are employed for as little as £88 a month. “Payslips” seen by the Guardian were written only in Chinese on a pencil-thin strip of paper. CDM is wholly owned by Huayou Cobalt, a Chinese conglomerate with interests in every step of the cobalt supply chain, from mining to cathode production. Renault and Daimler, the parent company of Mercedes-Benz, name CDM among their suppliers. Huayou Cobalt said CDM “adopted a policy of healthy and safe operation” at the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic until the government put forward its own pandemic prevention policies. It said all workers were paid in line with local labour laws. CDM has made significant contributions to the local community, Huayou Cobalt said, including organising agricultural education, building and renovating schools, setting up medical clinics and providing water and electricity to local villages. But there appears to be little sign of that in Kawama, a collection of red brick shacks with corrugated iron roofs held down by rocks. A woman heaves a bicycle laden with yellow water drums along a dry dirt track, a young boy helping to push from behind. “There is no drinking water, no electricity, no school, no healthcare,” claims Koffi. “Our community is right next to CDM, but they don’t do anything for us.” Renault, Volvo VW and Daimler, the parent company of Mercedes-Benz, responded saying they recognised the importance of responsible mineral sourcing, took the allegations seriously and would discuss the findings with their suppliers. *All names have been changedIn recent years mental health has become a justified talking point, albeit one that remains chronically neglected in terms of funding and structural change. Yet amid the clamour and the marketing and the celebrity authors, there is a group that remains silent: the millions of children in the UK who have a parent with a mental illness. According to the children’s commissioner for England, 3.7 million children aged 17 or under live with an adult who has “moderate or higher” symptoms of mental illness; in 1.6 million of those cases, the parent suffers from a severe mental health problem. According to a report commissioned by Our Time, the charity supporting young people affected by parental mental illness, 3 million children in Great Britain are living with a parent who has depression or anxiety. A new podcast series from Our Time represents a crucial opening up of the discussion. My Family, Mental Illness and Me features conversations between Dr Pamela Jenkins from the Mental Health Foundation, whose own mother had schizo-affective disorder, and a number of the now adult offspring of mentally ill parents, including Joe Wicks, whose mother has obsessive compulsive disorder, and Kayleigh Llewellyn, whose BBC comedy-drama series In My Skin is inspired by her childhood experiences of her mother’s biopolar disorder. These moving interviews cast a light on a fraught domestic environment that is usually hidden from view, often with a confused and distraught child at its centre. What strikes me most listening to the podcast is the culture of deep silence and shame that the interviewees felt about what was happening at home. In one episode, Wicks reflects on this double life, saying: “It wasn’t a safe environment as a young kid. So I had to come into school and just act like nothing was wrong. And I think that was because I was worried and concerned that my parents would get in trouble or that I’d be taken away from my mum and dad.” Llewellyn tells of how she pretended to a friend that her mother had been hospitalised for a physical illness, rather than tell that she had been sectioned. No one spoke to her about what was happening to her mum – not a social worker or a teacher, nor anyone in her family. The documentary film-maker Iain Cunningham, whose mother died after being institutionalised when he was a small child, knew from a young age never to talk about what had happened to her. When, as an adult, he learned more about his mother’s illness, he finally felt able to talk to his dad about it. During their conversation, he noticed that his father had made a note of her diagnosis: “post-partum psychosis” – he had never heard the term before Cunningham used it. This series will no doubt resonate with many families in which stories of psychological suffering have been passed down in fragments or whispers, the details of what happened becoming a vague snippet of family history that nobody has the right language to describe – except for oblique references to “nerves”. The history of the nation as a whole is also steeped in shame: with stories of experimental 20th-century treatments such as electro-shock therapy or lobotomy, asylums and suicide. These days, treatments are more humane, language has improved and stigma is slowly eroding. But this vulnerable group still often falls through the cracks. Part of the problem is that the children of parents with mental illness are not counted as as an at-risk group. Yet they are about three times more at risk of developing a mental health problem as a child. Without intervention, 70% of children affected by parental mental illness are predicted to suffer from mental illness themselves, but the adult mental health professionals who might care for a parent are not tasked with thinking about preventive measures for the children. They might count as young carers, but they face unique pressures. Early intervention is crucial to breaking cycles of trauma. Our Time is running family workshops that help children feel less isolated and to understand their parents’ illness, and is running outreach programmes in schools to help teachers recognise when pupils might need help. It is only a small charity – but it is campaigning to make these kinds of services accessible nationwide and for specific provision to be offered to children within the government’s family hubs initiative. Austerity, benefits cuts and the intersection of poverty with mental illness have of course continued to exacerbate suffering. But it isn’t all hopeless. Today’s young parents and future parents may be the first generation who are equipped with far greater awareness of mental health issues – including during pregnancy and after birth – and the language to describe how they are feeling. This podcast series demonstrates just how valuable that awareness and language can be to a lonely, confused child, and the potential that carries for future healing. It’s a cycle that needs breaking before it is able to impact later generations. We can’t change our disturbing history of failing families with mental illness, but we can change the future. Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnist‘You will die at 20.” That’s the death sentence handed down to a newborn baby at the start of this gentle, affecting Sudanese drama, the feature debut of director Amjad Abu Alala (and was Sudan’s first ever Oscar entry). The scene has a kind of intense, dreamy realism. A couple bring their baby son to a Sufi naming ceremony in the desert, and while a sheikh performs the blessing, a dervish in a green jalabiya sways in a trance. The crowd chants numbers, one for every year of the baby’s life. “One … two … three …” At the count of 20, the dervish falls into a faint. The sheikh confirms everyone’s gasps: the baby will die at 20. “God’s command is inevitable.” The film is a parable about the dangers of blind faith in religion and authority, but it’s also warmly compassionate and accepting of human nature. After the ceremony, the baby’s father Alnoor (Talal Afifi) can’t cope; he leaves the village to work abroad, telling his wife, Sakina (Islam Mubarak), that she’s stronger, she’ll manage. And she does, dressed in black as if her son Muzamil is already dead; understandably, she becomes overprotective. Finally, when he’s a boy of six or seven with a soulful expressive face (played beautifully by Moatasem Rashed) she lets him go to school where he’s bullied and nicknamed “son of death” by the other boys. Later as a teenager (now played by Mustafa Shehata), Muzamil is devoutly religious and doesn’t question his fate. Then his faith is cracked wide open by the arrival of Sulaiman (Mahmoud Elsaraj), a man from the village who has travelled the world and has come back to die. He drinks alcohol and introduces young Muzamil to cinema in scenes that possibly feel a bit familiar, though I found their tenderness irresistible. And there are some gorgeous images here, too, such as flecks of dust glimmering in beams of sunlight or banks of the Nile, which give the movie a kind of mythic otherworldliness. • You Will Die at Twenty is released on 12 November in cinemas.The means by which music is played invariably affects music itself: jazz changed with the introduction of the LP, which allowed longer pieces to be released; the arrival of the CD gave the world the blockbuster 70-minute hip-hop album padded out with skits; a couple of years ago, a famous pop producer told me that the algorithms of Spotify now affect everything from a single’s length to the sound of its intro and choruses. So it is with TikTok, seemingly the primary means by which tweens and teenagers discover music in 2021. There have been pop singles audibly designed to become memes on the video-sharing platform, Drake’s Toosie Slide and Justin Bieber’s Yummy among them. More intriguing is the way it has democratised music, taking it away from the machinations of record companies and placing its promotion into the hands of ordinary people, with often unpredictable results. As anyone with kids who use TikTok will attest, the stuff they start listening to after hearing it in the backgrounds of videos is bafflingly eclectic: my youngest daughter has variously expressed a liking for Rockwell’s 80s funk hit Somebody’s Watching Me, Tiny Tim’s Tiptoe Through the Tulips With Me, the oeuvre of Pitchfork-tipped singer-songwriter Mitski and Edith Piaf’s signature tune La Vie en Rose. She also likes Mother Mother, who may represent the most dramatic example of TikTok’s ability to turn around an artist’s fortunes: they were a minor Canadian indie band until two tracks from their 2008 album O My Heart unaccountably went viral on TikTok last summer. One, Hay Loft, has now been streamed 223m times on Spotify: Mother Mother’s forthcoming European tour will see them playing the kind of venues unimaginable 18 months ago. The question of whether it can break new artists is more thorny. The success of Pinkpantheress, a 20-year-old student whose scrappy short-form take on drum’n’bass has moved from TikTok to the charts, suggests so. However, randomly searching TikTok for original music yields a lot of stuff that’s clearly hugely popular there, yet has little purchase beyond. There’s J Maya, a Harvard graduate and singer-songwriter whose niche seems about as niche as you can get. She writes synthy pop songs based around Greek mythology: Achilles Heel and Thanatos (End of Us). There’s Lubalin, who comes from Montreal, looks like a skinnier version of Dave Grohl, and specialises in a brand of musical comedy that involves “turning random internet drama into songs”: his 40-second bursts of piano balladry or Weeknd-ish electro-pop come with lyrics based on preposterous online arguments about broccoli casserole or how to see if you’re pregnant. They’re genuinely funny, some having been viewed more than 40m times on TikTok, but you struggle to imagine them leading to a lasting musical career. Jeven Reliford has amassed 36.5m likes. He sings cover versions while banging pens on a table. Atlantic Records signed him, but his debut single – in a retro R&amp;B style – seemed to vanish without trace. The TikTok video of it got a tiny fraction of the interest that his a cappella version of Fly Me to the Moon did, suggesting that if he wasn’t banging pens on a table, people weren’t that interested. As with Pinkpantheress, you can hear the way both the restrictions of the TikTok video and the platform’s magpie approach to music have affected the sound of Bella Poarch, who seems to have pivoted to a music career after becoming huge on TikTok for “making adorable faces”. The two songs she’s released have barely touched the two-minute mark. They contain echoes of everything from showtunes to dubstep in the cutesy sound of Build a Bitch – but her name thus far ranks alongside a host of other TikTok celebrities who haven’t replicated anything like their online success in what you might call the outside world: Peach PRC, Tayler Holder and Lil Huddy, who deals in Auto-Tuned pop-punk. You’re struck by the sense of a kind of hermetically sealed space, with its own standards and stars – and the feeling that the latter don’t really need to break out. The money you can earn by making adorable faces as a TikTok influencer is such that you wonder where the incentive is: their annual income can run into millions. It feels like an end in itself, rather than a stepping stone. For the moment, TikTok’s impact on pop is likely to be felt in more subtle ways than simply grooming stars.England have suffered their second major injury blow at the T20 World Cup after confirmation that Jason Roy has torn a calf muscle and will play no further part in the tournament. Roy limped out of England’s final match of the Super 12 stage against South Africa on Saturday and, as the team prepare to play New Zealand in Wednesday’s semi-final, has dropped out of the squad, replaced by James Vince. “It is a bitter pill to swallow,” Roy said. “I will be staying on to support the boys, and hopefully we can go all the way and lift that trophy. It has been an unbelievable journey so far, and we have to continue expressing ourselves and concentrating on us.” Moeen Ali described the news as “a massive blow” but insisted the squad remains positive about their chances of winning the tournament. “It’s a big blow not just because of the way he bats but also because of what he brings to the field, the confidence that he brings,” he said. “Especially with guys that may be feeling a little bit nervous, he’s the one guy who settles our nerves and helps us get through it. “So it’s a massive blow, but he’ll still be around [to do] that. The confidence that he goes out with, the way he takes on the bowlers, it gives everyone else a bit of a boost and that will be missing, but we’ve got guys who’ve been waiting in the wings for a long time – guys who are playing well in the nets and are ready to come in.” Roy’s withdrawal follows that of Tymal Mills, who was forced out last week because of a quad injury, while Ben Stokes, Jofra Archer and Sam Curran are also absent because of fitness issues. “We’ve lost so many players,” Moeen said. “But I feel like the players that come in are as good and are also big players. The reason they don’t play is because we have such a strong XI. For me if we win the World Cup it will show the depth of English cricket. It’s a very difficult team to get into and you’ve got to be doing really well to get in, I think it will signify that more than anything. But it would be a massive achievement for this group of players if we do win that trophy.” Moeen has faced just 33 balls in the World Cup so far, batting in only three of England’s five group games, but his bowling has been key to the team’s success – he has taken seven wickets, fewer only than Adil Rashid’s eight, and has the squad’s best economy rate. He entered the competition in fine form after winning this year’s Indian Premier League with Chennai Super Kings just days before the World Cup started. “I did well in the IPL and winning that has helped, in my opinion, massively,” he said. “I felt like I learned so much about cricket and batting, all that kind of stuff – my game got better and better as I was going on. The confidence is high and I just feel like a big part of the team. I’ve got important roles and I’m really happy with my game. To be given that responsibility with the new ball or just outside the powerplay, whatever it is, and then going up the order when Morgs [Eoin Morgan, the captain] gives me the nudge, it’s always great. I just feel like I’m playing really well and I think the captain sees that and wants to use that as much as he can.” Vince, who was also a part of England’s squad at the 2016 20-over World Cup, opens for Hampshire Hawks in the Vitality Blast and has previously done so for England in T20 and ODI matches, including while Roy was injured at the 2019 50-over World Cup. However, there are several alternatives at the top of the order Morgan may prefer. “The great thing is there’s loads of options and loads of combinations that we can go with,” Moeen said. “I’m sure Morgs will make the right decision when the time comes.”My friend Allan Wilmot, who has died aged 96, was one of the oldest surviving Caribbean second world war veterans. Allan was unusual as a black serviceman during the conflict because he served in both the Royal Navy and the RAF. The youngest of five children, he was born to a middle-class family in Kingston, Jamaica, which was then under British colonial rule. His father, Charles, was the captain of a merchant navy ship. His mother, Alice, brought up Allan and his three sisters and brother and did voluntary work in the community. In his 2015 autobiography Now You Know, Allan wrote: “I soon became aware of the poverty that many other Jamaicans families experienced.” From Wesley school, Allan won a scholarship to Wolmer’s high school. Aged 16 he volunteered for the Royal Navy in 1941, responding to an advertisement for recruits in the Jamaican Daily Gleaner newspaper. He served on HMS Hauken in Caribbean waters where German submarines lurked, sinking many British ships. Allan starred in my 2015 BBC TV film Fighting for King and Empire, Britain’s Caribbean Heroes, and he told me his search and rescue team pulled hundreds of sailors out of the sea. Because his naval career was not progressing, in 1943 Allan heeded the call for Jamaican and other Caribbeans to join the RAF. After the war, in 1947 he docked in Southampton on the HMS Almanzora, then made his way to London, living for a while in an abandoned railway carriage and washing dishes at the Cumberland hotel in Marble Arch. He was joined the following year by his brother Harry, who sailed on the Empire Windrush. In the early 1950s they both became members of a soulful singing group, the Southlanders, which was the first of its kind to achieve widespread success in Britain and the longest-running black British hitmakers in the 1950s. Their cover version of Alone (Why Must I Be Alone), which sold more than a million copies and got to No 2 in 1957, was their biggest seller. The 1958 novelty song The Mole in a Hole, is, perhaps, the best remembered, with its line “I am a Mole and I Live in a Hole” sung by Harry (whose son, Gary, also went on to be an entertainer). Allan bought a new convertible car with his first royalty cheque. After leaving the Southlanders in 1974, Allan became a Post Office telephone operator. Five years later, he was promoted to assistant supervisor at the Balham telephone exchange. He helped set up the West Indian Ex-Servicemen’s Association, which originally met at the YMCA in central London’s Tottenham Court Road in the early 1970s, and then moved to its own building at Clapham, in south London. It’s now known as the West Indian Association of Service Personnel. Allan was proud that, as a war veteran, he went to Buckingham Palace several times to meet the Queen and Prince Charles - the photographs had pride of place on the memorabilia-adorned living room wall of his home in Gipsy Hill, south London. Allan’s wife, Joyce (nee Fletcher), whom he married in 1966, died in 2020. He is survived by four daughters, Alison, Sandra, Audrey and Michelle.The mobile phones of six Palestinian human rights defenders, some of whom work for organisations that were recently – and controversially – accused by Israel of being terrorist groups, were previously hacked by sophisticated spyware made by NSO Group, according to a report. An investigation by Front Line Defenders (FLD), a Dublin-based human rights group, found that the mobile phones of Salah Hammouri, a Palestinian rights defender and lawyer whose Jerusalem residency status has been revoked, and five others were hacked using Pegasus, NSO’s signature spyware. In one case, the hacking was found to have occurred as far back as July 2020. FLD’s findings were independently confirmed with “high confidence” by technical experts at Citizen Lab and Amnesty International’s security lab, the world’s leading authorities on such hacks. The revelation is likely to provoke further criticism of Israel’s recent decision to target Palestinian human rights activists. UN human rights experts have called the designation of the groups as terror organisations a “frontal attack” on the Palestinian human rights movement and on human rights everywhere, and said it appeared to represent an abuse of the use of anti-terrorism legislation by Israeli authorities. Investigations by the Guardian and other media outlets have found multiple cases of governments using NSO spyware to target journalists and human rights advocates who are perceived as threats, often by autocratic regimes such as Saudi Arabia that have been sold the technology. Targets in the past have included the fiancee and wife of the murdered journalist Jamal Khashoggi, as well as Carine Kanimba, the daughter of the jailed Rwandan dissident Paul Rusesabagina. NSO has said it investigates all allegations of abuse and that its technology is meant to be used by governments to fight terrorism and other serious crimes. The case of the six Palestinians also raises new questions about how Israel itself may use spyware to target critics of the government or others who are seen as threatening the country. The Biden administration placed NSO on a US blacklist last week, a move that will make it exceedingly difficult for the Israeli company to buy any US-originating technology or services. The administration said it took the decision after it found evidence that the Israeli spyware maker had acted “contrary to the foreign policy and national security interests of the US”. There is no technical evidence confirming that the state of Israel ordered the hacks of the six Palestinians, but three of the six individuals work for organisations that have been targeted and accused of crimes by Israeli authorities. NSO has said it sells its spyware only to government clients for the purposes of fighting serious crime and terrorism, and the company is closely regulated by the Israeli ministry of defence. A spokesperson for NSO Group said: “Due to contractual and national security considerations, we cannot confirm or deny the identity of our government customers. As we stated in the past, NSO Group does not operate the products itself; the company licence approved government agencies to do so, and we are not privy to the details of individuals monitored. “NSO Group develops critical technologies for the use of law enforcement and intelligence agencies around the world to defend the public from serious crime and terror. These technologies are vital for governments in the face of platforms used by criminals and terrorists to communicate uninterrupted.” The Israeli government did not immediately respond to a request for comment by the Guardian. The Israeli prime minister’s office and the defence ministry denied that Pegasus had been used to hack the Palestinians’ phones, according to the New York Times. The groups concerned are known to document allegations of human rights abuses by Israel and the Palestinian Authority. The six are Al-Haq, Addameer, Defense for Children International – Palestine, the Bisan Center for Research and Development, the Union of Palestinian Women’s Committees, and the Union of Agricultural Work Committees. Three of the six activists who were hacked agreed to be identified. They are Hammouri, who is also a French national, Ubai Al-Aboudi, the executive director at the Bisan Center, who is also a US citizen, and Ghassan Halaika, a researcher for Al-Haq. Ron Deibert, a Canadian professor and the head of Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto, noted that the group’s own forensic analysis showed that the hacking of the individuals had occurred prior to Israel’s designation of the groups as terrorist organisations. Pegasus gives government operators complete control over a victim’s device, including being able to use microphones and cameras remotely. “The possibility that a government operator could plant falsely incriminating data on a victim’s phone can also not be excluded, given this total control,” said Deibert. The Israeli defence ministry has previously claimed that the six organisations were linked to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), a secular political movement with an armed wing that has in the past carried out attacks against Israel. The groups “were active under the cover of civil society organisations, but in practice belong and constitute an arm of the [PFLP] leadership, the main activity of which is the liberation of Palestine and destruction of Israel”, the ministry said. FLD’s report was shared with Forbidden Stories, the French nonprofit that coordinated a recent investigation into NSO and the use of its Pegasus software by its government clients by a consortium of media outlets, including the Guardian. FLD condemned the hacking of the individuals. It examined 75 phones and found that six contained traces of malware specifically associated with Pegasus. FLD also claimed that the hacking of the Palestinians – some of whom are dual nationals – would have allowed authorities to spy on conversations between the individuals and others, including Israeli citizens, who could also have been surveilled. FLD said any such surveillance, if it occurred, would be a breach of Israeli law.It’s quite something, going from sacked by one of last season’s relegated Bundesliga clubs to a new post which offers a second game in charge in the rarefied atmosphere of the Champions League, no less. The perception might be that Florian Kohfeldt has landed on his feet but the early signs are that Wolfsburg are very happy that he did. Saturday’s 1-0 win over Augsburg was a third successive win for the new coach since he arrived in Lower Saxony to replace Mark van Bommel. Kohfeldt was honest about the reality of the performance – “the first 45 minutes was our best first half of the week but in the second half, we couldn’t have complained had they equalised” – but he has every right to enjoy the forthcoming pause for internationals. It may not quite be Peter Stöger leaving rock-bottom Köln mid-season and then taking Borussia Dortmund into the Champions League a few years back, but it has raised the odd eyebrow. The end for Kohfeldt at Werder Bremen wasn’t just the culmination of a lack of success. It was excruciating. Werder had hovered above the trapdoor for a while and when Kohfeldt was dismissed with the team in the relegation playoff spot with just a game left, it was a last resort, with the club bringing back the legendary Thomas Schaaf for a nostalgic short, sharp shock before their last chance (it didn’t work – Werder lost and with other results, were automatically relegated). There was never the suggestion that Kohfeldt was incompetent. Werder sporting director Frank Baumann had even underlined in his statement accompanying news of the coach’s departure his belief that Kohfeldt “is still an excellent coach.” He had, however, been ground down by the pressure of trying to make a Bundesliga giant defy gravity, beset by poor executive management, years of waning results and colossal debt. Kohfeldt had come in fresh-faced and idealistic, wanting a limited Werder to play positive football in the club’s – his club’s – tradition, and he succeeded for a while. He left three-and-a-half years later having been through the wringer. You will need to Google him several times to check and double-check that yes, he is still only 39. Now there is the sense that he and Wolfsburg could be the right fit. A club looking for a philosophy and a coach looking for a viable project. Perhaps before both were looking for love in all the wrong places, as Young MC might have it. His passion has been welcomed in the Wolfsburg dressing room and having to be brave and hit the ground running, with a trip to direct competitors Leverkusen and a Champions League must-win against Salzburg preceding this, has worked out well. “Kohfeldt’s an emotional trainer who encourages us a lot,” said Lukas Nmecha, the scorer in each of the new coach’s three games. “Tactically,” he added with some tact, “it is also a bit clearer.” Nmecha, having scored two very different winning goals through the week (against Salzburg, he chested down a Maxi Arnold pass and smashed it in at the near post, and soared to head in Paulo Otávio’s delivery against Augsburg), is particularly feeling the click with the new coach and the Manchester City academy graduate this week received a call-up from Hansi Flick for Germany’s games against Liechtenstein and Armenia. Together he and Kohfeldt promise to make Die Wölfe less one-dimensional – and less reliant on the talismanic Wout Weghorst – with Kohfeldt finally having the resources he would have given his eye teeth for in his time living off scraps in charge at Weserstadion. In time, Kohfeldt will hope to produce the type of football to fill the Volkswagen Arena – only 16,000 supporters, just over half-capacity, attended Saturday’s game. That may be something to build towards but with so many alluring short-term targets, led by potential Champions League last 16 qualification, this ambitious coach and club don’t have to wait to dream big together. Talking points • Freiburg finally lost their unbeaten record exactly where you would expect, even if they had their moments in Saturday’s narrow loss at Bayern Munich. Leon Goretzka opened the scoring and dominated, with Robert Lewandowski having got his inevitable (and just about onside) goal before Janik Haberer’s too-late reply. In between Christian Streich’s side created enough to keep Manuel Neuer honest. “We can’t do more than we did today,” said the coach. • The international window is arriving at just the right time for Dortmund, flagging in terms of fitness and form and well beaten in Saturday’s late game at Leipzig, despite a relatively modest scoreline of 2-1. Much was made of captain Marco Reus – whose second-half goal briefly gave BVB parity before Yussuf Poulsen’s winner – panning the team’s first-half display and their employment of three at the back. Marco Rose moved to a four-man defence after the break (with injuries dictating Thorgan Hazard filled in at left-back). Sporting director Michael Zorc played down any conflict, calling it “frustration over the defeat. Everything is OK between the two of them.” • Jesse Marsch celebrated with gusto at the end, having insisted before the game that it was time for his team to beat a rival of substance and it clearly felt good, even if Dortmund are currently diminished. He had “expected more from the start of the season,” he admitted, but “it was important for us to finally get more reward for our work.” • Leverkusen’s Gerardo Seoane might have felt a degree of relief, though not quite as much, after Robert Andrich’s badly-needed late equaliser at Hertha prevented a third straight domestic defeat. “Under the current circumstances,” said the coach, “the point feels really good.” They were hassled and roughed up by the spiky Berliners, and it was certainly a growth experience for Iker Bravo and Zidan Sertdemir, the two 16-year-olds who came on as substitutes. • Leverkusen’s local rivals Köln also netted themselves a late point, with Anthony Modeste scoring early and late on while their bogey team Union Berlin caused them a lot of frustration in between. Modeste’s late header was followed by him running to the touchline, stealing coach Steffen Baumgart’s iconic flat cap and dancing in front of him while he wore it (permissible, perhaps, after eight goals already this season). • Goal of the weekend, however, was Milos Pantović’s strike from his own half for Bochum to clinch victory deep into stoppage time against Hoffenheim, a fourth win already this season for last term’s Bundesliga 2 champions. It might not quite have been the equal of the 82-metre strike by Paderborn’s Moritz Stoppelkamp against Hannover in 2014, but it was cool enough. Pantović had already created the opener for fellow sub Soma Novothny when he ran the ball out from a cleared Hoffenheim corner and with the whole Bochum bench exhorting him to run the ball into the corner, he simply swished it into the open net with Oliver Baumann stranded upfield. “I have plenty of confidence in my left foot,” Pantović explained. In between, Bochum goalkeeper Manuel Riemann had missed the chance to seal the points by thrashing a penalty way over the bar. Just a normal Saturday at the Ruhrstadion, then.Although most of us love a spud, how many of us swear allegiance to the tarnished, orange flesh of a swede, the creamy, nutty delights of a parsnip or the bright, white celeriac with its mass of Medusa-like roots? But with a few well-chosen ingredients, these earthy root vegetables are easily transformed. Here, I bake them in a heady, garlicky, thyme-scented cream seasoned with softened onions and melted anchovies, and showered with rosemary- and cheese-flecked crumbs, allowing the roots to sparkle with their rich, velvety goodness. Root gratin with anchovy cream and breadcrumbs Ogleshield and Witheridge are two cheeses whose flavours are exceptional when heated and grilled; parmesan, mature cheddar or Lincolnshire poacher would work wonders here, too. Prep 15 min Cook 1 hr 30 min Serves 6 100g unsalted butter 2 large white onions, peeled and sliced (about 350g) 4 large garlic cloves, peeled and sliced 30g anchovy fillets, roughly chopped 2-3 tbsp thyme leaves Salt and pepper 250ml double cream 300ml chicken or vegetable stock 400g parsnips or swede, peeled and cut into ½cm-thick slices 400g celeriac, peeled and cut into ½cm-thick slices 400g waxy potatoes, such as roosevelt or desiree, peeled and cut into ½cm-thick slices For the breadcrumbs 150g fresh white breadcrumbs 1-2 tbsp thyme leaves A few sprigs rosemary, leaves picked and finely chopped 50-60g freshly grated Ogleshield (or cheddar, Lincolnshire Poacher or parmesan) 3 tbsp olive oil Melt the butter in a wide, fairly shallow ovenproof dish (or just a wide frying pan – if it’s not ovenproof, transfer the mix to one later). Once melted, add the onions, garlic, anchovies and thyme, season generously and cook over a medium-low heat for about 25 minutes while you prepare the root veg. Do not let the onions colour and do not stop until they are meltingly soft. Pour in the cream and stock, heat through and taste to check the seasoning, remembering that the root vegetables will absorb much of the saltiness. Remove from the heat. Heat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/gas 5. Add the sliced vegetables to the onion cream and toss gently to coat (transfer the mix to an ovenproof dish now, if need be). Mix the breadcrumbs, thyme, rosemary and cheese in a bowl, then scatter over the the top of the vegetable mix, season the top lightly and drizzle with the oil. Cover with a lid or foil and bake for 30 minutes. Remove the lid/foil and bake for another 20-25 minutes, until the vegetables are tender and the breadcrumbs golden. Leave to cool slightly before serving with steamed greens and/or sliced ham, roast chicken or a pork chop. The simple flex The anchovy adds delicious saltiness to this indulgent gratin (pancetta cubes would have a similar effect); if you leave them out, stir some mild umami-rich chilli flakes, such as urfa or ancho, lots of black pepper and nutmeg, or even Marmite into the cream. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoWhen the chair of the National Maritime Museum, Charles Dunstone, wrote to the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) to extend Dr Aminul Hoque’s trusteeship into a second four-year term, it was just a formality. The letter, written in the summer of 2020, said Hoque was a valued board member. It did not say that he was the sole non-white trustee. It did not mention his academic position, or his BBC history documentary, or his MBE. There was absolutely no need to say any of that. No one had ever heard of a trusteeship not being extended: it was automatic. An official at the department, however, telephoned Dunstone to say that Hoque’s term would not be renewed. There was no requirement for the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, to justify the decision, they said – however, they pointed out, Hoque had “liked” tweets hostile to the government. That autumn, Dunstone urged Dowden by phone to change his mind. He would not be able to defend the minister’s decision to the museum and fellow trustees. In January, though, Dunstone heard again from the DCMS: Hoque’s trusteeship would definitely not be renewed. Dunstone, honourably, resigned. For a giddy moment the other trustees, so I was told, considered going en masse – their “I’m Spartacus!” moment – until they realised that doing so would offer the government the chance to stuff the board with its chosen people. Bear in mind that Dunstone, the billionaire founder of TalkTalk, and his colleagues – among them a retired first sea lord and the then head of Lloyd’s Register – were as far from “woke warriors” as can be imagined. For his part, “I was shocked, disappointed and baffled,” Hoque told me. “People should draw their own conclusions as to whether my previous academic research and writing contributed to the government’s actions.” (A DCMS spokesperson told me: “There is no automatic presumption of reappointment, and ministers may decide to make a reappointment or launch a campaign to attract fresh talent.”) I’ve had my own little trawl through Hoque’s tweets. There’s a lot of enthusiasm for the England football team. There’s also a bit about British history, which, he suggested, “needs to be rewritten to include the stories of its ethnic minorities and acknowledge their important contribution to the development of the British national story. #decolonize #inclusive #multiplestories.” Pretty mild stuff – but the sort of thing that’s a red flag to this “culture wars”-obsessed government. Appointing political allies to influential public positions is nothing new. Under Thatcher, the Conservative Marmaduke Hussey became BBC chair; under New Labour it was Gavyn Davies, who had once worked for Harold Wilson and James Callaghan. “What is different now,” said Peter Riddell recently, “is the breadth of the campaign and the close engagement of 10 Downing Street.” Until September Riddell was commissioner for public appointments, in charge of ensuring the system’s fairness. The government, in short, is going in hard to shape English public bodies in its image. This project is being pushed forward shamelessly – as in the case of Ofcom, where the process to appoint a chair is being rerun so that the favoured, but initially rejected, former Mail editor Paul Dacre can have another crack. In the arena of the arts, what is seen as a left-of-centre consensus born of the Blair and Brown years has been targeted for fixing. The arts have become a battleground where ideas of national image, heritage and history are fought over. At the heart of No 10, there’s an intense dislike of the politics of identity, and a loathing of the suggestion that the British imperial project was harmful. That’s partly born of the assumption that anything that even hints at a lack of patriotism is a turn-off to the voters of the “red wall”. A look at the board of the National Portrait Gallery in London gives a sense of how this might be going: the museum in charge of presenting England’s image back to itself, and currently in the throes of a major redisplay, has on its board Chris Grayling; Jacob Rees-Mogg (the leader of the House of Commons is an automatic appointment); and Inaya Folarin Iman, the culture and social affairs editor of the rightwing GB News. The chair is David Ross, who “facilitated” Boris and Carrie Johnson’s infamous Mustique holiday. Behind this campaign of realignment is Munira Mirza, Boris Johnson’s culture adviser when he was mayor of London, now head of No 10’s policy unit, and her husband, Tory fixer Dougie Smith. The trawling of tweets is not just about risk-assessing inflammatory or offensive things buried deep in a person’s feed, but fishing for disloyalty. One person who recently sat as an independent member of an interview panel told me that their attention was drawn to one candidate’s tweet that was unfavourable about Brexit. “I’ll pretend I didn’t hear that,” they told me they replied. The government, it is pretty clear, doesn’t have a great deal of time for rules, or established practice, or the unspoken liberal norms that have traditionally funnelled behaviour into commonly accepted channels. Kicking out Hoque wasn’t the done thing, but since it was possible, it did it. You’re not supposed to leak the names of favoured candidates before a public appointments process begins, but it did with Dacre for Ofcom. The process itself is designed to be transparent and rigorous: it involves an interview panel containing at least one independent member and chaired by a civil servant. The panel will name who it considers the best candidate, alongside one or two others deemed “appointable”. Riddell has voiced concerns about ministers ignoring recommendations and selecting candidates deemed “unappointable”; there has already been an attempt to do this, he said recently. Johnson has form; when he was mayor, he tried to insist that the former Evening Standard editor Veronica Wadley became chair of the Arts Council London, despite the interview panel having rejected her. (Blocked at the time by Labour culture secretary Ben Bradshaw, she later got the job under the then Tory culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt.) How much does all this matter? Boards of trustees are innately conservative: that institutional stolidity might act as some protection from the radicalism of the right as much as it frustrates those on the left who wish for change. The direct influence of No 10 on arts institutions does not extend deep into the arts (and not much beyond England’s borders): aside from national museums, Arts Council England and a handful of others, English arts organisations are in charge of appointing their own board members. However – and unarguably once the BBC is brought into the equation – those that do fall under direct government influence happen to be especially influential ones. The most important job of trustees is to select directors of organisations, and as Tory influence deepens on boards this may begin to have its impact on the way institutions are run and what the public sees. In the meantime, don’t expect museum high-ups to utter the Tory trigger-word “decolonise” any time soon; an institutional caution around certain areas – the empire, slavery – may put them into conflict with their own audiences and even their workforces, many of whose younger members are increasingly impatient with structural inequalities. More generally, the climate created by a government obsessed by “culture wars” is profoundly damaging. When staff members from a rather dull institution such as Historic England – in charge of listing buildings and monuments – receive threats from the far right, there’s something amiss with the body politic. The Tories should be very careful what they wish for. Charlotte Higgins is the Guardian’s chief culture writerThere’s the album cover with the band as rabbits, or the one with a harmony duo walking out of water dressed only in their underwear and ties, but surely the most baffling is the concert guitarist pictured in dinner jacket and no trousers. Why? “I’ve no idea, sorry,” says Steve Goldman, who owns about 300 records that can lay claim to having some of the world’s worst cover art. Goldman, 55, has been obsessively collecting the records for five years and this week shares them with the public in a display in Huddersfield, raising money for charity and asking visitors to vote for their favourites. It is a collection that stems back to a 20-year-old Goldman coming across an album by a little-remembered band called Peter Rabbitt. Titled Roadstar, it featured the grinning band members’ faces superimposed on to rabbit pictures. “It was such a bad cover that I bought it, I think for 10 pence,” he says. Goldman, a computer programmer, subsequently lost the album, and when the internet came along he tried to find another copy. “Of course, searching for Peter Rabbitt brought nothing but Beatrix Potter.” Then he discovered the website discogs.com, found Roadstar again, and so began a mission. “I remember saying to my family: I’m going to start collecting disastrous LP covers. They approved.” Goldman says he gets about half the albums via discogs.com and the rest come from him and his family rooting around charity shops and flea markets. Top of his criteria, he says, is that “it has to be funny, it has to make me laugh”. Another rule is that the album is not self-published. “For example, there are plenty of American families from the deep south who in the 60s and 70s put out their own efforts, so I want a record company or a designer to be involved.” Also, “there’s plenty of terrible album covers but a lot of them are sexist or racist or homophobic. None of them are in my collection,” he adds. Goldman, who had a stroke 18 months ago, is staging the exhibition in aid of Different Strokes, a charity helping younger stroke survivors. It is proving popular – “we had about 250 people in on Saturday,” he says – and he hopes to tour the display in the future. His favourites change day to day but high up is an album by Duduca &amp; Dalvan titled Massa Falida. It shows Duduca and Dalvan walking out of water naked bar briefs and ties. In a triangle there is a girl dressed as an angel. “I really, really don’t know what is going on.” The Worst Record Covers in the World is at the Piazza shopping centre in Huddersfield until 14 November.A Scottish anti-independence campaign group was given £46,000 from an obscure organisation that might have breached political fundraising guidelines, the Guardian can reveal. Scotland Matters, a pro-union group registered with the Electoral Commission, the elections regulator, received two donations of £21,000 and £25,000 earlier this year from a little-known organisation called the Centre for Economic Education and Training (Ceet). Those donations were made in the run-up to the Holyrood elections in May and were the largest made to a third-party organisation during the campaign, but very little is known about the group behind them. The Ceet faces possible sanctions from the Electoral Commission as it did not register with them despite spending more than £25,000 in a calendar year – the threshold at which third-party political campaign groups must register with the commission. After the Guardian flagged the donations, a commission spokesperson said: “We will be seeking to obtain information from the Centre for Economic Education and Training to clarify its status and whether it is subject to any political finance requirements.” The Ceet does not publicly list its membership, its sources of funding or its purpose, and uses a London postal address that houses a virtual office service, an asset management firm and a number of other companies. When the Guardian visited the address, staff working in the building said they had not heard of the organisation. The lack of clarity over the source of these donations has raised questions over the use of what is alleged to be hard-to-trace “dark money” by anti-independence campaigners in Scotland and pro-union groups in Northern Ireland, where the identities of donors are obscured by the use of unincorporated associations. The commission has previously fined unincorporated associations that funded prominent Scottish Conservatives. The Scottish Unionist Association Trust (Suat) donated £364,000 to Tory candidates but failed to properly report all its funding, and was fined £1,800 in 2019. Irvine Unionist Club was fined £400 in 2018 after not properly reporting donations of £100,000. Pete Wishart, a Scottish National party MP and campaigner for stricter funding regulations, said there was an urgent need for the UK’s political funding laws to be tightened up. Full transparency was needed over the sources of all political donations, particularly anonymous supporters of unincorporated associations. “The way unincorporated associations work is unacceptable. This needs close examination. Far more scrutiny by our electoral regulators is needed to check their background and make sure they’re bona fide,” he said. Willie Sullivan, the director of the Electoral Reform Society Scotland, said: “As the role of third-party campaigners continues to grow, their influence is being felt more clearly than ever before. But these funding practices are making it more difficult for voters to know who lies behind the campaigns they see and harder to ensure spending limits are not breached.” Scotland Matters is one of a number of small groups that have sprung up to motivate pro-UK voters, chiefly using Facebook, advertising hoardings and mailings to attack the Scottish National party and the case for independence. Along with other pro-UK groups, it urged anti-independence voters to use tactical voting in important marginal constituencies – a tactic pollster John Curtice said helped prevent the SNP winning an overall majority in May. The Ceet is an “unincorporated association”, a kind of non-profit membership club, according to Scotland Matters’ returns to the Electoral Commission. Unincorporated associations are not regulated by Companies House and under existing regulations do not have to publish any financial information or details on their membership. A spokesperson for Scotland Matters said it had “provided all the donor information required by the Electoral Commission as part of [a] post-campaign return to the commission”. The Ceet has not responded to requests for a response. Scotland Matters paid for Facebook ads through the pro-union pages “SNP Exposed” and “The UK Union Voice”, as well as billboards before the Holyrood election. It was set up by former activists in the official Better Together pro-UK campaign in the north east of Scotland during the 2014 independence referendum. Among its members are Prof Hugh Pennington, emeritus professor of bacteriology at Aberdeen University, and David Bone, the director of a financial services firm in Glasgow. Two-thirds of donations to third-party campaigns in May’s Holyrood elections were from unnamed sources, Guardian analysis has found. Campaigners received £165,000 in total – of which £111,000 came from anonymous sources, including the Ceet.Valencia fans started chanting Hugo Duro’s name years before he ever played for them. A cult hero when he wasn’t even at the club, it wasn’t just the fans – it was the players as well – and it wasn’t just the songs, either; it was the banners and shirts too. It was also an accident. It was then, anyway, but not this time. This time they were going wild for all the right reasons and he joined in, running towards the corner and throwing himself to the ground, tumbling to the turf as everyone rightly lost it on Sunday afternoon, after he had done something no one had ever done in La Liga: scored twice in added time to avoid defeat. Like a comic book character with a comic book moniker, ‘Hugo Hard’ had rescued them when all was lost, and against the champions, too. He had only come on in the 86th minute and touched the ball three times, but two of those had gone in the net, a superb volley in the 92nd minute and a header on 95.26 seeing Valencia come from 3-1 down to draw 3-3, another absurd comeback in another crazy weekend. First it had been Iago Aspas, scoring the 97th-minute equaliser against Barcelona on Saturday afternoon. Now, 24 hours later, it was him. “Hugo …” bellowed the PA announcer. “Duro!” they replied. Hugo … Duro! Hugo … Duro! Hugo … Duro!” He had been here before. Almost exactly here, in fact. On the same corner of the same six-yard box. He was only 18 that night and he never forgot, not least because they wouldn’t let him, forced to listen to those same words over and over. It happened in the spring of 2019, during extra time in the second leg of the Copa del Rey quarter-final between Valencia and Getafe, the club Duro joined at the age of five and where he was starting to make his way in the first team. That night, at the end of a startingly brutal encounter, another chapter in a new and unexpectedly edgy rivalry, he made a name for himself. Or maybe they made it for him. Getafe had won the first leg 1-0 at the Coliseum and had gone 1-0 up in the opening minute of the second leg. Rodrigo Moreno, though, had equalised on the hour to make it 1-1 and he scored again in the 92nd minute. The comeback was dramatic enough already but it still wasn’t done. Getafe had held on; now they let go, throwing everything at Valencia. In the 93rd minute Jorge Molina went running through to score the goal that would have ended it, sending Getafe through and Valencia out. His shot was on target but it hit Duro, his own teammate, on the edge of the six-yard box. Suddenly, Valencia were away, heading straight up the pitch where Rodrigo scored again. From the ball hitting Duro at one end and the net at the other, 11 seconds had passed. It was all over bar the fighting — and there was lots of that. Valencia went on to win the cup in their centenary year. It might not have been people on the pitch, Víctor Hugo Morales asking which planet that cosmic kite had come from, or even the goal from Abreu, but the commentary of the goal was quite something, the perfect portrait of the moment — and soon it was everywhere. “There goes Jorge Molina, galloping forward like he was a kid,” Miguel-Ángel Román began, voice getting quicker and quicker until – “still Jorge Molina, who heads into the area, he can shoot ... his shot ... it hit Hugo Duro! It hit Hugo Duro, who denied his teammate a goal! And now Valencia respond straight away. How beautiful football is when it goes mad ... Gameiro sends it into the area, Rodrigoooo! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow!” ‘Tocó Hugo Duro ... y gol de Valencia’ became a line. ‘It hit Hugo Duro ... goal for Valencia’, which handily can also mean: ‘Hugo Duro hit it … goal for Valencia’. At the Copa del Rey final, some Valencia fans had T-shirts done up with the commentary on the back, a group of mates taking a line each. Other shirts were printed with name and number: Duro 92. A banner at Mestalla read: Tocó Hugo Duro. At the celebrations after the final, Gabriel Paulista took the mic and rapped it out, laughing his head off. Duro’s agents didn’t see the funny side, issuing a public statement demanding an apology for mocking their client. “A commentary is not a lack of respect,” Gabriel replied, although that depends who’s commentating. “We continue”. And so, they did. Duro did too. That autumn, Valencian sports paper Super Deporte, never one to knowingly conduct itself with dignity, asked where is he now, this figure of fun. That season he played 12 league games for Getafe, only one more than the year before, and made 23 appearances for the B-team. It might have felt like his progress was slowing. Interrupted by the pandemic, Getafe’s certainly was. Last season he went on loan to Real Madrid B — a curious choice for someone for whom the breakthrough could be coming. There was a remarkable coldness and clarity to his thought process, and at Valdebebas he did get some first-team minutes too – including in the Champions League. In total, he played three times with the first team, 19 times with the B team. This summer Duro joined Valencia on loan, having already played one game for Getafe – against Valencia. No one had really foreseen that either, más few saw him getting really significant chances — not with Maxi Gómez ahead of him and Valencia signing Marcos André. Then again, Valencia’s new manager was José Bordalás, his former coach at Getafe. “He changes you,” Duro said. “He squeezes everything out of you. At Getafe we were already talking about it, saying: ‘what a bastard the boss is, eh, he’s reviving Valencia already. He knows exactly what he wants. He only asks you for two things: to run and sacrifice yourself.’” And that’s Duro, “a team player” as his manager put it last night. Since heading to Mestalla, the striker leads the league on one metric – no one presses better than him. When he got there, they were waiting for him. “They remind me of that every day,” he told AS. “I don’t mind the jokes, and the shirts were quite funny. Hopefully one day there will be a headline that says: ‘Tocó Hugo Duro y gol de Valencia’.” One day like today. No one was going to pass up the pun, Super Deport going for “striker puro y duro” (a real, hard striker) and “hard but real”, and Marca choosing “Duro, duro”, a hard defeat for Atlético to digest. Only AS’s Conrado Valle went for “Tocó Hugo Duro ... twice.” He had been on the pitch five minutes when he scored the first one, guiding a wonderful volley into the net from José Luis Gayá’s perfect cross. Then, in the 96th minute, from right by where Molina’s shot had hit him in 2019, he scored a header. It was his fourth goal of the season in seven starts – 10 appearances in total, and he has a habit of turning up against the big opponents: his previous two had been against Real Madrid and Sevilla. But those weren’t like this – Valencia lost both games. They looked set to lose this one too. Valencia have struggled, their early revival grinding to a halt after three wins and a draw in their opening four games. Bordalás was projected as the man they had been waiting for, Duro’s goal put them one up against Madrid, only for them to concede twice in the last four minutes. That was the start of a seven-game winless run and although they finally beat Villarreal 2-0 last weekend, they seemed to set to end pointless again on Sunday. A Stefan Savic own goal cancelled out Luis Suárez’s clever opener but a sensational strike from Antoine Griezmann put Atlético back into the lead and then Sime Vrsaljko bundled in the third. It was done, a quiet descending at Mestalla. With four minutes to go Diego Simeone replaced Suárez, Ángel Correa and Rodrigo de Paul with Héctor Herrera, João Félix and Geoffrey Kondogbia to see out the final minutes. Instead, they threw them out. It was the fifth time in six games that Atlético had conceded two or more. “Always the same,” João Félix muttered as the equaliser went in. Simeone rested his head on the top of the dugout, barely able to believe it. “My fault”, he said afterwards. Duro’s too. Bordalás, who this week will travel to meet the owner Peter Lim, was still not happy — “the team looks more like what I want but I’m not satisfied. We’re haemorrhaging goals; we can’t have conceded 20 already,” he said – but this was still an explosion of joy, the kind of moment, the kind of result, that could change things. Especially for the striker himself. A moment to remember him by, and at the end his teammates made straight for him. They weren’t laughing this time. Actually, yes, they were. This time though, he was laughing with them. “I could see tired players but the fans gave us extra strength where there was none,” Duro said. “I only touched the ball twice. I hear that [line] every day; let’s hope I hear it every weekend.” When the second went in and everyone embraced him, Hugo Duro lifted the shoulders of his shirt so that they could see the name – but they already knew. They have known for a long time.Rich countries must hit their $100bn climate finance target in the last week of Cop26 or it will be catastrophic for the poorest nations suffering the most from the climate crisis, the Gambian environment minister has warned. In an interview with the Guardian as he prepared to leave for Glasgow, Lamin B Dibba urged developed countries to finally honour the annual funding commitment that was made 12 years ago at the Copenhagen climate summit (Cop15) – but which has never been achieved. “We [the world’s least-developed countries] bear the biggest brunt of the impact of climate change and we would like to see the commitment that was taken by the developed countries be fulfilled,” he said. If the $100bn (£75bn) target was not reached, he added, the consequences for those nations would be grave. “It would be catastrophic because we need those resources,” Dibba said. The leaders of the wealthiest countries at Cop26 are reported to be scrambling to reach the $100bn figure, with Boris Johnson keen for positive announcements after criticism of the summit’s lack of progress. Poor countries were given about $80bn (£60bn) in climate finance in 2019, the latest year for which full data is available, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The Gambia, Africa’s smallest mainland country, has been praised by some for its plans to tackle the climate crisis. A recent analysis found it to be the only “Paris-compatible” country in the world, with plans for keeping to the goal of limiting global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels by 2100. But Dibba said that without a hefty injection of climate finance and other support it would be difficult for the west African nation to respond properly. He called on richer countries to increase their ambition, warning that unless they did, Gambian efforts would be in vain. “We have our long-term vision but we would also want to see [it] on the part of the developed nations, because without that all the efforts we are doing will be negated by the impact of their economic activities,” he said. Coastal and low-lying, the Gambia has been suffering the impact of climate change for years. Its farmers have seen crop yields decrease due to irregular rainfall; its tourist industry is grappling with beach erosion; and many residents, particularly the poorest, face regular flooding and other natural disasters. Dibba wants to see greater investment in resilience and adaptation programmes to build the capacity of vulnerable communities to withstand extreme climate events, “so that whatever happens they will be able to weather the shock.” He says developing countries do need to be inward-looking as well as focusing their demands on richer nations, and says the Gambia is building its own national climate fund with initial investment coming from the government. But without the financial and technical support of the big global powers, countries such as the Gambia, which is responsible for less than 0.01% of annual global emissions, fear they will continue to suffer disproportionately from a crisis they did very little to create. “It’s important we shift the paradigm from ‘business as usual’ to a more realistic plan for the entire globe,” said Dibba. “Because if they [the richer countries] don’t, what will happen? Yes, we will suffer, and the Gambia is emitting 0.01% of greenhouse gases. But the consequence, the economic damage, the cost to society … you quantify this.” Additional reporting by Omar WallyNeil Kenlock, the British Black Panther movement’s official photographer, has been found after he went missing on Saturday, according to reports. Kenlock’s Instagram page announced on the early hours of Monday that the 70-year-old, who co-founded Choice FM in the early 1990s, had been located “and is now safe and home with his family”. “He has been found thanks God. He is OK. Thank you everyone so much for searching for him,” the post said. The Guardian has contacted friends and family of Kenlock. Police had launched a missing persons appeal for Kenlock, who also sometimes goes by the name Emile and is known to be hard of hearing, after he was last seen at Waterloo railway station in London at 6pm on 6 November. In an appeal shared on Twitter on Sunday night, Lambeth borough police said: “Please help police finding #missing Neil aged 70. Neil also goes by the name Emile. He was last seen at Waterloo train station at 6pm on 6 November. He is wearing this hat as seen in his photo. If you see Neil please call 999 quote 21MIS034674.” A separate appeal for information was shared on the photographer’s personal Instagram account earlier on Sunday. The @neilkenlockphotographer account shared a picture of Kenlock wearing a distinctive hat, a dark jacket and a light blue face mask, accompanied by the caption: “Have you seen Neil? He didn’t come home and his family haven’t seen him since yesterday evening in the Waterloo station in London Area. “Please share and look out for him. He also can’t hear very well. Send us a message if you know his whereabouts. Thank you all.” Kenlock was born in Port Antonio, Jamaica, where he lived with his grandmother until 1963, when he made his journey to England 14 years after his parents. He became involved with the British Black Panther movement – activists who fought for racial equality in the UK – in the late 1960s and 70s, before eventually becoming the group’s official photographer. He has documented anti-racist protests and demonstrations, building an archive of thousands of photographs depicting the ongoing struggle for equality. Choice FM, now Capital Xtra, was Britain’s first licensed radio station playing music of black origin 24 hours a day.Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla and world’s richest person, asked his 62.8 million Twitter followers over the weekend whether he should sell $21bn (£15.5bn) worth of shares in the electric car company in order to pay tax. Tweeting he would “abide by the results of this poll, whichever way it goes”, 58% of those who responded said “yes”, he should sell the shares, sending Tesla’s share price down 5% in pre-market trading on Monday. Why did he do it? Musk, who is sitting on a paper fortune of more than $338bn in Tesla and Space-X shares, proposed selling 10% of his Tesla shares in order to generate enough money to pay a proposed “billionaires tax” on “unrealised capital gains”. He said that as he did not “take a cash salary or bonus from anywhere” the only way for him to “pay taxes personally” was to sell stock. However, he has made billions through a bonus scheme that granted him share options based on Telsa’s share price performance. What is the billionaires tax and what are unrealised capital gains? Democrats in Congress have proposed tackling the yawning gap between the wealthiest Americans and everyone else by introducing a tax that billionaires would pay on the annual increase in the value of stocks and shares they own. At the moment, tax is only due when gains are “realised”, which means the holder only pays when they sell the stock and book the profit. Ron Wyden, the Democratic senator from Oregon who chairs of the Senate finance committee, said the proposed tax, which would affect the 700 wealthiest people in the US, would “ensure billionaires pay tax every year, just like working Americans”. “Whether or not the world’s wealthiest man pays any taxes at all shouldn’t depend on the results of a Twitter poll,” he said of Musk’s poll. Why did the Tesla shares fall after the poll result? Almost 58% of the 3.5 million people who voted said Musk should sell the stake. The result was revealed on Sunday night (while the market was closed), however Tesla’s shares fell by 7% pre-market trading on Monday, before recovering to about 5% down. Michael Hewson, the chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said: “Early indications suggest that the shares could fall sharply on the open [9:30am New York time 14:30 in London], however it’s not as if Musk will now go and dump them on the open market. He could well drip feed them into the market over time. “The fact that he’s got buy-in from his fans on social media will also dilute the impact of the sale and while we may see some early weakness, the shares are due a bit of a pullback anyway.” Does Musk have to stand by the vote, and sell the shares? Musk tweeted he would abide by the result said was “prepared to accept either outcome”. He owns about 17% of Tesla’s shares, which are worth about $208bn based on Friday’s closing price. If he went ahead and sold a tenth of them in one go it could well depress the price. But this is unlikely, company bosses often use so-called blind brokering where the shares are sold on their behalf in small batches over a period of time. This means they can avoid claims they benefited from insider information in the timing of the sale. Musk could find himself in trouble with regulators if he does not follow through and sell the shares, because announcing his intention to sell has affected the share price. Doesn’t he already have form for getting into trouble with regulators over his tweets? Yes. Musk and Tesla were fined $20m each in 2018 for misleading investors with tweets saying he was considering taking the company private at $420 a share and had “funding secured”. The US Securities and Exchange Commission said the tweet, which sent the share price up by as much as 13.3%, violated securities laws. Musk’s privatisation plan was at best in an early stage and financing was not in place. He also agreed to resign as chair of Tesla, and have the company’s lawyers pre-approve written communications, including tweets. But didn’t Musk carry on tweeting anyway? Yes. After the SEC’s 2018 action, he tweeted that the $20m fines were “worth it”. The regulator later said Tesla had twice violated the settlement requiring Musk’s tweets to be signed off by its lawyers. “Tesla has abdicated the duties required of it by the court’s order,” the SEC told the carmaker in May 2020.Bed occupancy in England’s hospitals has already reached normal peak winter levels, NHS leaders have warned. While modelling suggests that the rise in Covid infection levels appears to have stalled for now, the chief executive of NHS Providers has stressed that bed occupancy levels at acute hospitals are already at 94-96%, an “unprecedented” situation not normally seen until the middle of winter. It comes as long waiting times in England’s emergency departments are becoming normal, with the number of patients waiting for more than 12 hours increasing tenfold since 2019. Meanwhile, the NHS is undergoing a mounting workforce crisis and an enormous backlog of routine treatments that have built up over the pandemic. Six healthcare workers have described the pressures they are facing at the moment, highlighting staff shortages, rising wait times and abuse toward NHS workers. ‘Abuse towards staff is through the roof’: GP practice manager, south-west Scotland I’ve lost seven receptionists this year, including one who left for a job in retail, and I don’t think there’s been one week where I’ve had a full admin team, whether for Covid, other sickness, stress or leave. Staff resilience is at its lowest – a lot of them have been sick themselves during the pandemic or had family members being ill, and it feels as though there’s a lack of awareness of that for a lot of patients. Patients are saying: “I can go to a nightclub, so why can’t I just come and see the doctor?” There’s been a misrepresentation – we’ve not stopped face-to-face appointments. But obviously, we’ve still got a lot of patients who are at high risk, so we can’t have everyone in the waiting room. Abuse towards staff is through the roof. It’s been bad since the start of this year – people seem to be so used to living in a service world where if you complain, you get a better service. There have been physical threats – there have been times where if a receptionist has left work for the day, we ask them to text us when they get home because you don’t know who might be waiting outside. We’ve got GPs who’ve been here for decades who are running out of reasons not to retire and become a locum – they can make a lot of money right now. I’ve thought I could leave the NHS and train to be an HGV driver and not have to deal with the abuse, the endless backlog of paperwork and constant change of protocols. ‘A four- to five-hour wait in the ambulance has become standard’: paramedic, the Midlands One of my colleagues worked a 19.5 hour shift recently, that’s 7.5 hours late coming off their shift because they were queueing in the ambulance [outside the hospital] for eight hours. Ambulances are no longer just for accidents and emergencies; the problem is a shortage of other systems that used to be in place, which have been stripped back, like district care nurses and mental health services, so ambulances are now also doing the care in the community work and a lot of mental health jobs. It’s creating really unsafe conditions for patients and staff. A lack of social care services mean we get a lot of calls out to elderly people who have fallen or who have infections because there’s no one going round changing their catheters. Falls are categorised as low-priority incidents, which means by the time we get to them, the elderly person has often been on the floor for hours, in pain and desperate for the loo. In the last couple of months, a four- to five-hour wait in the ambulance has become standard. It used to be an hour. There’s a lot of time-wasting calls, people ringing up with things that don’t need an ambulance, and you’ve got people who can’t get GP appointments. At the start of Covid, people were just coping and not calling ambulances but as things get back to “normal”, people are expecting normal service everywhere. I think a lot of paramedics are leaving because it’s just too much. The frustration of not seeing this problem resolved is quite demoralising. ‘We’ve had six nurses resign in the last couple of months’: A&amp;E consultant, south-east England After low numbers of A&amp;E attendances during lockdown, we’ve seen a sharp rise following the end of restrictions over summer. We got very busy, very quickly and we’re not staffed to see that number of people. It’s the usual A&amp;E stuff – heart attacks, strokes, car accidents – as well as a lot of overspill from people who can’t access primary care services. They go to the nearest A&amp;E because then they know they’ll get seen face-to-face, and that’s led to rising waits and a lot of pressure on our services. About a third of our daily footfall could be seen by primary care – things like long-term health issues, high blood pressure, rashes. After not having any Covid walk-ins over spring, the numbers have crept up over summer, but it’s not a deluge in A&amp;E. There are shortages of nurses and doctors in emergency medicine. We’re working flat out. We’ve got long waiting times and that really impacts on the staff – we can’t give the quality of service we want to give to our patients. We’ve had six nurses resign in the last couple of months, and trained nurses are hard to find, so losing them is a big blow – it’s tricky to replace them quickly. The physical fatigue from working in a very pressured environment has become more intense and more frequent. There are no lulls, there’s no kind of time to regenerate and get your breath back. It’s just constant, 24 hours a day. And then there’s the moral injury of not being able to provide the service that you want to provide for the patients – that does really hurt people. Seeing 10- to 12-hour waits is no longer unusual. ‘We’ve got a generation of under-twos who have never been ill’: paediatrician, east of England We are seeing higher numbers of attendances through the children’s emergency department than we’ve ever seen before and the numbers go up week on week. We’ve been seeing the winter stuff early, which was a post lockdown effect – children have been locked away for 18 months and haven’t had contact with all of normal coughs and colds and viruses around so we’ve had a surge of winter viruses. We’ve also got a generation of under-twos who have never been ill before, and who have no immunity to normal respiratory viruses. We’re routinely having wait times of between four and eight hours overnight at the moment, which for the children’s department is worse than ever. In teenagers the biggest rise has been in mental health presentations. We’ve seen a lot higher numbers than we would normally expect to see for this time of year of young people with self-harm and overdoses. Normally, these patients may be briefly admitted on to a normal paediatric ward, but not for more than a night before going on to be managed in the community or a mental health unit – but those beds are very hard to come by at the moment. So patients get stuck in paediatric wards. I’ve seen more “red” levels of staffing in the last month than I’ve seen in a long time, not least because we have lots of staff with school-age kids and lots of kids are off with Covid at the moment. I have four nurses off sick with stress – this isn’t normal, it would normally be none. ‘We’re massively overcrowded’: critical care nurse in intensive care, the Midlands Pressure on the intensive therapy unit (ITU) has started to really pick up over the last three weeks. It’s Covid as well as trauma patients – people with injuries from bad falls, car accidents. We’re massively overcrowded and are having to push into other units, which aren’t made for critical care patients – like we had to do in the second wave. We’re expecting to be hit a bit later down the line, as patients have to deteriorate before they get to us. If we do get flu patients and Covid patients, that will be a major problem. Most of the Covid patients we’re seeing in ITU are unvaccinated – we’re seeing anti-vaxxers, as well as people who have recently come to the UK and haven’t had a vaccine yet, pregnant patients and immunosuppressed people, including cancer patients and people who have had organ transplants. We’ve pretty much always got one nurse to two patients, which isn’t normal, it should be one to one, and now we’re starting to have to triple people up – three patients to one nurse. We’ve got a massive loss of staff to sickness – quite a lot of us have been off with Covid. The other day we were down by 10 nurses on a shift. The majority are off with stress or having to self-isolate because of their kids. It’s hard because you feel quite guilty if you don’t go into work, so there’s always that pressure there. Most days managers are asking if people are free to cover shifts. We lost a lot of staff during the second wave because people realised it’s going to be going on for the foreseeable future. It’s always been a constant joke that we’d be better off working at Aldi, but I think recently a lot of people have actually looked at these jobs a little bit more. ‘We haven’t even hit the peak – it’s only going to get worse’: social worker on hospital discharge team, north-west England We are unable to discharge people once they’re well enough to leavehospital because of the lack of care workers, both in care homes and in the community. This has got worse in the last two to three months. The other week we had more than 30 people at once considered “medically optimised” but unable to leave hospital because of the shortage. This is three times the number we had six months ago. Care home providers are being picky with which patients they agree to take on – they don’t want people with high-level needs, we see providers rejecting people because they’re low on the ground with staff and demand for care is so high that they can cherrypick who they take. This ends up with people with high care and support needs remaining in hospital indefinitely. On average, the wait is two weeks before patients who need care can be discharged at my hospital, but there have been cases where patients have been waiting as long as eight weeks. It’s felt like winter pressure all year round and we haven’t even hit the peak – it’s only going to get worse. We’ve got fantastic people who are working above and beyond but it’s just this lack of provision.Downing Street has argued that Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, should not investigate who paid for the renovation of Boris Johnson’s flat, in the latest apparent attempt to exert pressure on the independent regulator. Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said there was no need for Stone to look into the matter as the No 10 flat was not connected to the prime minister’s role as an MP, prompting Labour to warn that it was vital the matter was properly scrutinised. “It is not for the prime minister or cabinet ministers to decide what the independent anti-corruption commissioner investigates,” said Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader. Meanwhile, Johnson said it would be up to a future cross-party process led in part by the Commons Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, to determine whether MPs should have second jobs, in the wake of the resignation of the Tory MP Owen Paterson. Speaking on a visit to Northumberland, Johnson said he hoped there would be “cross-party agreement on a way forward, including an appeals process for very difficult and very sad cases such as the ones we’ve seen”. Asked if MPs should be able to have second jobs, after Paterson was found to have breached lobbying rules in working for two companies, Johnson said: “All those kinds of things are issues that the Speaker’s panel – or whatever he sets up – are going to have a look at.” Hoyle is expected to set out his plans before an emergency Commons debate on the issue on Monday afternoon. Johnson will miss the debate, as No 10 said he was taking the train to and from Northumberland rather than flying. Last week Johnson decided not to declare the cost of a free holiday in Spain at a luxury villa owned by the family of Zac Goldsmith, the former Tory MP whom Johnson made a peer and junior minister. Johnson listed the near week-long stay in the Marbella property in October in the register of ministerial interests, But on Friday No 10 said that as the villa was provided by another minister, he did not also need to declare it in the separate register of MPs’ interests. Unlike the ministerial equivalent, this gives monetary values for gifts and donations. On Sunday the environment secretary, George Eustice, argued that the refurbishment of Johnson’s No 10 flat – for which Johnson was loaned at least £58,000 from Conservative party funds – was also “clearly a ministerial issue”. Johnson’s spokesperson, when asked if the prime minister believed Stone should be able to investigate the flat refurbishment, said: “Obviously it’s a matter for her on that. The interest, as you know, has been transparently declared by the prime minister following advice from Lord Geidt, the independent adviser. “And the Commons rulebook is very clear that such ministerial code declarations do not need to be double-declared. And the flat was clearly a ministerial matter, as the PM only occupies it by virtue of his office.” The spokesperson reiterated that the cost of the Spanish holiday would not be formally declared. “It’s for the commissioner to decide and set out her rationale. That holiday has been declared in the appropriate manner, as we set out last week,” he said. Stone has been placed under considerable government pressure in recent days. After her ruling that Paterson had broken rules on paid lobbying was overturned in a government-led Commons vote, the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, indicated that she should step down. Labour has called for an investigation into Kwarteng’s comments. When asked on Monday whether she backed Kwarteng’s view, the international trade secretary, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, said Stone “needs to be allowed to get on with her job”.Congress’s passage on Friday of Joe Biden’s infrastructure bill would ordinarily have been a cause for celebration. But there is a good chance it was the beginning of the end of his presidency. After all, the bill’s final days marked a new consensus around a centrist set of economic remedies, chosen out of fears of what will supposedly happen when progressives with a transformative agenda exercise too much influence on the Democratic party agenda. Only 10 months ago, Biden came into office with great expectations – but greater terrors. Even more apparent at the start than now, Biden’s presidency has been defined by fear rather than hope. With the assault on the Capitol earlier in the month, the culmination of a four-year deathwatch for American democracy, the emergency could hardly evaporate overnight. With Donald Trump temporarily ousted, his replacement also drew 1930s comparisons. The question “is he or isn’t he?” had been asked of Biden’s predecessor for four years. To redeem the country from the fascist, was Biden going to be Franklin Roosevelt? Like FDR, Biden led Democrats who have rightly stressed economic transformation for the sake of the poor and vulnerable but also for the angry and disaffected voters of the stagnating middle. But unlike Roosevelt, Biden’s coalition is fragile and fissures emerged to threaten his success almost from the start – fissures that broke it apart definitively last week even in the midst of Biden’s infrastructure victory. Other causes were forced to the margins along the way. Biden subordinated even critical fixes to American democracy, like reforms of courts and elections, to the economic agenda. As for his immigration policies, which mostly resembled the disgusting ones of prior presidents, they were treated with a partisan silence, provoking rage among the few principled enough to demand fewer cruelties and restrictions no matter who is imposing them. But Biden got a pass because enough agreed with the priority to address the economic reasons for Trump’s breakthrough, which are undeniable. Yet in comparison to Roosevelt’s first “100 days” – which saw 15 major bills and gave the early phase of every presidency its name – Biden’s first 100 days were bogged down. A Covid-19 relief and stimulus bill was passed, adding $1.9tn in emergency spending to the $2.2tn of the first such bill signed by Trump in March 2020. But the real hopes fell on the big-ticket measures for “infrastructure” and welfare that Biden resolved to pursue separately. After all, the American Rescue Plan was only meant to be a temporary stopgap for an American society beset with deeper ills even beyond those that the virus laid bare. The game was on. At first the debate seemed to be about how costly to make the bills and how to fund them. This was especially true for the American Families Plan, which was supposed to take steps towards an American welfare state – including by making relief measures for children in earlier bills permanent. Progressives in Congress, understanding the risks, were lauded for an early victory in August, refusing to back the first narrower infrastructure bill if Democrats abandoned the second more ambitious social spending bill. Centrists tried to tag progressives as the obstructionists. But the mainstream narrative remained that by holding infrastructure hostage, progressives were wisely keeping centrists from returning to form. Even as it became clearer and clearer that the Democratic centrist senators Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, and like-minded Democratic colleagues in the House of Representatives, were doing damage to the ambition of the bills, a breakthrough after generations of Democratic austerity and neoliberalism still seemed possible. Then came the critical event that allowed for the centrist breakthrough last week: the election for Virginia governor last Tuesday. In an electoral shock, Republican Glenn Youngkin won – and, more important, grizzled and uncharismatic Democratic party sage Terry McAuliffe, who had once held the governor’s office, lost. Even though McAuliffe’s reputation for decades has been one of a centrist on economics – he served as Bill Clinton’s campaign chair in the 1990s – centrists scored a narrative victory. Wasn’t it because of progressive excess that voters were turning on the party? “Wokeness derails the Democrats,” one headline ran. Lawmakers in Washington scurried to marginalize progressives by passing the infrastructure bill, with some progressives voting no, and others citing promises that Democrats will still continue on to the welfare measures. The rush to judgment was peculiar. It is not until 2022 that the Democrats will need to show something for themselves, and there was no reason to abandon the social spending plan. Suddenly, however, progressives holding tough – since some Republicans supported the infrastructure plan – were dispensable. The new narrative was that Youngkin won because of antiracist rhetoric many Democrats have adopted, along with elites branded as “out of touch” by other elite commentators. Centrists saw a golden opportunity to call for a return to their moderation, including in containing spending. In an extraordinary op-ed, the New York Times called for an “honest conversation” about abandoning progressive goals across the board – including the economy, where Americans demand “bipartisan solutions” that respect inflationary risks and refuse to spend very much. The truth was that Americans had gotten bipartisan neoliberalism for decades, but no matter. One Twitter commentator snarkily noted that it was hardly surprising that “the lessons from Tuesday’s election” matched the “ideological goals” neoliberal elites “had before the election and decades before that. What are the odds!” Democrats blew by the possibility that McAuliffe’s failures were mainly his fault, and due less to “critical race theory” that allegedly was already reshaping public education than to an abandonment of parents forced to endure school closures for years (itself an economic issue). Either way, the critical error is assuming that voters rejected progressive economic policies, which are popular across the board. Even before the events the other day, Democrats defined what was in Build Back Better – their slogan and the name of the welfare bill – downwards. Free college was stripped out early, family and medical leave – standard across industrialized democracies for decades – were killed late, and Biden kowtowed to centrists who demanded a more marketized version not just of environmental concern but of funding government across the board, as taxes hikes were reversed. With its fate no longer hostage to infrastructure, in spite of written promises from some centrists that progressives reportedly exacted at the last minute, there is no reason to be optimistic about the final bill’s fate. An infrastructure bill for a country in decay and decline was much needed and has itself eluded Democrats for decades. Though cut in half to win acceptance, its $1tn for a grab bag of spending – much focused on transport – is nothing to trivialize. But rarely in history has a greater looming defeat been snatched from the jaws of a political victory as the other day. In the first year of Biden’s presidency, Democrats agreed that the only alternative to barbarism is, if not socialism, some modicum of economic change. Many agreed that opening acts of Barack Obama’s administration had been fatefully insufficient. Now, despite the lessons of the Obama presidency, Republicans are set to recapture one house of Congress after two years – or both. By contrast, FDR gained seats in both houses after delivering substantive change, and won the presidency three more times. Of course, even if progressives were to secure a welfare package and retain influence in their party, Trump – or an even more popular Republican – could still win the presidency. But this outcome is a near certainty if the Democrats return to centrist form – as seems the likeliest outcome now. Samuel Moyn is a professor of law and history at Yale and the author of Not Enough: Human Rights in an Unequal WorldDocumentary-maker Frida Kempff makes her feature debut with a Swedish-set thriller drenched in urban paranoia. Molly (Cecilia Milocco), who has recently finished a stay at a psychiatric hospital following a personal tragedy, has moved into a new flat hoping for a fresh start. The plan proves futile: she is soon plagued by mysterious, relentless sounds of knocking coming from her ceiling. Convinced that someone is being hurt, Molly is determined to trace the origin of this mysterious cry for help, only to be faced with others’ disbelief and her own deteriorating sanity. Such a premise is by no means novel – apartment angst has been done to death since at least the mid-60s, after Polanski’s Repulsion – yet the eerie visuals and Milocco’s heart-wrenching performance elevate Knocking above its otherwise thin plot. Set during a scorching heatwave, the film beautifully pairs the restlessness of the summer with Molly’s own wandering mind, which scissors back and forth between her claustrophobic present and sun-drenched memories of a former lover on the beach. Natural light only exists in these aching echoes of the past. Mostly shot inside Molly’s flat, the imagery is smothered in jaundiced fluorescent tones, only accentuating her isolation and worsening state of mind. As Molly inches closer to the centre of the puzzle, Knocking ditches its slow-burn pacing and plunges viewers right in the midst of all-consuming hysteria via an outstanding sequence of body camera closeups. Without giving anything away, what starts out as looking like a quotidian thriller superbly coheres into a sensitive study of trauma and loss. Clocking in 80 minutes, the film still feels a tad long for the simple narrative it offers, but moments of visual ingenuity and a deep understanding of psychological suspense show that Kempff is one to watch. • Knocking is released on 15 November on digital platforms.Few albums that get dropped into the internet void then take on a life of their own through word of mouth alone. But when New York-based artist Ian Mugerwa, AKA Dawuna, created a record of luminous R&amp;B laced with gospel undertones and experimental electronics, it couldn’t hide in the digital wilderness for long. “When I put Glass Lit Dream online [in November 2020], I was in a hectic mental space, so it was this very impulsive decision. Would I do that now? Probably not,” the 25-year-old admits. “I was sitting on this thing that I thought was really good but the music industry was in disarray with Covid. So I didn’t even know how it would reach people.” Nonetheless it did, attracting the attention of ambient nomads Space Afrika and jazz drummer Moses Boyd. The latter describes the album to me as “so sick ... an intricately beautiful collection of songs and sonics. An incredible journey of music”. Its success warranted an official release (and a fresh remastering) via London label O____o?. Now more people will get to know the wonder of Glass Lit Dream, an album of smouldering soul made for the deepest of nights. “I was working a night job at the time, so my schedule was flipped,” says Mugerwa. He recorded the album in his basement apartment, dealing with numerous floods and using lonely midnight walks to help recuperate from PTSD from a previous relationship. “It got to the point where I was very rarely seeing sunlight, but I’m a night owl, so it was a very comfortable process for me.” That nocturnal comfort comes through in the final product, which couples the R&amp;B jam structures of D’Angelo’s Voodoo (Mugerwa’s favourite LP) with the electronic alchemy of British occultists Coil. Mugerwa was born in Maryland and lived his early years in Nairobi, Kenya. After his diplomat mother witnessed the 1998 US embassy bombing, his family moved to Fairfax County, Virginia. Mugerwa was five years old. “Fairfax County is a very white area, so there was a lot of racism there throughout my childhood,” he remembers. He faced a disturbing level of suspicion and passive-aggressive ostracism from locals. “That shit sucked,” he says. “You grow up knowing that if you represent yourself as a proud Black person, your environment is going to balk at that.” Moving to New York in 2019, Mugerwa began the long journey towards personal healing. “While I was recording this album, I was repressing a lot of stuff that I needed to deal with,” he says. “After the album, I went into therapy. That was an intense process, but it was really needed.” Moving to New York also helped him escape the relationship that had left Mugerwa with PTSD. “It was a pretty horrifying time in my life,” he says, literally breathing a sigh of relief. Glass Lit Dream does not address this directly – instead it acts as a marker for Mugerwa’s first steps as a free man. “It was me solidifying that I had left that space and I don’t have to talk about it in my music. But the effects of that relationship will linger on with me. PTSD is gonna be a lifelong thing.” Lyrically, Mugerwa often references religious existentialism, invoking biblical scenes of death and pleas to God. Though he describes it as “an electronic album”, he was also inspired by gospel music, which he discovered through the internet in his teens. “I was raised passively Protestant and that never really vibed with me,” he says. “The best I could do was, from my laptop, have a window into that world, listening to Aretha Franklin, Reverend TL Barrett, Mahalia Jackson … I heard Peace Be Still by Reverend James Cleveland and, to this day, I’ve never heard anything like it. That one piece of music changed how I look at the power of the voice.” Glass Lit Dream hums with the influence of Black musical history: “Black people created movement after movement which became massively influential on a global scale. Techno, rock, jazz, soul, disco … all that came from this lineage of Black musicians that were doing types of music that could be traced back to negro work songs, negro spirituals and early gospel music.” Mugerwa’s goal with Glass Lit Dream is simply to be part of that lineage: “Here’s the past, what has happened … and here’s something that could be the next step.” • In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid or the Men’s Advice Line. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.orgAt the very highest level, it consumes every waking hour, sometimes to the point of wrecking marriages, lives and health. Even on the lowest rung of the ladder, being a good backbench MP is not the sort of job from which you clock off at 5pm sharp, let alone bunk off for an afternoon. Or at least, it shouldn’t be. The only surprising thing about this week’s renewed demands for a ban on MPs taking second jobs as political consultants is that it took public outrage over Owen Paterson’s paid lobbying for the penny to drop. The Scottish and Welsh parliaments already forbid this particular kind of moonlighting, so why not Westminster? Ban dubious corporate gigs for politicians tomorrow, and before long it will seem bizarre that an arrangement so obviously open to abuse – under which MPs can work as consultants so long as they don’t actually lobby on behalf of their clients – was ever allowed. If a company really values an MP for their personal knowledge and skills, rather than for their ability to have a word in the right ear, then it can hire them a decent interval after they’ve left. A side hustle is not, of course, always a terrible thing for a politician. Sometimes it can be socially useful, as in the case of those MPs who are qualified doctors and nurses keeping up their registration by doing the odd hospital shift, or reservists in the armed forces. Several medically trained MPs returned to the Covid wards or put in stints at vaccination clinics during the pandemic, and in doing so didn’t just benefit their patients. The Commons too was better informed for members standing up and explaining exactly what they’d seen in A&amp;E or (in the case of Labour’s Nadia Whittome) in care homes. Work shadowing schemes for MPs, letting them step into the shoes of their constituents for a couple of weeks a year, could hugely enrich parliament’s understanding of the outside world too. But it insults voters’ intelligence to pretend that taking five-figure sums to advise big companies – or even to knock out a few Daily Telegraph columns – is genuinely for the good of the nation. Second jobs with no social value should be banned. By all means, let there be a quid pro quo for this sacrifice. An MP’s salary of nearly £82,000 is generous at three times the average British pay packet, but going into politics still involves a hefty pay cut for some, and comes with public pressure to forego any annual rise you might be offered. It’s less than an NHS surgeon or a high-flying head at a multi-academy trust might earn, and while those jobs are infinitely demanding, they don’t routinely come with daily hate mail, panic buttons in your bedroom and police advice to vary the time and route when walking your children to school. So let’s have a review of both salaries and the part of the expenses bill that covers staff costs – given researchers and caseworkers also shoulder life-or-death responsibilities for constituents and risks to their own safety for an awful lot less money – alongside a ban on consultant jobs. Improve security, clamp down on social media abuse of public figures, give female MPs the right to proper paid maternity leave instead of forcing them to haul their newborns along to constituency engagements, and take allegations of harassment and bullying at Westminster seriously rather than allowing investigations to drift on inconclusively for so long that the victim just gives up hope. Offer defeated MPs more help and support in finding new jobs too, given politics is one of the few professions where you can be fired for no fault of your own, should the electorate happen to turn against the national leader of your party. We might even consider how much of MPs’ surgery time is spent picking up things that should really be the responsibility of other public services (not least mental health) which are hopelessly overstretched. There are more than enough ways, in short, to make a life in politics more attractive and more rewarding. But the prospect of picking up a lucrative gig from the backbenches, especially once you’ve retired from a ministerial job providing useful connections, should not be one of them. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistWhat ingredients are required for a classic derby? A crowd in the stands is a good place to start. As was the case for Internazionale’s match against Juventus last month, the presence of more than 56,000 spectators at San Siro to see the Nerazzuri square off with Milan set a tone before a ball was kicked. The choreography in the Curva Sud was magnificent and moving, fans of the Rossoneri sending a message of gratitude to the nation’s doctors and nurses for their work throughout the pandemic. First came the word “Grazie” – thank you – spelled out in placards and designed to look like the line on an ECG. Then, an image of three medical professionals with the Italian flag, beneath the message “Milan does not forget”. A banner in the same stand shortly beforehand had advised that this would be “the most important choreography of the season”. And hey, if it made their rivals look petty, that couldn’t hurt either. The Curva Nord had prepared a celebration of itself, displaying an image of an Inter Ultra clutching the Scudetto, with a Milan fan in a jester’s hat crying behind. Which brings us to our second ingredient: high stakes. This was the first time these teams had met since Inter were crowned champions in the spring. Now the roles were reversed, Milan sitting unbeaten at the top of Serie A when the day began. Their neighbours were already seven points behind. For a little added spice, throw in a player who swapped sides in the summer. Hakan Calhanoglu turned down several offers of a new contract at Milan before joining Inter on a free transfer. He has said publicly that there are no grudges, and that he left only for the thrill of a new challenge. Yet the newspaper Corriere della Sera reported him telling teammates that he had been looking forward to this game since the day he arrived. It was Calhanoglu who opened the scoring, first procuring a penalty and then converting it in the 11th minute. Should it have been given? Replays showed the Turkish player placing his leg across Franck Kessié’s path as they chased a ball into the Milan penalty area, initiating the contact that ended with both sprawled on the ground. Calhanoglu did not let that trouble him as he stepped up to beat his former teammate Ciprian Tatarusanu from the spot. He celebrated unapologetically, cupping his ears toward Milan’s supporters. Yet he would not be the only player on Sunday to join the select group who have scored on both sides of this derby. Stefan De Vrij managed it without ever even playing for Milan. The centre-back’s headers helped Inter to win this fixture twice in the past two years but this time he sent one past his own keeper to make the score 1-1. He appeared to have lost sight of the ball from Sandro Tonali’s free-kick, after Fikayo Tomori leapt in front of him. And now we had the most important derby ingredient of all: chaotic, see-sawing drama. Inter’s lead had lasted all of six minutes, but they would have a chance to restore it nine later when Fodé Ballo-Touré scythed down Matteo Darmian. This time Lautaro Martínez, not Calhanoglu, stepped up to take it. Tatarusanu saved brilliantly, plunging to his right. Why on earth would Inter change their penalty-taker away from someone who already scored? Simone Inzaghi confirmed afterward that Lautaro was the designated taker. Calhanoglu should always have been second in line, followed by Ivan Perisic. “There is a clear hierarchy,” said the Inter manager. “[But] on the pitch, players live by their feelings.” Who knows how things might have gone without that initial switch-up? Tatarusanu revealed later that he had spent time preparing with Milan’s coaches for a Lautaro penalty. Calhanoglu was a trickier prospect because “I know him very well, but he also knows me.” On went the game, the two teams careening from one end to the other. Samir Handanovic punched away an effort from Rafael Leão before Ballo-Touré blocked a Nicolò Barella effort on the line. Inter took more control in the second half, Marcelo Brozovic starting to assert himself in midfield. There were further chances for Lautaro and Calhanoglu but the best of the bunch fell to Arturo Vidal, whose shots were twice blocked by Pierre Kalulu after Edin Dzeko had found him unmarked in the middle of the area. And then it was Milan’s turn to rue missed opportunities at the death. Zlatan Ibrahimovic saw a free-kick well saved but the real match-winning opportunity fell to Kessié after a long-range effort from Alexis Saelemaekers came back off the post. The Ivorian missed the target from 12 yards. The game ended 1-1, though both sides might have wondered how. The first question put to both managers in the post-game interviews by the Italian broadcaster Dazn was whether their glass was half full or half empty. Inzaghi chose the latter, saying that his team “deserved more”, even if he did also stress that there was still plenty of time to make up the necessary ground in the title race. For his Milan counterpart, Stefano Pioli, the outlook was unambiguously bright. “This was a positive display against a really strong team,” he said, agreeing with a follow-up question asking whether he felt his players had learned from a pair of defeats by Inter at the start of the calendar year. “Look at the age difference between our team and Inter’s,” he said. “These days we are playing with more conviction.” There is no question that Milan have been on an upward trajectory. Their starting XIs this season are, on average, the third-youngest in the division (25.4 years old), where Inter are second-oldest (28.5). To stay unbeaten through 12 matches, despite losing first-choice goalkeeper Mike Maignan to injury, and playing this match without Theo Hernández, is hugely impressive. Inter have done well, too, to remain a leading force in the division despite bidding farewell to Antonio Conte, Romelu Lukaku and Achraf Hakimi in the summer, but there are some troubling trends. After drawing at home to Juventus and Atalanta, and losing at Lazio, this was another failure to beat a direct rival. Worse, they have now thrown away 11 points from winning positions. The old cliche about derbies being stories unto themselves remains as true as ever. This was helter-skelter entertainment from start to finish, but we will learn more about both teams’ staying power when they return from the winter break for a frantic run-up to Christmas in which both can look forward to a steady diet of games every three days. For now, both managers will reflect on their recipes. The ingredients were just right for an entertaining derby, but what is still missing for a title-winning push?Donald Trump once described Mitch McConnell as his “ace in the hole” and wrote, in a foreword to the Senate Republican leader’s autobiography, that he “couldn’t have asked for a better partner” in Washington. Except, according to Trump, he didn’t. Speaking to the Washington Post for a profile of the Senate minority leader published on Monday, Trump said he told McConnell: “‘Why don’t you write it for me and I’ll put it in, Mitch?’ Because that’s the way life works.” McConnell did not dispute Trump’s account, about the book The Long Game, telling the paper: “I really don’t have anything to add related to him.” The Post profile lands at a tricky time for Republican leaders. Last week’s stunning victory in the election for governor in Virginia was achieved by a candidate who kept Trump at arm’s length while deploying many of his tactics. But the former president remains a dominant presence, seemingly likely to run for the White House again. He and McConnell, the two most powerful men in the GOP, are firmly at odds over Trump’s lie that the 2020 election was stolen and over control of a party McConnell steers in the 50-50 Senate, which Democrats control via Vice-President Kamala Harris. McConnell’s support for the bipartisan infrastructure deal which the House sent to Joe Biden’s desk on Friday only deepened the divide. In a statement on Sunday, Trump said “all Republicans who voted for Democrat longevity should be ashamed of themselves in particular, Mitch McConnell”. The Post spoke to many who know and work with or against McConnell. The Illinois senator Dick Durbin, a Democrat, spoke of being cloistered with him on 6 January, when Trump supporters attacked the Capitol in an attempt to overturn the election. Durbin said: “I thought to myself, ‘This could be a transformative moment. He appears to have taken this very seriously.’” McConnell voted to acquit Trump in his resulting impeachment trial, though he excoriated the former president on the Senate floor. John Yarmuth, a senior House Democrat from McConnell’s state, Kentucky, told the Post about working with McConnell on campaigns in their youth but said: “He never wanted to change the world. This is all about being, not doing. “He clearly doesn’t care about being labeled a hypocrite. It just doesn’t bother him. He is brazen about it. That’s one of the cynical sides of Mitch. He doesn’t care. If it’s expedient, he’ll do it.” In his interview, Trump emphasized his role, with McConnell, in passing tax cuts, slashing regulations and stocking the judiciary with conservatives, three on the supreme court. He also bemoaned McConnell’s failure to back his attempt to steal the election. The Post also noted a little-noticed split between McConnell and his daughter, Porter McConnell, who campaigns against big money in politics and against Republican attacks on voting rights. McConnell, the paper said, “declined to respond directly” when asked about his daughter’s activism. Also on Monday, the Hill reported that senior Republicans are worried controversial Senate nominees endorsed by Trump, Herschel Walker in Georgia and Sean Parnell in Pennsylvania prominent among them, could cost the party its chance to retake the chamber next year. Durbin said McConnell was now “looking at Trump, not in the rearview mirror, but looking through the windshield and realizing he’s going to have to live with this man in the Republican party for the foreseeable future”.After being hospitalized for 28 days with Covid-19, a man returned to the Seattle hospital that saved his life – to apologize for not getting vaccinated. Richard Soliz, a 54-year old graphic artist, developed blood clots on his lungs after contracting the coronavirus. Admitted to Harborview medical center in late August, he spent close to a month on a ventilator and heart monitor, as doctors worried one of his blood clots might transfer to his brain or his heart. Soliz pulled through, and in October he returned to the hospital to thank the staff for saving his life – and to say sorry. “I deeply regret, you know, not making the decision to get vaccinated,” Soliz told Dr James Town, a pulmonologist and director of the medical intensive care unit. “No one blames you or judges you,” Town told Soliz. “Everyone is just happy that you are willing to share the story, I think. And happy that you’re better.” When Soliz got sick, he assumed it was the flu. Then he started having severe headaches. Shortly after that, he came down with a fever and began experiencing shortness of breath. “And I realized, ‘Hey, this is not the flu. It’s Covid,” he said. He was admitted to hospital on 23 August. Soliz said he had been confused by contradicting information about vaccines on social media, including debunked claims of microchipped vaccines and suspicions of government intentions. He was now certain, he said, “that there is truth to this virus, and not being vaccinated leaves you vulnerable to the extent of possibly really taking a person’s life. I personally know that, because I was not vaccinated, I did not act, I wasn’t certain, and I nearly lost my life. “It was just not knowing, and what I did know was confusing and contradictory, so when a person is not totally convinced of something and doesn’t have the proper information to determine a yay or nay, perhaps they’ll do what I did and do nothing.” When Soliz returned to the hospital in October a nurse, Kimmy Siebens, told him he looked great. “To see you alive is just amazing,” she said, adding: “We do put so much of our own heart into the care and worry. We never really get to see people get that much better. And so it’s amazing. It makes it feel like it’s definitely all worth it.” Soliz is now fully vaccinated but has been left with scarred lungs, which cause him to become winded even after slight physical activity. He has difficulty sleeping and struggles with a foggy memory and thoughts. Doctors have told him he could begin to see improvements in his lungs in six months.The England rugby union head coach, Eddie Jones, has received criticism after claiming that Emma Raducanu has been burdened by “distractions” that have affected her form on the court. Jones, who was speaking after England defeated Tonga in the Autumn Nations Series on Saturday, used Raducanu as a cautionary example when discussing the need for Marcus Smith, the talented young England rugby player, to remain focused. “The big thing for good young players is distractions … there’s a reason why the young girl who won the US Open hasn’t done so well afterwards,” said Jones. As he discussed Raducanu, Jones did not refer to her by name. “What have you seen her on – the front page of Vogue and Harper’s Bazaar or whatever it is, wearing Christian Dior clothes,” he said. “All that is a distraction around her.” Raducanu’s photoshoot for the October 2021 edition of Vogue took place shortly after her breakout Wimbledon run, which she followed by winning the US Open as a qualifier. This week she has broken into the top 20 for the first time, rising to a career-high ranking of 20. The comments prompted criticism on social media. The BBC sports presenter Gabby Logan called Jones’s comments “unbelievably unfair and not even remotely comparable … imagine an 18-year-old rugby player winning a World Cup having never played a club game.” Logan’s response was endorsed by the tennis coach Judy Murray. Meanwhile, the former British No 1 Jo Durie called Jones’s comments sexist. “Emma isn’t a girl; she is an 18-year-old woman. No one ever complains about blokes going to galas; it’s always something that is thrown at women,” Durie told the Telegraph. “Unfortunately, when you’re this famous, everybody likes to have their opinion about you.” Raducanu competes at the the Linz Open this week, where she is the top seed in her final event of the year, and she is still growing accustomed to the tour after only becoming a full-time professional in June after her A-levels. She has contested two tournaments since the US Open and after her opening round loss at the BNP Paribas Open, she reached her first career WTA tour quarter-final at the Transylvania Open in Cluj. Such is her high profile, countless prominent figures have already opined on her career and she incidentally discussed similar topics with reporters on Sunday. Raducanu said that she does not listen to outside opinions or read news about herself and she underlined her priorities. “I made it very, very clear to every single person in my team that I was not going to cancel one training session or practice session for any off-court commitments,” she said. “That was a non-negotiable for me. I wanted to make sure that that is my priority and it is. So everyone’s clear about that.”A teenager has been jailed for a minimum of 16 years for murdering his 12-year-old friend after luring him to woodland and attempting to decapitate him. The 15-year-old boy, who can now be named as Marcel Grzeszcz, repeatedly stabbed Roberts Buncis in Fishtoft, near Boston in Lincolnshire, on 12 December last year. At the teenager’s trial at Lincoln crown court, the jury was told he stabbed Roberts “in excess of 70 times”, with a wound to the neck that was “consistent with a decapitation attempt”. Grzeszcz admitted manslaughter midway through his trial but denied murder. The defendant claimed the victim had taken the knife to the scene and he “lost control” when the younger boy attempted to stab him, but jurors dismissed his argument and concluded he was “motivated by anger”. Sentencing the teenager on Monday, Mr Justice Jeremy Baker told him: “Marcel Grzeszcz, in the early hours of Saturday 12 December 2020, you lured Roberts Buncis to a wooded area of Boston where you carried out a savage and brutal attack upon him with a knife which you had brought to the scene, in the course of which you made a determined effort to remove his head, before leaving his body for others to find later that same morning.” The judge said there was “a significant degree of planning and premeditation” involved in the attack, with Grzeszcz turning up with a large knife and latex gloves. While Grzeszcz may not have initially intended to kill him, “given the number and nature of the injuries which you inflicted upon the deceased, there came a time when you did intend to kill him and proceeded to do so”, the judge said. The judge lifted a reporting restriction barring the naming of Grzeszcz following an application by the PA Media news agency. The trial previously heard that Grzeszcz was forced to leave St Nicholas primary after bringing a knife on to the premises and was sent to a pupil referral unit (PRU). He was later excluded from high school for selling drugs both in and out of school and had started at another PRU the day before Roberts was found dead. Giving his ruling on the decision to lift the anonymity order, the judge said: “The balance is strongly in favour of the principle of open justice … rather than the accused’s welfare, which is of more limited significance in the context of this extremely serious case.” In a short victim impact statement read to the court on behalf of Roberts’s father, Edgars Buncis, he said: “How do I put into words how I feel? This is all wrong. No father should ever have to bury their son. Nothing is a reason for this. I have lost my destination and my purpose. My life is in a cemetery. I feel empty and nothing will change this.” Roberts would have turned 13 two days after he was killed.The RSPCA is investigating after a woman was filmed by a hunt saboteur group apparently punching and kicking a horse. The woman was condemned by the anti-hunting campaigners, as well as the naturalist Chris Packham and the organisation that oversees hunting with hounds in the UK. Packham called upon the RSPCA to “urgently investigate and definitively prosecute this appalling abuse – thus upholding our standards of animal welfare protection”. Megan McCubbin, a zoologist and a presenter of BBC Springwatch, called on anyone with information to forward it to the RSPCA, adding that the footage showed “disgusting behaviour”. She said: “Yet another ugly side of an activity some call ‘sport’.” The RSPCA called the footage “really upsetting”, adding: “We will always look into complaints made to us about animal welfare. We would urge anyone with first-hand information about this incident to contact us.” The Hunting Office told ITV News it “expects the highest level of animal welfare at all times – both on and off the hunting field – and condemns the actions taken by this individual, who is not a member of the hunting associations”. Hertfordshire Hunt Saboteurs said it filmed the incident on Saturday while observing the Cottesmore hunt, which is based in Rutland and claims to trace its heritage back to the 17th century. The group said the incident demonstrated “violence running through their veins”. According to ITV News, the hunt said it did not condone the actions shown in the video “under any circumstances” and added: “We will be reminding all of our supporters that this will not be tolerated.” The reputation of the UK’s hunting community was damaged last month, when a prominent huntsman was convicted of encouraging others to hide the illegal hunting of live foxes behind a “smokescreen” of trail hunting. Mark Hankinson, the director of the Masters of the Foxhounds Association, was found to have encouraged people to commit an offence during two webinars broadcast to more than 100 of the organisation’s members which were obtained by hunt saboteurs, who passed them to the media and the police. Trail hunting involves a trail layer dragging a rag coated in an animal scent for the hunt to follow instead of a live fox. But Hankinson told members: “We need to have clear, visible, plausible trail laying being done throughout the day … It’s a lot easier to create a smokescreen if you have got more than one trail layer operating, and that is what it’s all about, trying to portray to the people watching that you are going about your legitimate business.”Name: Pandemic buyer’s remorse. Age: Approximately 20 months old. Appearance: An exercise bike, covered in old clothes, destined to die unridden. Oh really? You bought a exercise bike? Of course I did. My gym was shutting and I didn’t want to gain weight under lockdown, so I splashed out. Did it work? Of course not. I’ve used it once since March 2020, before returning to the more traditional lockdown activity of eating biscuits and watching Tiger King. But at least I’m not alone. You’re not? Not at all. According to a newly published How We Live report, which surveyed more than 4,000 adults, nine out of 10 Britons bought “treats” such as clothes, air fryers and entertainment equipment to get them through the hell of lockdown, and now they’re riddled with guilt. Why? Apparently, 8% of buyers said those treats were never used. Another 9% no longer use them, and 11% use them less than expected. It’s so wasteful, isn’t it? Hang on a second. This was a global pandemic the likes of which we haven’t seen for a century. We were plunged into completely unknown territory. If people’s coping mechanism was to buy an air fryer they had little use for, it’s easy enough to forgive them. It wasn’t just air fryers though, was it? Well, people did go wild for hot tubs too (one adult in 20 of those surveyed bought one). More than a third of those who did now regret the decision. So at least I can relax in the knowledge that that was the stupidest lockdown purchase. Well, that and people who rushed into buying entire houses. People regret buying houses? Yes! The trend was for lots of itchy city dwellers to sell up and move to the countryside because the extra space gave them more room to work from home. And now they have to go back to their office, they’re realising that they’re saddled with a longer commute and reduced local amenities? That and a house so old it creaks in the night like a pirate ship, not to mention a Deliveroo range that consists of a one-star kebab place half an hour away. An Aviva survey published in July found that half the people who have bought a home since March 2020 have regretted the amount they paid for it. Only one in eight who bought before early 2017 felt the same. No wonder they feel bad. But, hey, people need to go easy on themselves. Whatever gets you through the night, remember? And for you that’s an expensive mint-condition exercise bike. While for others it’s a broken-down home in the middle of nowhere. Do say: “Our society makes it too easy to buy expensive items on impulse.” Don’t say: “Ooh, a shiny ad for me to click.”Dennis Kelly, writer/adapter The Royal Shakespeare Company had this theory that a lot of musicals are quite bad because no one bothers with the story. The script is often just glue for the songs. So they wanted a playwright to do the story first. I didn’t know anything about musicals but fancied getting stuck in. Now, it feels like Matilda was this golden ticket, but at the time it was just a Christmas show. Roald Dahl stories had been done on stage for years but it wasn’t like doing a Dahl was a recipe for success. What was relatively easy about adapting Dahl is that the tone is so strong and colourful, you don’t need to think about it. You do have to make it your own though. He was a genius at writing these crazy kids’ books, but he wasn’t a playwright. You’ve got to do a lot to make it work on stage. We needed a composer. The director, Matthew Warchus, knew he’d really found someone in Tim Minchin. I went to see his solo show and was moved by his song White Wine in the Sun. We had a chat and really got on, but there were definitely times when we struggled with each other. His job was the songs, mine was the words and story. Sometimes you have different opinions about how those things work together, but it was always a laugh. Tim is not very sentimental but he’s got a lot of heart. I hate it when musicals brazenly ask you to feel something, like: we want you to be sad now. Tim never does that. His songs are open and honest. At first, I had imagined adults would play the children. There was one workshop where Matilda was played by a puppet, another where she was a child and everyone else adults. It was Tim who was very keen on casting kids. I had also imagined Miss Trunchbull, the headmistress, would be played by a woman. My worry about a man was that it might be a bit pantomime, so when the story gets to a dark place you wouldn’t believe in the character. But Bertie Carvel’s performance was incredible. He approached it like a method actor and lost himself in it. We never sent it up – Bertie would turn around and you’d get a gasp from the audience as they think: “Oh, it’s a man!” Then you forget that and we get on with the story. Schoolboy Bruce Bogtrotter’s big chocolatey burp became very important. We had all these ideas about how to do it, like using a big balloon or a bubble, but in the end we just had a kid do a burping face over a simple sound and light effect. A low rent but extremely theatrical moment. And that’s what I love about Matilda – it’s rough and ready theatre but done really well. Tim Minchin, composer/lyricist When the RSC asked me if I’d heard of Roald Dahl’s Matilda, and if I’d ever thought of writing music for theatre, I was like: “Are you kidding me?” Years earlier, I’d written to the Dahls to ask if I could turn it into a musical. But I almost said no. I thought: “I’m a rock star now and I don’t need to go back to writing children’s theatre.” But I looked up Matthew Warchus, who was going to direct it – and the dude had won Tony awards. In our first meeting, I still lectured him about how he wasn’t allowed to fuck it up because I’m a Dahl head and not very into musicals. It had to be dark and funny, not a Disney thing. I loved Dennis Kelly’s script. I made flow charts with different colours for solos and choruses, another showing whether they’re ballads or upbeat, another with different colours for dance. So there was a structure mapped out. Then I went away and wrote When I Grow Up first. I made Matthew and Dennis listen to it on headphones at the Groucho Club in London. Matthew later told me he’d been worried because it’s like a pop song, a bit off-brief. The script deadline coincided with the birth of my second kid, and my daughter was two at the time, so I was very much in that head space of childhood and sensitive to how innocent kids are. In six weeks I wrote 10 songs, but Matilda herself didn’t have any. Her schoolmate Hortensia was a very strong character in the script: she is the rebel and Matilda is shy. I thought maybe Matilda doesn’t sing and that’s what’s amazing – this world sings around her. Then we realised: it’s a fricking musical, the protagonist needs to sing! Matthew and Dennis broke my heart when they decided to kill Hortensia. I fought it, but they were right. So Matilda gets her rebellious spirit and I wrote Naughty for her, using the structure of When I Grow Up. Harmonically, those songs are the same. In a musical, in the second act, there’s often an “11 o’clock number” where the protagonist sings a big tearjerker. But Matilda isn’t that kind of person. Instead she sings another number, Quiet, the hardest song to write and a counterpoint to Loud in the first half. It’s difficult to be proud of your own work – you hate your own voice and your own face. But I’m proud of Matilda and I love the people who helped me create it. Musical theatre is a big business but this is a show that was made uncynically. I wrote it from a point of passion and innocence. • The Royal Shakespeare Company’s Matilda the Musical is at the Cambridge theatre, London.A meeting of hundreds of members of China’s political elite, which is expected to pave the way for Xi Jinping to consolidate power with an extraordinary third term as president, has opened in Beijing. The four-day, closed-door meeting of the ruling Chinese Communist party (CCP) central committee, known as the sixth plenum, is expected to produce a resolution on the history of the party, which analysts say will shape domestic politics and society for decades to come. The sixth plenum is one of the last significant meetings in China’s five-year political cycle, and sets the stage for next year’s party congress, where Xi is expected to seek a third term as leader of the CCP after having previously abolished term limits in 2018. The agenda of the meeting is top secret, with a communique of discussions and resolutions to be released after it has finished. At the 2016 plenum, the CCP bestowed the title of “core” leader on Xi, putting him on par with Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping but also emphasising the importance of collective leadership. Xi opened the plenum on Monday with a work report on behalf of the political bureau of the party’s central committee and “explanations on a draft resolution on the major achievements and historical experience” of the party in its 100-year history, the state news agency Xinhua reported. The historical resolution will be only the third since the founding of the party, following in the footsteps of Mao, who set out the aims of the party in 1945 with himself as the only true leader, and Deng, whose 1981 resolution condemned the failures of Mao’s rule while salvaging the party. “The 1945 resolution affirmed Mao’s leadership in the CCP, and the 1981 resolution was about turning a new page from the decade-long destructive chaos of Cultural Revolution Mao created,” said Dali Yang, a China expert at the University of Chicago. “This year’s resolution will be somewhere in between – the party’s past and Xi’s future.” Anthony Saich, a professor at Harvard University and the author of the book From Rebel to Ruler: One Hundred Years of the Chinese Communist Party, agreed. “For the CCP, history is the future,” he said. “The objective of this plenum is to tie them together to show that Xi is an inevitable product of the history of the party, which is leading China into a new chapter.” The resolution will determine how Chinese history is taught and depicted, and dictate the context in which Xi’s authority and his policies are viewed as successes. The document comes in the centenary of the CCP’s founding and a critical time for Xi’s future leadership. Analysts say Xi hopes to cement his place in history as an epoch-making Chinese leader alongside Mao and Deng. As China’s relationship with the west continues to deteriorate, many in western capitals question what type of power China is going to become in the future. In July, Xi said his party had achieved its first centenary goal of building a moderately prosperous society for all and eradicated extreme poverty. He also said “reunification” with Taiwan was a “historic mission and an unshakable commitment” of the party he leads. Saich said that although this particular plenum was not about policy, it would, however, signify China’s newfound role on the international stage, and the party’s identity in helping the Chinese people achieve their “China dream”. “Internationally, we will continue to see China playing an assertive role; domestically, we’ll see anti-corruption, addressing inequality and tackling environmental degradation [still] as the party’s priorities,” he said. Critics of Xi say that since his tenure as China’s president and the CCP’s general secretary, as leader, he launched sweeping anti-corruption drives, purged many political enemies, oversaw crackdowns on minority groups, introduced his own political theory – “Xi Jinping thought” – to school students, and initiated an increasingly expansionist foreign policy. In the run-up to this week’s meeting, Xinhua has been in propaganda overdrive, highlighting Xi’s pivotal role in many aspects of China’s achievement. “Xi Jinping often visits farms, farmers’ houses … and even inspects pigsties and toilets to obtain first-hand information of people’s livelihood,” read one tweet. “President Xi attaches great importance to cultivation of morality and ethics throughout society …” wrote another. But John Delury, a historian at Yonsei University in Seoul and the co-author of Wealth and Power: China’s Long March to the Twenty-first Century, cautioned against putting too much emphasis on Xi in interpreting this week’s events. “I fear we over-read Xi Jinping across the board and fall victim of the Chinese propaganda agencies,” Delury said. “If we use the 1981 resolution as the baseline, it was a collective effort to draw a line between the party under Deng and Mao’s Cultural Revolution. Since then, the story of the CCP-led China is one largely filled with economic growth and Beijing’s expanding role in international affairs, so the history is easier to resolve, as it were. “Of course, since 1981 there was the 1989 Tiananmen massacre and in 2012, a massive corruption scandal involving the then Chongqing party chief, Bo Xilai, but my guess is that they are going to avoid them as much as possible, or fold them into a more triumphant narrative.”Spectator abuse of referees has reached such proportions that the officials in one league this weekend staged a wildcat strike and if the bad behaviour continues then playing behind closed doors might be next. The football teams involved all play in an under-10s league and are officiated by younger referees, many of them aged 14-15. What innocent fun that must be, many would assume. Far from it, said Helen Beales, marketing and partnerships manager for the Northumberland Football Association. “Unfortunately we are finding that they are getting more and more abuse. From the start of the season it has just crept up and up and up to the point where, a couple of weeks ago, we had eight referees in tears which is just absolutely crazy.” Beales said the abuse was coming from coaches and parents and enough was enough. “They are shouting at referees who are starting their careers and are learning. You wouldn’t shout at an under-10 goalkeeper who let in a goal.” On Sunday the referees staged a day of action by refusing to officiate games at venues in Newcastle, Gosforth and Killingworth. Supporters went round with disposable whistles telling parents they would have to find their own referee. “It gave people an idea of how hard it is to referee a game,” said Beales. “A lot of people were shocked to hear about the amount of abuse there is. I think it was a real eye-opener for people.” Abusing referees has long been an issue at all levels of football but Beales said, post-lockdown, it was getting worse. “We have seen a deterioration in behaviour. I’m not an expert as to why that has happened. I know people have missed football and been very frustrated by not having it. Is that the reason? I don’t know.” It is a small minority, Beales said, but it was unacceptable. “We’re all very passionate about football but I think some people just get caught up in it, they can only see it from their point of view or their child’s point of view.” The organisation is planning a season-long campaign to improve behaviour including a weekend of games on 20-21 November where spectators, coaches and players are expected to make only positive comments. There will also be paid referee mentors, a monthly competition to reward positive behaviour and a new course to train parents or volunteers who want to act as assistant referees. If none of that works then Beales said further action might include playing without spectators. Teams could also be excluded from the league. “Something has to be done now, we can’t go any further with this.” Ian Coates, general manager of Northumberland Football Leagues, said: “All the referees at our central venues are new to officiating. They are children themselves and are still learning – yet they are receiving horrendous verbal abuse when they make an honest mistake, or make a decision that not everyone agrees with. “I would urge every one of our parents and coaches to take a look at their own behaviour. Please support and encourage our referees – without them there would be no football. Let’s all move forward together in a positive manner.”Sleaze allegations against Boris Johnson’s government have bubbled away for some time, but been thrust into the spotlight again after the prime minister tried to overhaul standards rules to spare a Tory MP from suspension. These are the scandals facing Downing Street, how damaging they would be for the government rated out of 10 if wrongdoing is proven, and suggested solutions to uncover the truth: Second jobs and lobbying: 7/10 The scandal concerning Owen Paterson, the disgraced former MP who committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules for which he was paid more than £100,000, has raised wider concerns about politicians’ outside financial interests. Despite announcing he was stepping down from the Commons after a government-backed bid to save him from suspension sparked uproar from the public and senior Tories, the scrutiny of his work for Randox and Lynn’s Country Foods continues. A new register of MPs’ interests also revealed some are making up to £400,000 on top of their taxpayer-funded salary. Paterson’s repeated breaches of the rules by meeting and messaging ministers and officials has sparked soul-searching by those who want to restore trust in parliament. Proposed solution: the Commons Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, is reportedly throwing his weight behind giving MPs’ more opportunity to appeal if they are found to have broken the rules, in exchange for launching a review into how those elected to parliament can make vast sums of money from other jobs. An analysis by the Guardian found more than 30 MPs would be hit if a rule were introduced barring them taking up positions as consultants or advisers. Covid contracts: 8/10 There has been no shortage of allegations that Tory MPs helped associates gain lucrative Covid contracts. Former health secretary Matt Hancock was even found to have acted unlawfully when his department failed to reveal details of contracts it had signed during the pandemic. Attention was drawn to Paterson because of work he did on behalf of two firms, one of which was Randox. The Department of Health has reportedly refused to release minutes of a phone call last spring between Paterson and the health minister Lord Bethell, which took place just days before the company got a £133m deal to supply and analyse test kits. Proposed solution: the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has demanded Johnson commit to a “full-transparent investigation” into the vast sum of taxpayers’ money that he said was handed to Randox “without competition or tender”. Starmer added the public needed confidence Paterson’s “paid advocacy did not influence these decisions”. PM’s flat refurbishment: 10/10 After months of dodging questions about how Johnson paid up to £200,000 for a refurbishment of his Downing Street flat, it was eventually revealed that a Tory peer and donor – Lord Brownlow – had initially stepped in to settle the bill. The prime minister was cleared of breaking the ministerial code, but his standards adviser, Lord Geidt, said Johnson “unwisely” proceeded with the redecoration “without more rigorous regard for how this would be funded”. The row is now back in the headlines because the Electoral Commission, which scrutinises political party spending and donations, has completed its own probe and handed its findings to Conservative headquarters to give the party an opportunity to respond. The parliamentary standards commissioner said she would hold off launching her own investigation so as not to prejudice the existing one, and some believe Johnson’s attempt to hobble the commissioner was linked to the upcoming inquiry she may launch into his flat payments. The opaqueness with which Downing Street treated questions about the issue raise serious questions about how much influence Tory donors funding the prime minister’s lifestyle have. Proposed solution: Johnson is facing calls not to reform the standards system until it has completed any investigation into him. Johnson’s jaunt to Marbella: 6/10 Rather more recently, attention turned to who paid for Johnson’s post-Conservative conference holiday to southern Spain. No 10 said he would not declare in the register of MPs’ interests the free luxury getaway at a villa belonging to the family of Zac Goldsmith – a Tory peer – meaning the prime minister will not have to detail the value of the gift. Johnson has been rapped previously by the standards commissioner for making incomplete or late declarations in the register of MPs’ interests. Although Johnson has registered the holiday in the register of ministerial interests, this meant he did not have to detail its monetary value – unlike the requirement for entries in the MPs’ interest document. By not declaring the value, Johnson has opened himself up to criticism he put Goldsmith in the Lords and is now on the receiving end of his financial endowment. Proposed solution: Declaring the value would show Johnson believed in the importance of transparency, which in turn would improve confidence in the propriety of his relationships with benefactors. Parliamentary passes: 6/10 It is not just financial gain under the spotlight, but power and influence. This weekend it emerged Paterson will get to keep his Commons pass, as many ex-MPs do. However, he and others still allowed free access to parts of parliament are not obliged to declare their financial interests – meaning they would be able to catch legislators in the corridors and bend their ear on certain topics or business interests. Proposed solution: Having a register of interests for those ex-politicians with lobbying jobs who still get access to parliament is one way mooted to solve this issue. How peerages are handed out: 9/10 Much criticism was levelled at Johnson granting arch-Brexiteer Goldsmith a seat in the Lords, immediately after he lost his seat in the 2019 election. However, the thorny issue returned this weekend, when it was reported that 15 of the last 16 Conservative party treasurers have been offered a seat in the House of Lords, having each donated more than £3m to the Tories. No 10 has also refused to rule out Paterson being handed a peerage – though they have since retreated from this position and briefed he will not be appointed to sit in the House of Lords. Calls to reform the way peerages are granted have long gone ignored by Conservative party leaders, and almost a quarter of those appointed to the Lords last year were found to be Tory donors, or close associates or former colleagues of Johnson. Proposed solution: There are calls to scrap the unelected House of Lords altogether, or for the commission that scrutinises appointments to parliament’s upper chamber to get stronger powers to say no to recommendations by political party leaders. Deleted and disappearing WhatsApps: 7/10 Ministers and senior Conservative figures have deleted or lost WhatsApps texts, or turned on “disappearing messages” so that conversation history disappears after a short period of time. The latest figure to admit some messages have gone missing is Bethell, who is a hereditary peer and advised Hancock on his Tory leadership campaign in 2019. After legal proceedings were launched against the awarding of Covid contracts worth £85m to Abingdon Health, Bethell admitted he had “cleared WhatsApp messages” from his personal phone to “free up storage”, and conceded: “To the extent that these messages related to the Abingdon Health contract, they would have been deleted.” Proposed solution: Campaigners are already launching a judicial review into the government’s use of self-destruct messages. Attempts to sway watchdog panels: 9/10 The Guardian revealed on Sunday that a watchdog had to prevent ministers breaching a strict code on political neutrality and independence during the search for new chairs for several semi-public bodies. Messages from the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments showed that ministers were asked to replace interview panellists for the high-profile jobs because they were “not sufficiently independent”. The body said the moves were “threatening to undermine the independent status” of a role intended to bring “challenge and rigour”. Proposed solution: Jonathan Evans, chair of the committee on standards in public life, cited concerns about ministers “seeking to pack assessment panels with majorities of political affiliates” and called for the commissioner for public appointments to be consulted on all panellist choices.It was disappointing to read in the Guardian that “Britain has no rainforests to soak up carbon dioxide emissions” (The problem with blue carbon: can seagrass be replanted … by hand?, 5 November). Britain emphatically does have rainforests. Along the western seaboard of Scotland, starting just north of Glasgow, the largest remaining fragments of temperate rainforest in Europe cling on. Under massive pressure from excessive grazing killing young trees, and rapidly spreading invasive non-native rhododendron, these fragments remain a precious carbon store and a globally important, incredibly beautiful, biodiversity treasure. Rainforest fragments also remain in the west of Wales and England. The Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forests and Land Use (Cop26: world leaders agree deal to end deforestation, 1 November) made a global commitment to conserve and restore forest ecosystems. That day, Scotland’s environment minister, Màiri McAllan, restated a commitment to restore and expand Scotland’s rainforest as part of investment in the natural economy. On Sunday, indigenous Amazonian representatives visited Cormonachan forest in Argyll for a rainforest blessing, linking the hopes and challenges of tropical and temperate rainforests. If the Scottish government now commits concrete financial and operational resources to fulfil its promise and deliver genuine ecosystem restoration for our own rainforest, perhaps that leadership will emerge, and those hopes will be rekindled. Dr Andrew Weatherall Principal policy officer (woodlands and forestry), RSPB Dr Paul Walton Head of habitats and species (Scotland), RSPBIn our world of clay and fire, Richard Batterham was a quiet legend. As a young potter in the 1970s, I visited him at his studio in Dorset. He gave me a tour, explaining making methods, technical details and his ethos. The studio was full of work in progress. The pots were strong and functional forms, made while the clay was wet from the wheel, and with beautiful glazes from the flame kiln firings. Although generous with his time, and encouraging, he was very focused on his work. I commented that he had been difficult to find, and he replied that he didn’t want “all England and his wife” to descend on him.This year, Boris Johnson craved the titles of champion of Cop26 and star of G7. He saw something called “global Britain” and hoped it would crown his Brexit triumph, leading the world into a new age of peace and prosperity like a 21st-century Churchill. Instead, Johnson now finds himself in a morass of sleazy MPs, dodgy peers and Covid contracts. More seriously, he is about to plunge once more into the messy issue of the Irish border. His Northern Ireland Brexit protocol was supposed to liberate him from such torments, yet it has bound him hand and foot. Two years ago, Johnson lied to unionists, telling worried exporters in Northern Ireland there would be no need to fill in extra paperwork when sending goods across the Irish Sea. He now wants to keep face by ditching the protocol altogether and presenting the EU with what amounts to a clear crisis: a permeable border drawn around the whole of Northern Ireland, which he knows is unacceptable to Brussels. Johnson conducts his politics like a poker player who constantly raises the stakes while showing his opponents his cards. When politicians take control of trade negotiations, it usually means trouble. After the UK left the EU, the job of reordering its markets, customs and tariffs should have been left to officials and mediators. Devising a practical deal would have been in everyone’s interest. It was madness that no agreement was reached. Such a deal might not have been greatly to Britain’s advantage, but Brexit was never going to be either. The UK opted to leave the top table and did so with no plan for replacing or safeguarding the trade it had lost in Europe, becoming an offshore supplicant for some 40% of its lost trade. For years, Johnson taunted Europe and gloated over Britain’s impending superiority. He draped his negotiator, David Frost, in ermine and sent him to fight every battle as if it was the hundred years war. As every passing week now shows, this strategy was utterly counterproductive. Even so, a sober observer of the Northern Irish predicament may wonder why a solution cannot be found. Goods passing into and out of Northern Ireland could surely be monitored electronically for customs and standards purposes. Brussels has already proposed an easing of bureaucracy, the chief bone of contention. It wants this to be overseen by the European court of justice, which is hardly a deal-breaker. The EU is the dominant regulator. The US would react in much the same way. As it is, Johnson has made the whole issue politically toxic. Desperate for machismo, he huffs and puffs and threatens a “nuclear option”. He has no strategy for Britain’s relationship with Europe, no alternative border mechanism to meet what is clearly a real problem. Meanwhile, Brussels has an awesome arsenal of retaliatory trade and migration controls, which it is already mobilising. Johnson’s woeful diplomacy has left him with no European leaders who have any interest in helping him. Half are happy to see Brexit fail. The other half are busy letting their farmers, haulage firms and care organisations gleefully tap into what was once a critical source of British labour. The idea that Brexit would enable Britons to “take back control” of anything is absurd. Control has been lost. And Belfast’s buses are burning once more. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistTeam Europe turned out to be Team Charlie Appleby at the Breeders’ Cup meeting at Del Mar over the weekend, as the man from Moulton Paddocks rounded off the best season of his career with all three of the European-trained winners over the 14 races. Appleby has now had runners in 11 races in North America in 2021 and won seven of them, and returns from California with another £2.7m in prize money earnings despite seeing two fancied runners scratched in bizarrely similar circumstances after becoming upset in the stalls. And all this in a week when Appleby’s predecessor at the yard, a certain Mahmood al-Zarooni, saddled his first runners for eight-and-a-half years at Meydan in Dubai. They finished eighth of nine and 12th of 13. Hands up: who’s seen Sliding Doors? Zarooni, of course, was very much the architect of his own downfall, and Appleby’s considerable ability when it comes to training horses has been apparent ever since the former assistant stepped into Zarooni’s shoes in the summer of 2013. But even so, there is a sense that this season has particular significance, and not just because Appleby is certain to be Britain’s champion trainer for the first time. For about 20 years now – ever since the extraordinary Galileo’s offspring started to emerge on to the track, in fact – the simple fact of the matter is that the Ballydoyle/Coolmore axis has been winning the game of international Flat racing. Godolphin has had occasional champions of its own, of course – Appleby landed a first Derby for the royal blue colours with Masar in 2018, but it has never really felt like a genuine clash of equals. The Coolmore crew have for the most part been at least one step ahead. Aidan O’Brien, however, drew a blank at Del Mar, where unusually he had just one runner in one of the juvenile events, and just six in all. Despite winning two Classics, meanwhile, he is only fifth in the British trainers’ table and could conceivably be relegated to sixth by Mark Johnston before the season ends on 31 December. O’Brien, inevitably, was Ireland’s champion trainer once more, for the 23rd season running and the 24th time in all. After four straight seasons when his prize money total was more than double that of the runner-up, however, this year’s margin – over his son, Joseph – was €2.4m to €1.5m, and two more trainers – Jessica Harrington and Ger Lyons – were hot on Joseph’s heels. It might be a blip – O’Brien has had the occasional one before – but this was also, of course, the year when Coolmore lost Galileo. His final crops of yearlings will keep things ticking over for a few seasons yet, but unless St Mark’s Basilica – a grandson of Galileo on his dam’s side – has inherited a lot more than 25% of the great stallion’s winner-siring ability, Ballydoyle’s dominance in middle-distance races in particular will inevitably start to slip. Whether O’Brien feels the need to ring any changes at Ballydoyle remains to be seen. Suggestions towards the end of last year that Colin Keane might replace Ryan Moore as his number one rider proved to be a long way wide of the mark, and Keane had only a handful of rides for Ballydoyle in 2021 while also retaining his title with a record-breaking total of winners. And while Frankie Dettori rode second-strings to win O’Brien’s two British Classics this year – Mother Earth and Snowfall – Moore was back in the groove from midsummer, with eight Group One wins in Europe aboard St Mark’s Basilica, Mother Earth, Snowfall and most recently Luxembourg, Ballydoyle’s big hope for next year’s Classics, in the Vertem Trophy at Doncaster. Appleby, though, had a top-notch juvenile of his own this year in Native Trail, while Modern Games, his Juvenile Turf winner, also looks highly progressive. Adayar and Hurricane Lane, his Derby and St Leger winners respectively, are expected to race on at four. The best season of Appleby’s career may well prove to be only the best season of his career so far.Developing countries pushing for a climate deal that limits global heating to 1.5C have been given a boost after Barack Obama signalled his support, in a rare positive moment amid an increasingly sombre Cop26. Rifts are deepening between countries that want to force negotiators to return every year to revise national plans on emissions cuts, if they are deemed inadequate to meet the 1.5C goal, and those who want to stick to the Paris agreement timetable of five-yearly revisions. Those who support a five-year gap were buoyed last week by findings suggesting the long-term commitments to net zero emissions by mid-century that many countries have presented would lower future heating to 1.8C above pre-industrial levels. But a fresh assessment on Tuesday is widely expected to provide a “reality check” which is less positive, focusing on short-term emissions in the next decade. These are crucial because if those are too high they will push the 1.5C target out of reach before the longer-term cuts kick in. Obama’s conviction that countries must revise their targets more frequently was also supported by the current Joe Biden administration, which has signed a strong statement from the High Ambition Coalition of developed and developing countries calling for the change. The former US president said: “Science has made it clear. The dangers of a warming climate are greater than we thought.” In a private gathering of High Ambition Coalition ministers, Obama said: “What you are doing – what the HAC is attempting to accomplish – is vital.” Noting the coalition’s role at the 2015 Cop summit in ensuring the target of 1.5C was written into the Paris agreement, he added: “The brutal tempests of the warming climate are making even clearer that we cross that line at our peril. Once again … it falls on the High Ambition Coalition to make that case. “You’ve come together once again to speak to not only the need to get to 1.5C, but also to provide the adaptation funding that’s necessary for those who may end up paying the steepest price for actions that they themselves did not take.” Obama’s intervention came as the UK sought to focus attention on how countries can adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis, but developing nations protested that the funds on offer to help them were too small. The presence of the former president dominated the conference, as: The UK promised £290m more to help developing countries protect themselves from the impacts of extreme weather Developing countries called for a settlement on “loss and damage”, which refers to the impacts of climate breakdown that are too extreme to adapt to or protect against A draft “cover decision” for the outcome of the Cop was slammed as too weak Saudi Arabia was accused of trying to prevent progress The UK came under fire for its flurry of announcements in the first week, which some campaigners said were an attempt to “spin” the talks as a success despite underlying problems. A draft statement from the HAC noted on Monday the “deep concern” over the gap between existing commitments on greenhouse gas emissions made at Cop26, and the far deeper cuts needed to limit global heating to within 1.5C of pre-industrial levels. The countries are demanding that the parties to the Paris agreement keep returning annually to the negotiating table until pledges are in line with the 1.5C, and they want all countries to come with nationally determined contributions in line with that target by next year. The statement reads: “[We] stress the urgent need to accelerate the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in this decisive decade, and recognise the importance of ambitious action by the G20, whose members, if they align their policies with a 1.5C pathway, could limit global warming by 2100 to 1.7C.” Current pledges on emissions under the Paris agreement would lead to a rise of 2.7C, according to the UN. Some estimates last week based on pledges made outside the UN process put the likely rise at 1.8C or 1.9C, but those estimates are based on untested assumptions and sometimes vague commitments. The HAC, which includes the US, EU member states and dozens of developing countries, was a leading force at the 2015 summit, pushing for a 1.5C limit to be included in the Paris agreement. Not all countries in the coalition have signed the statement, but the 40 current signatories include major groups of developing countries: the Alliance of Small Island States, the Least Developed Countries and the African Group. The group said the statement and support for it signalled “growing momentum behind a Cop26 outcome that reduces emissions drastically and limits temperature rise to 1.5C. It elevates the importance of climate adaptation as a critical element of global climate action, and addresses the resources needed for the world to adapt, keep a target of 1.5C alive, and respond to loss and damage. In an interview with the Guardian, Bolivia’s chief negotiator, Diego Pacheco Balanza, criticised rich countries’ refusal to discuss loss and damage or compensation at Cop26 as evidence of “diplomatic bullying”. He said: “There’s been a systematic attempt by developed countries to remove all discussion about responsibility, compensation and direct climate finance from the negotiations; it’s shameful. Instead, they want us to focus on carbon markets and their 2050 net zero narrative, which is completely meaningless. The net zero narrative is a big lie. We need to eliminate greenhouse gases now, not in 30 years.” In response to the first draft of the Glasgow decision text published on Monday, which contains no mention of phasing out fossil fuels, Pacheco said: “It shows how developed countries are trying to impose the net zero and carbon markets narrative, it’s a form of diplomatic bullying. They are always trying to destroy what’s been achieved at previous climate negotiations and start again, so we never move forward.” HAC has called on other countries to address the issue of adaptation, to ramp up climate finance, and to reduce emissions through action on coal, fossil fuel subsidies and methane, and ambitious policies in transport, including shipping. The coalition is trying to refocus the talks on the key goal of Cop26 – keeping 1.5C alive – amid fears that it is slipping out of reach, as some countries have shown unwillingness to agree to an acceleration of the Paris ratchet mechanism, by which countries bring back improved commitments, currently every five years. Draft proposals for the “Cop decision” – likely to be the main outcome from the Glasgow conference – were also criticised by Greenpeace and others as too weak. The campaigning group was particularly concerned that references to phasing out fossil fuels, which some countries want to be included in a final outcome, were being opposed by countries including Saudi Arabia. Jennifer Morgan, the executive director of Greenpeace International, has been to every Cop meeting and said the mention of fossil fuels had been blocked by the same countries each time. “What’s very concerning here in Glasgow is that the first draft of the climate pact text is already exceptionally weak. Usually the text starts with some ambition, which then gets watered down,” she said. “To keep 1.5 alive, four words must be added: ‘fossil fuels phase out’, and countries must come back next year to close the gap.”The independent inquiry into how hundreds of post office workers were wrongfully accused of theft, fraud and false accounting as a result of computer errors has been urged to demand immediate compensation for those affected. Addressing a preliminary hearing of the inquiry into one of the biggest miscarriages of justice in British legal history, Sam Stein QC, acting for 151 post office operators, said any attempt by the Post Office and government to put the issue of compensation on the back burner until the end of the inquiry must be resisted. He told the inquiry chair, the retired high court judge Sir Wyn Williams: “Frankly, we are concerned that Post Office Ltd and BEIS [Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy] may use the lifetime of the inquiry to obfuscate and say: ‘We need to wait and see what the inquiry says’ before they act. “The Post Office has had plenty of time to sort this out with government. They should not be permitted to add to the extent of the Post Office scandal by doing nothing, delaying payment, prolonging suffering and avoiding responsibility. Instead, we suggest that this inquiry should demand urgent and immediate action.” Stein told Monday’s hearing that despite judgments in the court of appeal quashing the convictions of scores of post office workers, victims had still not received adequate compensation. Campaigners believe that as many as 900 operators may have been prosecuted and convicted between 2000 and 2014 because the defective Horizon IT system falsely suggested there were cash shortfalls. Stein said that the claimants’ legal costs should be refunded. £46m of legal costs were incurred by 555 claimants when the Post Office settled a civil claim with them for £57.75m, leaving them with a net amount of less than £22,000 each. Stein said the Post Office had told them it was in discussion with the government regarding this issue but he said that was not good enough. “We say this: Post Office Ltd and BEIS need to recognise that payments of proper and full compensation, [and] the return of legal costs, is required now – that means immediately and not at some unknown point in the future, nor subject to continuing discussions,” he said. He said that when the inquiry started in earnest next year, it would hear accounts of post office workers who died before the names could be cleared, who contemplated or attempted suicide and whose children were bullied and spat at because of the stigma that came with the wrongful accusations.The British satellite communications company Inmarsat has agreed a $7.3bn (£5.4bn) takeover by the California-based Viasat, becoming the latest UK tech firm to be taken over by a foreign rival. The deal is the latest in which a UK company that plays a key role in Britain’s economy and national security is to be taken over by foreign rivals or private equity firms. Inmarsat was listed on the London Stock Exchange before being taken private two years ago by a consortium including the private equity firm Apax. Viasat, which described the deal as “transformative” for the global communications industry, said it intended to work with the government to continue to invest and grow Inmarsat’s presence in the UK. “Viasat plans to preserve and grow Inmarsat’s London headquarters,” the US company said, announcing the deal. “Viasat plans to build on Inmarsat’s presence in the UK and is committed to preserving and growing the investment of the combined company in UK space communications.” Inmarsat provides mobile satellite services that underpin email, internet and video conferencing, as well as in-flight wifi. It has 14 satellites in orbit and plans to launch another seven, and supplied satellite services to the Ministry of Defence to improve ground communications for troops fighting in Afghanistan. It provides commutations services for ships as well. The company, whose technology was used in the hunt for the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 in 2014, employs about 860 people at its base in Old Street and 1,800 worldwide. Viasat, which in 2019 had Priti Patel on a £1,000-an-hour contract for five hours’ work a month as a strategic adviser until she was appointed home secretary, said that it would “cooperatively engage” with the UK government to continue to operate in the country following the same commitments made by the private equity consortium that took over Inmarsat two years ago. “Together, we can advance broadband communications and create new hybrid space and terrestrial networks that drive greater performance, coverage, speed, reliability and value for customers,” said Mark Dankberg, Viasat’s executive chair. Given the nature of Inmarsat’s business the deal may be reviewed under the National Security and Investment Act 2021, legislation brought in to protect key national assets from foreign takeover. The government said it would continue to “closely monitor” the deal, which will be subject to regulatory scrutiny in a number of markets including the UK. A spokeswoman for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: “The business secretary has powers under the Enterprise Act 2002 to intervene in acquisitions which raise public interest concerns. The government recently strengthened those powers through the National Security and Investment Act, which commences on 4 January 2022.” In July, the government launched a review of the takeover of the Welsh microchip manufacturer Newport Wafer Fab by Nexperia, the Chinese-owned company that acquired the UK’s largest producer of semiconductors. In April, the government ordered an investigation into Nvidia’s takeover of the Cambridge-based chip designer Arm, citing potential national security concerns. Four months later, the Competition and Markets Authority launched an in-depth investigation into the deal after finding it raised serious competition concerns. “Joining with Viasat is the right combination for Inmarsat at the right time,” said Rajeev Suri, the chief executive of Inmarsat. “The industrial logic is compelling and ensures that the UK has a strong and sustainable presence in the critical space sector for the long term.” Viasat, which has a UK base at Farnborough and supplies services and products to the MoD, said it expected the combined company to be able to make cost savings of $190m a year but did not comment on potential job cuts. “Decisions regarding management of the combined company following the closing of the transaction will be made as part of the integration planning process,” it said. Inmarsat was set up in 1979 by the International Maritime Organization, the UN’s maritime body, as an international governmental organisation to enable ships to communicate with shore and to call for help in emergencies. It was privatised in 1999 and floated on the LSE in 2005. The company has struggled in recent years, however, and faces increasing competition from rivals including Elon Musk’s SpaceX. In July 2020 the government bought a £400m stake in the satellite operator OneWeb in a post-Brexit effort to rival the European Union’s Galileo system.The National Gallery has published detailed research into its links to the slave trade – including the connections of John Julius Angerstein, whose series of Old Master paintings formed the nucleus of the gallery when it was founded in 1824. The data, covering mainly the period between 1824 and 1880, records at least 67 trustees and donors, as well as some important sitters and painters, with links to the slave trade. A further 27 named people were associated with the abolitionist movement, and another 17 had links to both slavery and abolition – highlighting the many links between slave-ownership, art collecting and philanthropy in 19th-century Britain. Research began in 2018, predating the Black Lives Matter movement of 2020, which shone a spotlight on the issue. According to the gallery’s website, the project scrutinises “what links to slave-ownership can be traced within the gallery, and to what extent the profits from plantation slavery impacted our early history”. The gallery took an all-encompassing approach when identifying people’s connections with slavery, including direct links or those arising out of relationships, a professional encounter or through third-party ownership of a painting formerly belonging to a collector involved in the slave trade. Thomas Gainsborough, for example, the leading portrait painter in England in the later 18th century, painted three portraits of sitters with links to the slave trade – all presently in other collections. These included The Byam Family (1762-66, on long-term loan to Holburne Museum, Bath), The Baillie Family (about 1774, now at the Tate), and Ignatius Sancho (1768, now at the National Gallery of Canada). The most notable person researched was Angerstein, who in 1824 sold 38 paintings to the British government to establish the National Gallery’s collection. Working for what became Lloyd’s of London, Angerstein amassed a fortune through broking and underwriting marine insurance. “An unknown proportion of this was in slave ships and vessels bringing to Britain produce cultivated in the Caribbean by enslaved people,” the gallery reports. “Angerstein acted as a trustee of estates and enslaved people in Grenada and Antigua.” The National Gallery is embarking on further research to cover collectors from 1640 and trustees and donors from 1880 to 1920. A spokesperson said the gallery acknowledged that its collection “has a particular, historically rooted character” but stressed they “have not, and will not remove any picture from display because of its association with slavery”. She added: “If anything, we want to engender discussion and understanding about these questions. A great deal of work had been undertaken by the curatorial team in this area, and the picture labels in the gallery mark clearly where paintings are associated with slavery.” Hakim Adi, professor of the history of Africa and the African diaspora at the University of Chichester, welcomed the gallery’s research but said it was “much too little, much too late”. “It is always a step in the right direction when it is recognised that it was the labour of exploited and enslaved Africans that created much of the wealth that made Britain ‘great’,” he said. “However, it has been well-known for centuries that all the major institutions in Britain, from the Bank of England to the Church of England to the monarch, were involved in this great crime against humanity. “Acknowledgment is a very fine thing but it is not a reparation for that crime. Indeed, I see no mention that the National Gallery is planning to do anything as a result of this research. It doesn’t appear to want to extend its inquiry into the period after 1920, nor to extend it to the colonial exploitation of those in Africa, Asia and elsewhere.”Maureen Cleave, the British journalist best known for her profiles of the Beatles, has died aged 87 after a short illness. As one of the few young journalists given scope to write about the pop explosion of the 1960s – and with her inquiring, non-deferential tone – Cleave helped to kickstart the British music journalism that flourished in her wake. Her most famous encounter came with John Lennon in 1966, who told her: “Christianity will go. It will vanish and shrink. I needn’t argue about that; I’m right and I will be proved right. We’re more popular than Jesus now. I don’t know which will go first, rock’n’roll or Christianity.” His statements outraged God-fearing Americans and damaged the band’s popularity – after their tour of the States later that year, they never toured in the US again. Lennon later wrote: “If I hadn’t said the Beatles were ‘bigger than Jesus’ … well, Lord, I might still be up there with all the other performing fleas.” Born in India in 1934 and later raised in her mother’s native Ireland, Cleave studied at Oxford and was hired as a secretary at London’s Evening Standard following graduation. She persuaded the newspaper’s editor to give her a column on pop music, entitled Disc Date. It enabled her to visit Liverpool in 1963, where she documented the growing Beatlemania in a piece headlined Why the Beatles Create All That Frenzy. In the coming years she continued to write about the group, and befriended them. She later described them as “more fun than anyone else and terrible teases. The interviewer was outnumbered four to one: they might put your coat in the wastepaper basket, offer to marry you, seize your notebook and pencil, pick you up and put you somewhere else, demand you cut their hair … On the other hand, they were often kind, offering you cigarettes or a swig from their bottles of Coke, making sure you never got left behind.” She rewrote a line of A Hard Day’s Night: “I find the things that you do / Will make me feel all right” updated Lennon’s more laboured “I find my tiredness is through / And I feel all right”. Lennon later claimed that Norwegian Wood was written about her and that he and Cleave had had an affair, but Cleave denied it and Lennon later recanted, saying he could not remember who it was about. In September 1966 she married her husband Francis Nichols, whose work took the couple to Peru for a spell in the late 1960s. After returning to the UK, Cleave continued her journalism career, also writing for the Daily Telegraph, Observer and others. Cleave was diagnosed with ME in the 1990s, and later with dementia after her husband’s death in 2015. She is survived by their three children.I was reasonably sure that I could live my whole life without agreeing once with Jacob Rees-Mogg, and I nearly made it; then he said he loved fireworks. Unhappily, I also love fireworks. This year I went to Lewes in Sussex, which is like the Glastonbury of setting fire to things, the pilgrimage of the truly faithful, the place where there are too many firework displays for a firework lover to see them all, although unlike at Glastonbury, you can concurrently hear them all. I had never been before, and had heard so much about it that I was afraid it might not meet my expectations. It turns out that if your expectation is that a lot of things will explode, it is almost impossible to be disappointed. “Good servant, bad master,” they always say about fire, forgetting all the other jobs it can do: excellent street entertainer, suspense-builder, child-minder. I saw a four-year-old carrying a flare considerably longer than their own leg; that kid was definitely not about to misbehave or take a break to eat raisins. You couldn’t have this much incendiarism without a lot of planning, and it takes all year, with a Captain of Effigies, a Captain of Torches and a Captain of Fiery Pieces. It sounds like a circle of managerial hell, where three people have been given broadly the same job, and spend the rest of their careers engaged exclusively in schemes to tear each other down, but because it’s a leisure activity, it seems to work. Also, you have to think twice about making an enemy around this much petrol. Besides, the chain of command is really clear: the Captain of Effigies is king, since this is where you get to take the nation’s temperature. You could dispense with opinion polling and just sit in for a year on the Lewes effigy meetings, to see where people really are on the issues of the day. But you do have to put the hours in. If you weren’t in the room where it happened, you have no chance of deciphering them. So there was a Dominic Cummings, wearing glasses, having an eye test. A lot to unpick, here – why was the optician wearing nothing but a lab coat and a loin cloth? Or was it a nappy? The message was pretty clear, though: we’ve had enough of your bullshit, Cummings, and just because we’re about to set fire to it, that does not mean it’s forgotten. Matt Hancock, meanwhile, was modelled after Auguste Rodin’s The Kiss, with a naked woman draped across him, and here the symbolism really broke down for me – was it actually his girlfriend, or was it the beleaguered NHS, or was it the ailing nation, and can anyone hereabouts give me a quick low-down on what Rodin’s original message was, as that might help? Nobody I was with at the time could, as they were engaged full time trying to figure out how many tons of potatoes the chip shop had got through, relative to a regular Friday. A crow-masked man in religious robes was holding a giant needle over a globe, but – here we go again – was the globe the virus or the Earth; was the figure an avenging angel or a bringer of death; and what were we cheering when we set it alight? Had we accidentally joined an anti-vax protest? Oh, and there was Joe Biden, but he was either a chicken (Afghanistan?), or a turkey (general, light-hearted anti-Americanism). There’s a niche life lesson, here – that papier-mache is an incredibly challenging medium for biting political satire. But I can still draw broad conclusions: everyone’s sick of the government, and all its many tendrils; they are also pretty sick of the pandemic; they really love setting fire to things. Jacob Rees-Mogg, incidentally, concluded his paean to gunpowder by asserting nobody wants an Oliver Cromwell-style government, “cracking down on every possible bit of fun that people have”. In fact, Cromwell, while heavily anti bear-baiting and Christmas, was fine with fireworks but this is a feature of new Conservatism, redirecting civic discontent anywhere but where it belongs. The people of Lewes aren’t having any of it. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistAfter an hour of trying to cajole my dog Lyra into watching DOGTV – which launched in the UK and Europe this morning – I had some pressing questions: “What am I doing with my life?” and “why is this starting to feel like that scene in A Clockwork Orange?” DOGTV has a number of short videos explaining why it exists and how you – the human being with a dog – are supposed to use it. One blurb, a cartoon narrated by a man pretending to speak from the perspective of a pet, explains that it has been created “by scientists and dog experts” and is “based on more than 60 scientific studies”. The idea is that it offers soothing content, presented in colours and sounds that are most palatable to dogs’ perceptions, with “healing sound frequencies and positive affirmations”. It should stimulate them, calm them, and even educate them, by slowly getting them used to new or triggering sounds. I watched another introductory video, from an American trainer called Mikkel Becker and her dog Indiana Bones, in which she reassures viewers that their pets are getting the benefits of the channel even if they’re not actively watching. It will make them calmer, more relaxed and happier, says Becker – though it might take a few weeks. Then she let Indiana lick her on the mouth. I realised then that I might not be a DOGTV person. There were other clues, too. Some of the videos are four hours long – not because they have paid an expensive director a lot of money, but because they are supposed to be played to a dog that has been left at home all day. I work from home, so my dog is more likely to want to be left alone than want a dogsitter. Nevertheless, I tried to get Lyra involved. Usually, she can take or leave TV, though she does have a soft spot for wildlife shows, particularly anything involving horses and elephants. Weirdly, she seems to find Bake Off fascinating, which must be because of the colours. But she also has a strict napping policy between 8am and 12pm, so it was an uphill battle. I put the feed on the television, but she refused to leave her bed. Instead, I had to give her the full weekend hangover experience. I put my laptop on the floor in front of her, so she could see it better. I started to feel like I was corrupting her. Was it right to make her watch a screen, when she seemed so much happier looking at me with complete disdain? “Ly! What’s this?” I said, pressing play on the live feed. A bulldog trotted up and down a beach, fetching a ball. She pricked up her ears at the squeaking sound, failed to see a toy in front of her, looked at me as if I had lied, then turned her head away. I’d say it was pointed. I could get her to watch for a few seconds at a time, but she was only as attentive as she was to everything else that was nearby – her chew toy, my partner, the lady who passes the window with her staffy at the same time every day. The discovery of a new cobweb hanging underneath the radiator was more exciting. Soon, Lyra refused to look at the screen, even if I said “puppy!” I wondered if, given her indifference, I might at least be soothed or educated, but it was unsettling: the footage paired jaunty music with a rapid pace, quickly moving from a walk in the woods to a splash in the lake then a stroll past the Golden Gate bridge. As well as the live stream, there were three specific categories of video available: Relaxation, Stimulation and Exposure. Relaxation worked, in the sense that she slept through it, as drops of colour swirled in water, a man moved smoothly along a river on a scull and birds flew across a vivid blue sky in formation. After three minutes, I almost nodded off myself. She woke up for Stimulation, though I did trick her into looking by shouting, “dog! Big dog!”, because there was a horse on it, and I don’t think she knows the word horse. Exposure aims to familiarise dogs with noises and experiences that might unsettle them. It had some dogs’ eye views of legs on a pedestrian crossing, and an American mailman being nice at the door. It certainly exposed her to the USA, but by this point, she had lost interest completely. She licked her paws, then her legs, then moved on to other regions. If you want to take that as her review, please feel free.The final film from Hong Kong maverick Benny Chan (Big Bullet, New Police Story, Who Am I?), who sadly died during post-production, this has all the genre pleasures of an old school bad cop v good cop flick. Honest, stoic cop Bong (Donnie Yen) is about to capture a longtime criminal nemesis when, to his horror, a masked gang annihilate his foe along with a dozen other colleagues. Even more shocking, Bong soon discovers that the leader of this savage ambush – spectacularly shot at an abandoned shopping mall – is none other than Ngo (Nicholas Tse), a former comrade-in-arms whom he sent to jail for misconduct. Straight out of prison and thirsty for blood, Ngo and his band of cops-turned-criminals are itching to settle the score, which leads to some adrenaline-pumping action pieces. The ageless Yen is as mesmerising as ever in these sequences, one of which involves him infiltrating a housing project and jumping through one window to another, all while being outnumbered by ruthless goons. Still, Tse steals the show here, in part because his villain has more depth than Yen’s angel of justice. Sporting long black locks and a broody gaze, Ngo makes for an almost tragic figure; he is only evil because of misplaced loyalty to a system that does not hesitate to spit him out. Such resentful undercurrents add an impressive grittiness to the action sequences: the fight scenes are drenched in mud and tears, and the camera revels in the material dirtiness of combat. There are occasional lags during dialogue-heavy moments, but the final showdown between Tse and Yen – the pair wrestle each other among the rubble of a run-down church – is a special moment. • Raging Fire is released on 12 November in cinemas.African nations want Cop26 to open discussions this week on a mega-financing deal that would channel $700bn (£520bn) every year from 2025 to help developing nations adapt to the climate crisis. Tanguy Gahouma-Bekale, the chair of the African Group of Negotiators on climate change, said the increased finance was needed for the accelerated phase of decarbonisation required to hold global heating to 1.5C. These funds would also be essential, he said, to cope with the impacts, including fiercer heat, widening droughts and more intense storms and floods, which are using up an increasingly large share of GDP. According to a recent study, some African nations are already spending more on climate adaptation than on healthcare and education. “The work on this needs to start now,” said the climate diplomat from Gabon. “Talks about finance take time so we need to have a roadmap now with clear milestones on how to achieve targets after 2025 to ensure the money flows every year.” It is also a question of justice. The climate problem was largely created by Europe, North America and east Asia, but the worst impacts are in the southern hemisphere. In 2009, rich nations promised $100bn a year, which was considered a downpayment and an important gesture of trust. Until now, they have welched on the deal by providing only 80% of what they had promised. For the African group, Glasgow is a time to make amends and lift the level of support in line with the greater urgency demanded by science. The money is needed immediately, say negotiators. According to a recent study by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, Cameron devotes close to 9% of its GDP on climate adaptation, Ethiopia 8%, Zimbabwe 9%, while Sierra Leone, Senegal and Ghana are all more than 7%. Even with these high shares of domestic funding, the study found a gap of about 80% between need and expenditure. Gahouma-Bekale, who also serves as special adviser to the Gabonese president, Ali Bongo, said the opening phase of Cop26 had pushed the world in a more positive direction, but words needed to be backed by actions in the second week. “We have received some assurance during the world leaders’ summit that they really want to close the gap and we have seen strong announcements on deforestation and methane,” he said. “What we want to see now is implementation. Only implementation can give us the assurance we need that we can keep warming to 1.5C.” Africa accounts for less than 4% of historical global emissions, compared with 25% for the USA, 22% for the EU and 13% for China. But it has suffered many of the most devastating effects of climate disruption, recently including droughts in the Sahel and floods in the Nile delta. In future, it is expected to be among the most vulnerable regions of the world to heatwaves and crop failures. Some African countries have shown leadership. Gabon is among a handful of nations that already have a carbon-negative economy because its vast tropical forests in the Congo Basin absorb more greenhouse gases than its factories, cars and cities emit. It has recently passed an ambitious climate law that aims to ensure the country remains dependant on forests and agriculture rather than the fossil fuel industry. To achieve this goal, it needs outside support so that the government can continue to raise living standards. Many African nations depend on coal for electricity and did not join a declaration this week by more than 40 countries to quit this most polluting of fossil fuels. Gahouma-Bekale said this pledge was an important step forward, but developing nations would need more time. “This is very good news for the world,” he said. “If we want to succeed with the Paris goals, then we must phase out all fossil fuels, and coal is among them. But our situation in Africa is different. We are still on our way to be developed. We can’t drastically stop coal and oil. For now we need to use it to eradicate poverty and access to energy. We will need support for the transition. And we need to be flexible. For five to 10 years, we must do the two together [coal and renewables] so the transition can be smooth.” That transition will depend on a flow of funding. African nations insist wealthy countries are held as rigorously to account on their finance promises as they are on emissions reductions. That means regular reporting on the levels of support provided, needed and received. “What we want to achieve at this Cop is a transparency framework with strong rules on accounting,” said Gahouma-Bekale. • This article was amended on 9 November 2021. It is the USA that is responsible for 25% of historical global emissions, not China as an earlier version said.The disclosure that Palestinian human rights defenders were reportedly hacked using NSO’s Pegasus spyware will come as little surprise to two groups of people: Palestinians themselves and the Israeli military and intelligence cyber operatives who have long spied on Palestinians. While it is not known who was responsible for the hacking in this instance, what is very well documented is the role of the Israeli military’s 8200 cyberwarfare unit – known in Hebrew as the Yehida Shmoneh-Matayim – in the widespread spying on Palestinian society. In 2014, a number of military “refusenik” from the unit described to the Guardian and a handful of other media organisations the scope of the surveillance. The largest intelligence body in the Israeli military, Unit 8200 intercepted electronic communications including email, phone calls and social media in addition to targeting military and diplomatic traffic, they said. Those whistleblowers alleged that the “all-encompassing” intelligence the unit gathered – much of it concerning innocent people – was used to divide Palestinian society. In a letter refusing to continue with interceptions, which they said were unjustified, the reservists described the unit’s work. “The Palestinian population under military rule,” they wrote, “is completely exposed to espionage and surveillance by Israeli intelligence. It is used for political persecution and to create divisions within Palestinian society by recruiting collaborators and driving parts of Palestinian society against itself. In many cases, intelligence prevents defendants from receiving a fair trial in military courts, as the evidence against them is not revealed.” The reservists said personnel were instructed to keep any damaging details of Palestinians’ lives they came across, including information on sexual preferences, infidelities, financial problems or family illnesses that could be “used to extort/blackmail the person and turn them into a collaborator”. More serious still, some former members of the unit claimed that some intelligence gathered was not collected in the service of the Israeli state but in pursuit of the “agendas” of individual Israeli politicians. At the time, the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) cast doubt on the claims and said it had “no record that the specific violations in the letter ever took place”. Again, while too little is known about the case of the Palestinian human rights defenders to determine with certainty precisely who was behind the hacking, some issues are clear. The organisations in question – including Al-Haq, Addameer, Defense for Children International – Palestine, the Bisan Center for Research and Development, the Union of Palestinian Women’s Committees, and the Union of Agricultural Work Committees – had been targeted by the Israeli government for intelligence gathering over their work and associations, which saw them recently accused by Israel of “terrorist” associations, which are denied by the groups. On Monday an Israeli security-diplomatic source, briefing journalists, confirmed that investigations into the groups involved had yielded an “excellent file” of evidence linking the organisations to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), a Marxist group labelled a terrorist organisation by many western states. The Israeli government, as both NSO and Israeli officials have insisted, licenses the sale and use of NSO spyware. It is currently investigating claims of whether government clients misused the spyware. All of which suggests that the Israeli government should, at the very least, be abundantly aware of who was using the software, and for what purpose, not least since it was used to target organisations and individuals who appear to be primarily of interest to the Israeli state. And the context of Israeli spying on Palestinians, as reports in the Washington Post and Israeli outlets make clear, is one of routine intrusion that is escalating both in its scale and technical sophistication. According to the reports, in the past two years, Israel has rolled out a new surveillance initiative that involves a smartphone technology called Blue Wolf that captures photos of Palestinians’ faces and matches them to a database of images so extensive that one former soldier described it as the army’s secret “Facebook for Palestinians” with the phone app flashing to alert soldiers if a person is to be detained, arrested or left alone. All of which raises profound human rights questions over an apparently unchecked state surveillance regime in an area under military occupation. and whose tools and methods, if history is anything to go by, risk being offered as services to other states.The occupants of a disused building in Glasgow that was reopened to offer emergency accommodation for climate activists have accused police of trying to break into the site with a battering ram early on Monday morning. The activists at Baile Hoose, a former homeless shelter in the Tradeston district, said up to 20 officers from the Metropolitan police and Welsh forces mounted the raid at 3am, claiming to be acting under orders from Scottish police. The activists said Police Scotland officers arrived soon afterwards and “calmed the situation. [It] was only then that the Met and Welsh police backed off.” One witness to the raid said at least one of the liaison officers from Police Scotland appeared to be shocked at their colleagues’ conduct, and also said that an officer described it as “totally unacceptable” policing. Another activist said police had their batons drawn as they entered rooms, to the distress of many occupants. A spokesperson for Police Scotland confirmed that officers went to the building. However, Police Scotland deny that the operation was a raid or an attempt to force entry, or that a battering ram was used. “Around 3am on Monday 8 November, officers attended at a property on Centre Street, Glasgow, following concerns for the safety and security of those using the building. Officers will continue to engage with those currently in the property,” the spokesperson said. A Baile Hoose spokesperson disputed that explanation. She said they had been occupying the building since 3 November and that the Scottish fire and rescue service had already inspected it, giving them advice about fire safety and battery-operated fire alarms, which were now installed. The activists squatted in the building after it emerged that hundreds of Cop26 delegates, including indigenous leaders, were unable to find accommodation for the summit. There were unconfirmed reports of some indigenous activists sleeping rough. “Baile Hoose has provided a safe home and meals for hundreds of activists during this summit,” a spokesperson said. “There have been a lot of people who have travelled here from all over the world and the country, and quite often people from marginalised communities are not getting their voices heard.” Glasgow city council, which owns the building, said it had asked the activists to leave last week because it was concerned about the safety of its water supply and the possibility that the building could contain asbestos.Australian-led research claiming moderate alcohol intake is associated with a reduced risk of heart disease and death is not based on strong evidence, and fails to take into account recent research findings linking even moderate alcohol intake to cancer, experts say. A research letter from Monash University reported the results of a survey of 18,000 people in the US and Australia over the age of 70 who were asked about their alcohol consumption. The researchers followed the participants for almost five years and found a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease in people who consumed between more than five standard drinks a week compared to those who never drank, regardless of gender. They found consuming five to 10 standard drinks a week was associated with a reduced risk of mortality from all causes. The findings were published in the European Journal of Preventive Cardiology. Associate Prof Andy Towers, an addiction researcher from the school of health sciences at Massey University in New Zealand, said there had been numerous studies over the years showing an association between moderate drinking and reduced mortality. But the findings of many of those studies had since been called into question with problems in their methodology. The Monash University study used similarly outdated methods that did not account for the socioeconomic status of participants, Towers argued. Higher socioeconomic status is known to be protective against poor health. Selection bias of participants – which meant they were generally more healthy to begin with – and the limitations of observational studies where participants self-report alcohol intake have been found to artificially show an association between drinking and better health. On a graph, this association looks like a j-shaped curve, with the lowest point on the curve – light-to-moderate drinking – representing the “ideal” level of exposure to alcohol to offer health benefits. “This sort of analysis has often been cited as a reason to support moderate drinking as being beneficial for health,” Towers said. “[But] in our own research, we’ve tried to explain why you cannot make claims about the health benefits of alcohol with exactly this type of graph. We show that this is clearly not a causal relationship and is actually reflective of someone’s socioeconomic status. We show that once you control for how rich or poor someone is the relationship between alcohol and health no longer exists.” The research letter notes this as a limitation of the study, acknowledging there was “a potential healthy volunteer bias due to the selection process of a clinical trial” and that socioeconomic factors were “unmeasured or underestimated”. Towers said generally people who drink moderately are also people “who are richer, have better houses, have better jobs, have better education and can – as a result – afford better lifestyles that support better health”. “Basically, saying that moderate drinking causes better health is just as nonsensical as saying that having a Ferrari causes better health. It’s not the drinking causing better health – both health and the tendency to drink moderate amounts are reflective of middle-class lifestyles.” The research letter cites just five other research papers and does not include references to recent papers linking even modest alcohol intake to cancer. The researchers were monitoring the health impact of aspirin intake in healthy older people. They asked the same study participants about their alcohol intake to draw their findings. Towers said he was concerned the public would be left confused and misinformed as a result of the research letter. Media have widely reported on the study. “The intent of these authors was likely positive and to explore an issue of significant interest to the public,” Towers said. “However, it ignores best-practice and some of the hard-won insights we’ve gained in alcohol research over the past decade.” The Heart Foundation’s position statement on alcohol recommends that to reduce the risk of harm from alcohol-related disease or injury, healthy men and women drink no more than 10 standard drinks a week and no more than four standard drinks on any one day. The previous weekly guideline was 14 standard drinks a week but that was reduced to reflect the latest evidence. The Heart Foundation’s manager of clinical evidence and gerontologist, Dr Amanda Buttery, said an observational study “cannot establish a direct cause of the impacts of alcohol on heart health in people aged 70 years and older”. Buttery said the Heart Foundation recently reviewed the best evidence relating to alcohol and cardiovascular health. The evidence reviewed “presents a clear picture of the harms of alcohol consumption,” Buttery said. “Alcohol is not a necessary or recommended part of a heart-healthy diet. It contributes unnecessary kilojoules and is of low nutritional value. Alcohol can also have negative impacts on blood pressure, heart rhythm and inflammation. “The relationship between alcohol and health is becoming clearer. There is strong evidence that consuming alcohol increases the risk of various cancers including mouth, pharynx, larynx, some oesophageal, breast, colorectal, stomach and liver cancers. It can seriously impact on your heart health too, by increasing the risk of heart rhythm disorders like atrial fibrillation, which can lead to stroke.” Buttery noted that people who had a previous heart attack or stroke were excluded from the Monash University study which might have affected the findings. “There is not strong enough evidence to recommend a safe level of drinking for cardiovascular health,” Buttery said.The expansion of Afterpay and other buy-now-pay-later products into pubs and restaurants could lead to bigger debts for people already struggling financially, consumer advocates warn. Concerns were raised last week after news that pub giant Australian Venue Co had partnered with buy-now-pay-later (BNPL) monolith Afterpay to roll out the facility in the 160-plus venues it operates nationally. Afterpay and other similar products like Zip Pay and PayPal have been available in retail outlets for some time but the latest development heralds the arrival of the biggest BNPL provider into the Australian hospitality industry. Katherine Temple, the director of policy and campaigns at the Consumer Action Law Centre, said her organisation was already working with an increasing number of people struggling with BNPL debts. “Often people are struggling with buy-now-pay-later debts on top of existing debts: credit cards, personal loans, even utility bills. So it can be a very complex debt situation that people are experiencing,” Temple told Guardian Australia. The move to offer Afterpay and other BNPL options in pubs and restaurants was “a really concerning development”, she said, especially given the approach of the festive season. “We’ll see a lot of people in January with a lot of buy-now-pay-later debt that they need to pay off, whether for Christmas presents or going out over the Christmas period,” Temple said. “My fear is that that will be on top of credit cards and other kinds of credit – and that’s going to exacerbate financial hardship for people.” Because BNPL debts don’t accumulate interest in the way a credit card or bank loan does (there are late payment fees instead), companies are not subject to the same regulatory requirements regarding responsible lending. “There are so many players operating in the space and they exist in a regulatory void,” Temple said. “These companies aren’t doing proper affordability checks, and these products can really exacerbate money problems. They aren’t free, especially if you don’t pay on time. Some of them might have some good safeguards in place but then there are 10 more that don’t. There’s no consistency.” James Hunt, the campaign director of Financial Counselling Australia, said: “It’s like the wild west without a sheriff. The law is not keeping up with the pace of innovation in our lending markets.” Financial Counselling Australia was seeing more and more people relying on BNPL products to pay for essentials such as groceries, Hunt said. Those suffering from a debt spiral had often opened accounts with multiple BNPL companies. Hunt and Temple both called on the federal government to close the regulatory gap to ensure consumers have a safety net when they use BNPL products. “We totally understand why people would be using these products when you can’t afford food,” said Hunt. “But you don’t have consumer protection like you do with credit cards or personal loans. These companies don’t have the same hardship practices in place. We’re seeing more people becoming overcommitted.” Australian Venue Co told Guardian Australia the company was introducing Afterpay due to customer demand. “The addition of Afterpay … is about offering a service that many of our customers are already using and are comfortable with, so this is about giving them greater choice,” a spokesperson said. It is against the law for gambling providers to offer forms of credit to punters, but the regulatory grey area in which BNPL companies operate – and the expansion into venues with poker machines or other forms of betting – has raised questions about its potential to exacerbate gambling problems. Afterpay would only be available on food and beverage purchases at Australian Venue Co’s venues, and not for any purchases in gaming rooms or any area where wagering takes place, or any venues that did not serve food, the spokesperson said. Afterpay said its product was limited to dining and hospitality. “Unlike credit cards, Afterpay cannot be used for any type of gambling service,” a spokesperson said. “Responsible spending rules are built into our product, which ensure that customers never pay interest or revolve in debt. Customers are unable to continue using Afterpay if they are late on a single instalment.” Australian Venue Co expects to offer Afterpay as a payment option by the end of this week.Some authors write for escape. I wrote poetry during the pandemic to process, to meditate on the world that was, to try and make some sense of things as a writer, and hopefully to offer some peace to at least one reader, somewhere, somehow. When Covid lockdowns started across Melbourne in 2020, my income all but dried up. In between the online schooling and Covid-test runs, the mask-sourcing and endless Zoom calls, the online grocery shopping and mapping the curve, I turned, in comfort, to my first love: poetry. I wrote in fits and spurts – erratically, feverishly, snatching time whenever I had the inclination and the energy – which, granted, was not at all some days, weeks, months. From the most locked-down city in the world, I wrote in dog-eared notebooks and on the backs of old bills, penning the poems for my new collection, How Decent Folk Behave. Some were published as events unfolded, in a national paper I was freelancing for at the time. Others collected in small piles around our limited living space. Looking upwards from my window at the bottom of the world, I wrote about the bushfires that devoured our summers; about children marching out of school to bring attention to environmental catastrophe. I wrote about the epidemic of violence against women in Australia, and finding hope in the despair: hannah and them kids died brutal we don’t know ’em all from soap but it aches my soul to muse on it so babe, your mama needs to know that a good man exactly the man you’ll be will lead a bad man home. I wrote about the moment the Black Lives Matter movement galvanised across the world. When my memoir The Hate Race was published in 2016, I likened writing about growing up as a Black child of migrants in Australia post-White Australia policy to “writing about a house burning down, while you’re trapped inside the burning house”. Mapping 2019-2021 in poetry felt similar in some ways, yet completely opposite in others. Sometimes you need to remove yourself from something in order to see it more clearly. And in this case, I was literally physically removed from the world. Instead of looking within myself for the lyrical journey, I was staring out at it. Art, at times of crisis, can be difficult to justify – can seem like an indulgence. I wrote about grappling with this too: painting gives pennies back to medicare … old time jazz, that opera, eases congestion in the hospitals, helps our old folks live longer in their homes … poetry is why that kid so close to falling through the cracks even gets up and goes to school … art is the heart of all that we are. I’ve been asked about the emotional toll of making art which responds to such visceral events, with such immediacy. There is always an exhaustion which comes from sitting with trauma, or loss, or hopelessness. A heaviness. But what of the cost of not making the work? What do we lose, when at crucial times in history, the artists down their tools? There is a reason fascist regimes come for the artists. The poets weave together the threads of our stories. When they come for the poets, they are coming for the truth of the people. Using art to ensure the survival of story, culture and history is imbedded in many cultures. In my case, it is the Black transatlantic legacy I lean into. For centuries, those stolen, born into and descended from the transatlantic slave trade have found stunning artistic ways to express the unthinkable. Abducted from West Africa and trafficked through the Americas to serve as free labour for the western world, my ancestors were forbidden to speak their birth language or practise traditional customs, and forbidden to read and write English. They soon realised that a thing of beauty, of joy, of poetry would render certain facets of their being out of reach of their oppressors. Gospel music, for example, often contained stories of escape, or instructions and inspiration for rebellions. When plantation owners looked in on a congregation singing a rendition of Michael Row the Boat Ashore in mellow a capella harmonies, they probably weren’t aware that Michael’s boat was being rowed towards freedom. The lyrics of this song have even been adapted over time, to incorporate lines that mirror the Black struggle for civil rights over the centuries. Jamaican-American musician Harry Belafonte’s 1962 version contained the lyrics: Mississippi kneel and pray, Hallelujah Some more buses on the way, Hallelujah. In Brazil, enslaved Africans developed an art form now widely known as capoeira. From up at the “big house” it looked like energetic dancing, but complicated combat manoeuvres were disguised within. It is this challenge I think of, when I put pen to paper, all these hundreds of years on – how to hold the reader inside the rhythm, to sing so beautifully some do not know I am singing about freedom. To contort into such shapes that onlookers mistake battle for dance – that, to me, is still the ultimate challenge of making political art in these times. • How Decent Folk Behave by Maxine Beneba Clarke is out now through Hachette Australia (A$26.99)Voter approval of Scott Morrison is at its lowest level since before the outbreak of the pandemic, while the government’s handling of international relations has taken a hit over the past month, the latest Guardian Essential poll suggests. After a torrid week on the international stage that saw Morrison’s feud with the French president dominating the agenda and Australia’s climate policies under the spotlight, the survey of 1,089 people tracked a six percentage point drop in the prime minister’s approval rating since October. The survey, which was taken while Morrison attended the G20 summit in Rome and the United Nations Cop26 conference in Glasgow, found 48% of those surveyed approved of the job he was doing as prime minister while 42% disapproved. This continues a gradual decline in voter satisfaction with Morrison which has fallen from a high of 65% in February and is at its lowest level since the 41% recorded in March 2020 in the wake of the black summer bushfires. Morrison’s approval rate is steady across most states, but the fall is being driven by voter sentiment in Queensland where approval has fallen from 60% to 46%. Approval for the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, went from 41% to 40% nationally – which is within the poll’s 3.1% margin of error – while one in four voters are still unsure about his performance. Morrison remains ahead as preferred prime minister, 44% to 28%, but his dominance on this metric has eroded over the past year from 52% of people in February who preferred him over Albanese at 24%. The number of respondents saying Morrison deserves to be re-elected is also shrinking, with 45% of those polled saying it is “time to give someone else a go”, up from 41% in August. Amid the diplomatic fallout over the cancelled French submarine contract that led to the leaking of text messages sent by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to Morrison, voters have switched their judgment on which of the two major parties is best trusted to handle international affairs. Labor is now three percentage points higher than the Liberals as the party most trusted to manage international relations. It now leads 36% to 33%, which is an eight-point turnaround since last month. Almost half (47%) of those polled say Morrison’s behaviour has “undermined” Australia’s reputation on the world stage, including 28% of Coalition voters, while just 27% think the prime minister has boosted Australia’s international reputation. Voter judgment on the importance of Australia’s international reputation is clear, with a total of 94% saying it is either “very important” or “fairly important”. About 70% of people said this reputation was important because it “affects our economic performance”, while about 80% agreed it was important for Australia to be trusted by its allies and for global cooperation to address major challenges such as the climate crisis. While Morrison spent months wrangling internal resistance to the government’s net zero target that it took to Glasgow, the poll finds the Coalition’s revised climate policy has split voter sentiment. A total of 43% say the net zero by 2050 commitment is not enough action on climate change for Australia and “we need to do more”, while a similar proportion of those surveyed – 37% – say the commitment is enough. A majority of Coalition voters (51%) say that the commitment is enough, while 32% say it falls short. Among Labor voters, the view is reversed, with 52% saying it does not go far enough and 29% satisfied wth the pledge. Those over the age of 55 and men were more likely to be happy with the commitment, while young people and females were more likely to be dissatisfied. About a third of voters said they understood the government’s plan set a clear target “but does not provide a credible plan to get there”, while 21% said it did neither. Following criticism that Australia did not go far enough at the Glasgow summit, a total of 43% of voters wanted the government to set a more ambitious 2030 target, with more people deeming this important than the 25% who thought the net zero 2050 pledge was a priority. Most voters (52%) were not confident that the UN summit would result in meaningful changes to address climate change and reduce emissions on a global or a domestic level, with those over the age of 55 the most pessimistic. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The survey has also tracked views on the government’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic, finding the Coalition has improved its standing since NSW and Victoria have come out of prolonged lockdowns, with a total of 48% saying the federal government has done a good job, and 29% saying it has done a poor job. The positive rating jumped most markedly in Victoria, going from 34% in October to 45% this month. As the government seeks to focus attention on economic management ahead of the next election, due by May, the poll shows that the Liberal party is most trusted to handle the economy (41%) compared to Labor (33%). It is also ahead on national security 38% to 32%, but has slipped on this since September, when it was 13 points ahead, 41% to 28%. But on healthcare, childcare, housing affordability, jobs, climate change and fair wages and workplace conditions, Labor is more trusted.Tasmania became the first state in Australia to open a casino in 1973, and since then, it has become a place in which the gambling lobby’s influence on Australian politics is at its most bald-faced. Now, a bill about to head through Tasmania’s upper house has brought that influence into the open. The bill would mark the end of a monopoly on gambling licences in Tasmania held by Federal Group – a company owned by the Sydney-based Farrell family who are worth $564m – since it established that first casino. The Liberal state government argues the legislation will deliver an additional $8.5m a year in state revenue for essential services and community needs, at the expense of Federal Group. But critics say the Gaming Control Amendment bill is a missed opportunity for reform in a state where gaming interests have long held sway and which has one of the highest levels of gambling harm. Tasmanians as a whole lose an average of $15.5m every month to poker machines. “This opportunity in Tasmania is unique,” Meg Webb, an independent upper house MP, says. “We should be grasping with both hands this opportunity to do everything we can to regulate this industry effectively.” “No other state in Australia has this chance, and we’re utterly blowing it.” Negotiations crash into the open For decades, the political deals between Federal Group and the Tasmanian government were shrouded in secrecy. But when details of the controversial arrangement were exposed in 2015, the government committed to put the licences to tender. A joint parliamentary committee was set up to investigate. At the 11th hour, the Tasmanian Hotels Association (THA), which represents the state’s pubs and clubs, and Federal Group put forward a joint submission proposing, among other things, a model that raised the tax on pub pokies but slashed them drastically on casino pokies – by far the most lucrative – from 25.88% of gross profit to 10%. The proposal was slammed by independent assessors and by the Tasmanian Liquor and Gaming Commission, which argued that it would not provide greater protection for vulnerable people from pokies use or increase regulatory compliance. Industry flexes its muscles In an extraordinary pivot, the government abandoned its policy and adopted the industry’s position wholesale – taking it to the 2018 state election, but staying mum on one crucial detail: the value of the casino tax cut. When Labor took an anti-gambling policy to the same election, the national gaming industry converged on it in a startling display of power – directly bankrolling the Liberal Party’s campaign and funding its own separate advertising blitz. Labor lost, and dumped their anti-pokies policy. When the 2021 election rolled around neither of the major parties wanted to talk about pokies – especially not the intended casino tax rate. Then a memorandum of understanding between the Labor Party and the THA was leaked, signed prior to this year’s election, showing that Labor had effectively capitulated to the industry, giving the THA the power of veto over its pokies policies. A Right to Information request from Webb also uncovered evidence that the casino tax rate had been agreed upon between the government and Federal Group well before the 2021 election, but kept secret until after it. The figure was 10.19%: the industry got exactly what it wanted. That tax cut represents $119m in lost revenue over the 20-year life of the proposed licence. Were casino pokies to be taxed at the same rate as pubs, the state could yield $248m in public revenue. And revenue is needed: Tasmania is falling behind in a number of socioeconomic measures. Social housing waitlists are longer than they have ever been. ‘Breakdown of the democratic process’ Tasmanian historian James Boyce, who has spent years investigating the links between the gaming lobby and the government, says the problem is a failure of democracy. “The situation in Tasmania exposes the fact that the depletion of our public services is directly connected with the vulnerability of our democracy and breakdown of the democratic process,” Boyce says. Anti-pokies campaigners say that 40% of losses from poker machines come from high-risk gamblers. The easiest measure of an effective harm minimisation effort, then, is reduced revenue. That doesn’t necessarily mean all pokies revenue is jeopardised: measures proven to reduce the harm on gambling addicts – such as $1 bet maximums and doubling of machine spin speeds from 3 to 6 seconds (thereby halving the speed at which a punter can make a new bet) – are also shown to have no effect on revenue from recreational gamblers. None of these measures form part of the proposed legislation. Better than the status quo? The bill finally passed through the lower house of Tasmanian parliament in late October. Labor MP Dean Winter said the party supported it because it ended Federal Group’s monopoly and was an improvement on the status quo. “By voting with the bill we vote for a piece of legislation that we wouldn’t have proposed, but something that we fundamentally believe is better than the current arrangements,’’ he said. The Greens and a lower-house independent, Kristie Johnston, disagreed. Dozens of amendments were proposed and voted down. All signs point to the government’s intention to ram the bill through the upper house this week. Critics say the best outcome now would be an upper house inquiry allowing controversial elements of the bill to be scrutinised, but this would require support from Labor. “When the government’s policy has been literally written by industry, you would look to the opposition to be true representatives of their community, but the Labor opposition has also been captured by this industry and compromised,” Webb says. “The issue is actually not just poker machines, it’s about our democracy. Low-income people in Tasmania pay the price of this failure of democracy. This is easily preventable suffering,” says Boyce. “This is a major taxation measure and it’s locking in enormous levels of social harm.”About 800km north of Adelaide in the middle of the South Australia desert, an oil and gas company is working on a high-profile project to capture and store carbon dioxide. It’s claimed to be one of the world’s biggest carbon capture projects and lauded by the federal government, but what is actually going on at Moomba? Can this $220m project led by Santos really live up to the hype and will it store enough CO2 to make a difference? What’s the hype? The Santos chief executive, Kevin Gallagher, travelled to Glasgow for the start of the international climate talks to stand alongside Australia’s emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, and confirm the company’s investment in the project. Gallagher said: “This carbon reduction project in the South Australian outback will be one of the biggest and lowest cost in the world and will safely and permanently store 1.7m tonnes of carbon dioxide per year in the same reservoirs that held oil and gas in place for tens of millions of years.” The project is the first carbon capture and storage scheme to be registered as eligible to generate carbon credits under the Morrison government’s emissions reduction fund (ERF). A model of the project was on display at the government’s pavilion during the first days of the Cop26 climate talks. How will it work? According to an environmental report submitted to the South Australian government in March, Santos will look to capture CO2 currently being vented to the atmosphere from its existing gas plant at Moomba. That gas will be compressed and transported through new or existing pipelines “to suitable locations where it will be injected into target geological formations deep underground”. Last year, the company told an industry roundtable it had identified six sites up to 60km away from Moomba that could be used for CO2 storage. Santos has said in the future it could store CO2 from other sources and third parties. Will the project actually cut emissions? Santos claims Moomba will be one of the world’s largest CCS projects and will store 1.7m tonnes of CO2-equivalent a year with the potential to scale up to 20m tonnes a year. For context, 1.7m tonnes of CO2 is about 0.35% of Australia’s current annual emissions of 494.2m tonnes. Operators of Australia’s biggest CCS scheme, Gorgon Carbon Dioxide Injection project, off the north-west coast of WA, say it can store 4m tonnes of CO2 a year but has missed targets. According to Santos’ latest climate change report, the company emitted 5m tonnes of CO2-equivalent in the financial year 2019-20 when all its direct and indirect energy use was added up. Santos has a target to cut these emissions by 26% by 2030 and to reach net zero by 2040, but this aim excludes emissions from burning the fossil fuels the company sells to customers. According to Santos, these emissions – known as scope 3 – added another 24.3m tonnes of CO2e to the atmosphere in 2019-20. But the climate impact of those scope 3 emissions will continue to grow because the company has a target to double its production of fossil fuels between 2018 and 2025. Santos has a 66.7% share in the Moomba project, with the rest owned by Beach Energy. Both companies have said the project will help them cut their own emissions. Capturing, processing and transporting the CO2 will also use extra energy. The Guardian asked Santos how this would affect the overall emissions reductions from injecting the CO2, but the company did not respond before publishing. Is this a new plan? Santos has been talking about capturing and storing CO2 from its gas processing plant at Moomba since at least 2006. A 2007 information sheet from Santos describes how a demonstration phase “could commence as early as 2010” to capture CO2 from gas operations at Moomba and pump it into partly depleted fossil fuel reservoirs. This, the document said, would “re-pressurise the reservoirs and sweep residual oil left behind by traditional recovery methods (this is called enhanced oil recovery)”. The Guardian asked Santos if pumping CO2 into its reservoirs would push out extra oil or gas and, if it did, what the company would do with those fossil fuels. Santos did not respond before publishing. Just days before the 2007 federal election, the Coalition led by John Howard promised it would give Santos $10m to fast-track a “‘Moomba Carbon Storage Concept” if it was elected. Howard lost the election to Kevin Rudd. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In 2009, Santos put the project “on hold” but by 2018 it was carrying out engineering studies, modelling and looking for potential sites for CO2 injection. In June this year, the project was given a $15m grant from a $50m federal government program to support CCS. But Santos had said the project’s future hinged on CCS being accredited by the government’s emissions reduction fund, meaning they could generate carbon credits that could be sold to the government or private industry. In early 2021, the government installed several fossil fuel industry leaders and supporters to the panel that would decide if CCS should be added to the ERF. In October, the government made CCS eligible for carbon credits and the Moomba project has now become the first project to be registered.“Each and every” skilled shipbuilding worker affected by the federal government’s decision to scrap the existing $90bn submarine project and switch to nuclear-powered boats will have a job in the future, defence industry minister Melissa Price says. As ongoing controversies surround the plan, Price will tell a major submarine conference in Adelaide on Tuesday that the submarines will be built in South Australia. As part of the Aukus deal, the government will now buy at least eight nuclear submarines from the United States or the United Kingdom instead of buying 12 diesel-electric submarines from France. The decision has enraged France, which says it was blindsided by the move. It has also sparked fears about nuclear proliferation, a capability gap, and job losses. It is not clear yet what sort of industry Australia will need in order to support the build and maintenance of nuclear-powered boats. Unions wrote to prime minister Scott Morrison in September saying thousands of jobs were at risk. Defence officials told senate estimates in October that the future of up to 600 construction jobs was uncertain after the government scrapped the existing project. Another 560 people are employed directly on the existing project. Many companies had invested in resources to become part of the supply chain for the submarines that were being bought from France’s Naval Group. In a pre-recorded message Price said she understood the uncertainty the decision had created. She said small and medium businesses affected would be supported to compete for future work across defence programs, and that individual workers would find new jobs through a sovereign shipbuilding talent pool. Workers will be redeployed to other projects, such as maintenance of and upgrades to the Collins-class submarines, or placed with overseas shipbuilders or governments. Others will have the opportunity to get new skills, or train in nuclear power. “We have a solid commitment to find a role within that pool for each and every skilled shipbuilding worker affected by this announcement,” Price said. “We will be building nuclear-powered submarines in South Australia.” The federal government has insisted France knew its project was in trouble, but France, outraged, says it was taken by surprise. The diplomatic stoush with France flared up again last week when Australian reporters interviewed Macron at the G20 summit in Rome. Asked if he thought Morrison had lied to him, Macron said: “I don’t think, I know”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In response, someone leaked a text from Macron to Morrison from two days before the Aukus announcement asking whether there was good news or bad news on the way. French ambassador Jean-Pierre Thebault, who was recalled to France amid the dispute but has since returned to Canberra, called that leak a “new low” that threatened trust in the Australian government. In a blistering address to the National Press Club, Thebault said the decision itself was a “stab in the back”. A thousand jobs have been “trashed”, he said. Labor is generally supportive of the Aukus deal but critical of the treatment of France, the potential need for the Collins-class submarines to be used for decades more before new submarines are in the water, and wants a guarantee that no jobs will be lost. The Submarine Institute of Australia is holding its conference on “homegrown undersea technology” until Thursday. The SA premier, Steven Marshall, will tell conference attenders that the state government will help the industry grab available opportunities and “help towards a seamless transition of skilled workers into new jobs”.For three decades, Kelly Slater has dominated Australian waves. He first rung the iconic Bell’s Beach bell in 1994, and then again in 2006, 2008 and 2010. On six occasions he has triumphed in competition on the Gold Coast. On his way to winning a record 11 world titles, famous breaks across Australia have often provided an early season launch pad for the American star. Perhaps never again. The World Surf League has recently warned surfers that remaining unvaccinated ahead of the 2022 season would pose “significant challenges” and may see them prohibited from “entering certain countries if they are not fully vaccinated”. At the top of that list is Australia, where the WSL is expected to head in April for events at Bells Beach in Victoria and the Margaret River in Western Australia. While the nation’s entry conditions for non-residents have yet to be confirmed, it is anticipated – as with the Australian Open – that unvaccinated athletes will either be banned or face strict quarantine requirements. Slater, a tour veteran who will soon turn 50, is understood to be unvaccinated against Covid-19. He caused controversy in a recent comment on Instagram, criticising the pro-vaccination advocacy of Australian Ironman athlete Matt Poole. “If something happens to me, it’s on me, not someone else,” Slater wrote. “And for people saying listen to the doctors, I’m positive I know more about being healthy than 99% of doctors.” The surfer has no medical qualifications. Unless Slater’s views on vaccination change (he has insisted he is not against vaccinations, just that he does not currently feel comfortable being vaccinated against Covid-19), or authorities loosen restrictions, it seems that the best surfer of all time may never again compete at Australian beaches. Nor is he the only one. Brazil’s Gabriel Medina, who won the 2020/21 WSL season, thanks to wins in Australia at Rottnest Island and Narrabeen, admitted last year that he had refused a vaccination ahead of the Tokyo Olympics. His current status is unclear – he later insisted his failure to be vaccinated was a “mistake”, adding “vaccine saves lives, guys!” Slater’s predicament underscores a looming dilemma for international sporting competitions. While Australia’s long-closed borders are now slowly reopening, the blanket ban on foreign arrivals is being replaced by vaccination requirements that are stringent by international standards. In sports notable for their globe-trotting – including tennis, golf, road cycling, Formula One, surfing and cricket – Australia’s entry requirements make being unvaccinated a significant competitive liability. Across a season of fine margins, sitting out one of the four Grand Slams, a Grand Prix or two WSL legs is unthinkable. Or is it? “I don’t think an unvaccinated tennis player is going to get a visa to come into this country,” Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews insisted recently, amid defending Australian Open champion Novak Djokovic’s ongoing disinclination to disclose whether or not he has been vaccinated. “And if they did get a visa, they’d probably have to quarantine for a couple of weeks. But let’s not personalise it. I don’t think any other [unvaccinated] tennis player or golfer or Formula One driver will even get a visa to get here.” Djokovic has told the New York Times that he is not against vaccines generally, but does not agree with mandates – especially for the Covid-19 vaccine. In comparison, anyone is able to enter the United Kingdom without a vaccination – but must self-isolate at home for 10 days and test negative twice. In the past, the British government relaxed entry rules for Premier League stars competing abroad during the international break. In the United States, non-nationals must be vaccinated but there is no blanket quarantine rule for unvaccinated returning citizens. Singapore has also adopted a vaccinated-only approach. While Australia may be at the stricter end of the spectrum, it is by no means the only nation insisting on the vaccine. Globally, sports have been grappling with how to ensure widespread vaccination among athletes and staff. The AFL has been at the forefront, implementing a vaccination mandate that requires all players and football department staff at AFL and AFLW to be vaccinated in order to train and play. The NRL has insisted it will not take the same approach, although admitted that state health rules and airline requirements may take the matter off their hands. In the NBL, 99% of players have had at least one dose ahead of the season tip-off next month; in reaching that high-level of coverage, a number of players who refused to get the jab have been released from their contracts. Those numbers compare favourably to overseas leagues – only about 70% of Premier League stars are double-jabbed, while rates in major American leagues hover at just above 90% – largely without the use of league-enforced mandates. But there have been high-profile hold-outs – Kyrie Irving has not played a minute this season for the Brooklyn Nets, after refusing the vaccine in the face of a New York City requirement for anyone entering indoor gyms, including the Nets’ stadium, to be vaccinated. While Irving remains benched, he is being paid only half of his $45m annual salary. While interest in high-profile domestic athletes who have refused vaccination may diminish once leagues return to action, international competitions look set to face an ongoing headache. With major global events on the agenda, including the UCI Road World Championships and Fiba Women’s Basketball World Cup next September, the Fifa Women’s World Cup in 2023, and the anticipated return of F1 at Albert Park and the Tour Down Under in South Australia, being vaccinated is likely to be an effectively essential requirement for jet-setting sports stars. For as long as the likes of Slater and Irving resist the vaccine, their fame and sporting prowess will mean that leagues and governing bodies grapple with meeting local requirements while attempting to accommodate the hold-outs. Yet with state premiers holding firm, a compromise in Australia seems unlikely. Slater’s rivals on the WSL will breathe easy knowing they have one less foe in the water at Bells Beach next Easter.History has largely ignored John Farrow. Despite the Marrickville-born film-maker carving out a staggering body of work – directing about 50 features for major US studios and working with stars including John Wayne and Bette Davis – it’s as though he barely even existed, beyond his name appearing in credits. The story of cinema is punctuated by those who rise to fame while countless others are relegated to the ash heap of history. John Farrow: Hollywood’s Man in the Shadows is a new documentary that shines a light on the Australian artist who was once a mover and shaker in Tinseltown, but whose legacy went the way of the dodo – similar to Gillian Armstrong’s 2015 film Women He’s Undressed, which examines the life of Australian-born costume designer Orry-Kelly. Many of Farrow’s films were well reviewed and he received two Oscar nominations: for best director (1942’s Wake Island) and best adapted screenplay (1956’s Around the World in 80 Days). The director belongs to a famous lineage, being the father of the actor Mia Farrow and the grandfather of Ronan and Dylan Farrow. Yet the co-directors of the film about his life, Frans Vandenburg and Claude Gonzalez, found almost nothing documenting his prolific career. “We were completely floored,” Vandenburg says. “Like, how did this happen? Where did this guy come from? You could find anything you wanted to about Mia but there was nothing about John.” Gonzalez add: “We went through the work of some of the best critics in the world – from Pauline Kael to Andrew Sarris – and found none of them mentioned Farrow. We looked into archives – no archive. We looked into biographies – no biography. We looked into interviews – no interviews. He had come and gone, and somehow made all these films without leaving much of a cinematic historical trace.” Hollywood’s Man in the Shadows, which premieres this weekend at Sydney film festival, is a work of excavation and investigation, digging up and studying a neglected artist’s oeuvre. It marks what is almost certainly the first rigorous analysis of a director who, according to Gonzalez, was “a pioneer” and “could match [Otto] Preminger, [Billy] Wilder and even [Alfred] Hitchcock, in his chutzpah, in his sense of drive, in his idea of the beauty of what a visual language cinema could be”. A conga line of experts appear throughout the film proclaiming Farrow’s virtues. One critic describes his 1942 action-drama Wake Island as “one of the most astonishing war movies ever made” and his fellow director Philippe Mora (Mad Dog Morgan, The Return of Captain Invincible) calls 1944’s The Hitler Gang “the first American film to track the rise of Hitler”. Farrow was also one of few Australians working in the old school Hollywood studio system. Vandenburg says there were “one or two” Australian cinematographers in Hollywood in that period but “I don’t think there’s another director who worked in the same period, in the same studios, who was Australian”. For those partial to film noir – as every cineaste should be – good entry points into Farrow’s work include 1948’s The Big Clock and 1950’s Where Danger Lives – two tight, twisty, pacey crime thrillers starring Ray Milland and Robert Mitchum respectively. One unfortunate consequence of his low profile, however, is that many of his films are difficult to find. Farrow’s many faces Farrow’s life outside cinema was stranger than fiction, encompassing adventures that sound like flourishes from Errol Flynn’s famously tall tale-filled autobiography My Wicked, Wicked Ways. And yet he really did (according to Man in the Shadows) masquerade as a doctor, which horrified his family; he really did take to the high seas and become a sailor; he really wrote the Tahitian-English-French dictionary; he really did fight in various revolutions, and on and on we go. Man in the Shadows was made with assistance from Farrow’s family, and includes interviews with his son John Charles Farrow and cousin Jim Farrow. So, why did history forget about John Farrow? The film-makers believe one important factor is that he didn’t big-note himself or his work. Vandenburg describes this as one of the director’s few “Australianisms”. Directors such as Hitchcock, Wilder and Preminger, Vandenburg says, “obviously knew what they were doing, but they also made a great fuss about what they were doing and how they were doing it”. “Hitchcock notoriously feted publicists and there are many, many interviews with him,” Gonzalez says. “There are none with Farrow about his work.” The co-directors also believe Farrow’s apparent willingness to direct any movie the studios assigned to him left an impression that he wasn’t a serious auteur. “He amassed this workload, basically taking on whatever project they threw at him,” Vandenburg says “He wasn’t credited as having a particular style – but we discovered, looking at his work, that he does have a particular style, and can be credited as an auteur because of his love for things like lengthy tracking shots.” But it’s not all high praise – the documentary acknowledges Farrow’s reputation for being notoriously difficult to work with. . One interviewee doesn’t pull any punches, saying Farrow was known for being “very sadistic, very cruel and overbearing” and “something of a monster”. The film explores the familiar tension between the greatness of the artist versus the sins of the person, with even his own son describing the director as “a dictator on set” and reflecting that he “had a couple of meltdowns working with him, as a lot of people did in Hollywood”. On top of that, Gonzalez explains, “he was a philandering husband, a person who had a secret life outside of family, who had a second family, who had illegitimate children”. “So he was a very complicated personality … and in the end he was critical of Hollywood society, seeing it as very money-driven, full of people hungry for power.” Gonzalez says Farrow became “very much guilt-ridden about what he was involved in – the idea of seeking fame and fortune through this medium”. This is another factor helping to potentially explain why he’s been overlooked and under-appreciated, suggesting the director’s omission from the history books may have been partly of his own volition. The engraving on Farrow’s headstone doesn’t mention his film career. “He’s described as a sailor and poet, a loved husband and father – and there is no mention of being a film-maker,” Vandenburg says. “That sums up a lot.” John Farrow: Hollywood’s Man in the Shadows is airing in select cinemas as part of Sydney film festival, and is available for streaming on SFF On DemandGiven the talk about rising inflation and interest rates, it is not altogether surprising that banks have lifted their fixed home loan rates. But that does not mean their variable home loan rates should begin rising, and we should not let banks pretend they are doing it tough. Two weeks ago NAB raised its fixed home loan rate by 0.2 percentage points, and last week the Commonwealth Bank and Westpac followed. Fixed rates, by their very nature, tend to move up or down faster than variable rates. Fixed-rate loans in effect anticipate movements in interest rates. If banks believe that in the next three years interest rates are going to rise, then they will start to raise fixed-rate loans. This happened in 2009 after the GFC when fixed-rate mortgages started rising six months before variable rates did and then in turn fell more quickly than variable-rate ones over the past decade: If the graph does not display please click here So given inflation and rate rises are expected to rise, you would expect banks would rush to cover themselves by raising the fixed rate. But while everyone appears to be certain that rates are going to go up sooner than previously expected, even in the past week expectations have dampened a bit. Prior to the Reserve Bank’s meeting last week, the market was predicting the cash rate to reach 1.0% by November next year. But by Friday that expectation had been pushed out to February 2023: If the graph does not display please click here So while the banks are justified to raise fixed rates, we should not let them start pretending life has suddenly become hard for them. For example, last week a spokesperson from the Commonwealth suggested the increases “reflect the steep increase in funding costs over the past few weeks”. Well now. Yes, in July the RBA stopped its term funding facility, which was set up to provide $188bn to the banks for fixed-rate loans during the pandemic. But even still, funding remains very cheap. Last Friday the Reserve Bank’s latest statement on monetary policy noted that “banks’ overall funding costs remain close to historic lows”. The short-term borrowing costs on the money-market, for example, remain well down on those of the past decade, and even below that of the cheap-money era of the mid-2000s: If the graph does not display please click here It is even better for banks when you consider that the majority of bank funding comes from deposits – both in savings accounts and term deposits. The Reserve Bank found banks’ funding has become more dependent on deposits, and that “funding costs have also benefited from the strong growth in low-rate deposits over the past year or so”. The RBA estimates that “deposits now account for around 60% of banks’ total funding – around 5 percentage points higher than before the pandemic”. And that money is dirt cheap. The RBA found that two-thirds of those deposits (or 40% of banks’ total funding costs) were paying an interest rate of 0.25% “or less”. That is well below that latest inflation rate: If the graph does not display please click here Think of it like this – deposits rates are what the banks pay, while loan rates are what they get. Over the past decade and during the pandemic, deposit rates have fallen by much more than mortgage rates: If the graph does not display please click here When interest rates are high, both mortgages and term-deposit rates go up and down by about the same amount. But more recently, for every 1 percentage point fall in the mortgage rate, term deposit rates have gone down by 1.5 percentage points: If the graph does not display please click here It means that while mortgage rates are low in real terms, real term-deposit rates are negative – the value of your money falls while it is in a term deposit: If the graph does not display please click here The gap between mortgage rates and both term-deposit rates and the cash rate is now as wide as it has ever been. In the past the discounted mortgage rate was about 1.5 percentage points higher than term-deposit rate. Now it is 3.2 percentage points higher: If the graph does not display please click here Such is the increase of the gap between mortgage rates and the cash rate that were it the old pre-GFC gap, the average discounted mortgage rate would be 1.35% rather than 3.45%: If the graph does not display please click here So while banks might have some justification for increasing their fixed home loan rates, let us not allow them to cry poor. Their funding costs remains at historic lows and there is zero justification for them to begin increasing variable mortgage rates before the Reserve Bank does.As the early morning sun rises over the hills of Wandella, a small hamlet of farms and rural properties near Cobargo, it is possible to momentarily overlook the devastation that tore through the area almost two years ago. Birds chirp, dairy cows roam the valley and a wet winter has left the area carpeted in verdant greenery. The national gaze has long since moved beyond Australia’s black summer bushfires, and even here at ground zero it is possible to imagine that day can be forgotten. But only for a brief moment. When the sun pokes above the adjacent ridge, it illuminates row after row of barren trees that betray the tranquillity. A potent reminder of the fire’s enduring impact, the trees are upright but still yet to recover. The same is true of those who inhabit this beautiful but now melancholy part of far-south New South Wales. For many, the long road to recovery has only just begun. As he surveys this vista from the construction site that is his home, Graeme Freedman is insistent. “I wasn’t going to be burnt off this site by a fucking bushfire,” he says. Freedman and his wife, Robyn, fled on the morning of New Year’s Eve, half an hour before the fire storm hit their property. Neighbours stayed to fight – and lost their lives. The Freedmans have spent most of the past 22 months trying to rebuild. It remains a work in progress. As the the second anniversary of the black summer bushfires approaches, less than one in 10 families who lost their homes on the south coast have finished rebuilding. An investigation by Guardian Australia has found that planning difficulties, labour shortages, underinsurance and a lack of support from government has left many stranded in caravans. As support services are withdrawn – the deployment of case managers from state government agencies has ended and mental health programs are finishing – local advocates have hit out at what they see as the abandoning of bushfire survivors. “It is so heartbreaking to see people still struggling nearly two years on,” says Leanne Atkinson, who is funded by Catholic Social Services to help communities recover. “There are a significant number of people falling through the cracks, living without adequate housing, access to water and sanitation.” In two of the worst-hit local government areas, Bega Valley and Eurobodalla, almost 1,000 homes were lost. Data obtained by Guardian Australia shows that barely 7.5% of survivors have finished rebuilding. Across Bega, of 467 homes that were lost, the council has received only 117 applications to rebuild. In other words, three in four families have not even commenced the planning process. “Rebuilding their homes isn’t as simple as it may seem,” local MP Kristy McBain says. “The paperwork and red tape can be difficult to understand at the best of times but it’s even more difficult for people experiencing trauma and dealing with the mental, emotional and physical stress of rebuilding after the fires.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Shortages take toll The first step in rebuilding involves the preparation of a development application. It took the Freedmans five months to submit their application – for a one-bedroom granny flat – such is the complexity of the planning process. After the 2009 bushfires in Victoria, laws were amended to make it easier for survivors. This time around in NSW, only minor legislative changes were made. “We thought some of the lessons from Black Saturday might have been learned,” Freedman says. “We expected some easing of building requirements, some assistance in terms of planning. But there was none.” Construction began last November. It has been a slow process. There is a significant skills and materials shortage in regional Australia. It has been made worse by an influx of sea- and tree-changers during the pandemic, often flush with cash for renovations and incentivised by the federal government’s homebuilder scheme. “That’s chewed up all the resources,” Freedman says. Every time the Freedmans needed a new speciality – a plumber, an electrician, a tiler – there would be a month-long delay. Freedman says some tradespeople in the region have stopped taking bushfire jobs, which are often out-of-town, more complex and more time consuming. “There are just not enough tradies and there is a scarcity of building materials,” adds Atkinson. As a result, the Freedmans have lived in a small caravan as their rebuilding efforts moved at a snail’s pace. At one point they begged an elderly tiler to come out of retirement. That was a stroke of good fortune. Neighbours have been told the earliest they can get a tiler is March 2022. One delay can have a domino effect. The fire was so intense that underground infrastructure – piping, cabling, sewerage – had been destroyed too. Because it is not covered by typical insurance policies, the Freedmans have been left $100,000 out of pocket. Hikes in material costs as a result of higher fire ratings have also meant that most survivors are significantly underinsured. A recent report by the Insurance Council of Australia admitted that underinsurance was a “real and significant issue” in bushfire-hit areas. Freedman has raised these challenges with government at all levels. “There ain’t nobody to listen,” he says. Where money can solve problems, there has been some help – extensive funding has gone into mental health services. But as Freedman noted in a submission to a Senate inquiry: “To people who have lost everything … mental health is getting out of a caravan.” Practical support informed by the reality on the ground has been lacking. “This is a problem you can’t throw money at,” he adds. Cumulatively, Freedman’s experience of the past two years has amounted to what he calls “bureaucracy-induced trauma”. He recently saw a trailer for the new ABC series, Fires, which ends with a voiceover: “You are not alone in this.” The dissonance between drama and reality left him reeling. “What a load of shit,” he says. “There’s been nobody here for us, no one here to help. We’ve been abandoned from day one.” ‘No end in sight’ The Freedmans’ story is alarming. Yet it represents the tip of the iceberg – if anything, they are ahead of the rebuilding curve. The Freedmans will be in their home by Christmas (even if it is just a granny flat – they anticipate that fully rebuilding will take another four years). But many remain in their caravans or sheds. Just last week, Bega council was forced to extend an exemption that permits bushfire survivors to live in temporary accommodation on-site while they rebuild. The University of Melbourne’s Prof Lisa Gibbs says authorities were well aware of this “long tail of recovery”. After the Black Saturday bushfires of 2009, Gibbs and her colleagues conducted a longitudinal study of the impact on survivors. The research underscored the enduring nature of the trauma. Within four years, a quarter of study participants had been diagnosed with a mental health condition. A decade on, almost one in five survivors was still experiencing financial distress. In communities that had been hit hard, just one-third felt their community had “mostly” or “fully recovered”. “One of the recommendations from our research is that there should really be a five-year recovery plan,” says Gibbs “There’ll be an influx of services and support in the immediate period. But there needs to be an appreciation that [the support] needs to be there for years and transition into local mainstream services so that people are not left hanging.” On Cobargo’s main street, the volunteer-run relief centre has sought to support bushfire survivors. It began operating on day one of the disaster, initially set up at the showgrounds to help evacuees. Ever since, it has evolved to provide whatever support is needed by the community. In the absence of government assistance, the local branch of the Maritime Union is paying the rent for the centre’s quaint cottage headquarters. “There’s no end in sight,” says volunteer Danielle Murphy. “People can’t move forward – they keep facing obstacles, red tape thrown up, lack of trades. A lot of people are in the same spot they were last year.” Murphy says the pandemic meant that some of the government services now being withdrawn were never fully utilised. “They haven’t extended any deadlines,” she says. “They’re pulling out and people are at a loss.” Atkinson regularly drops by the cottage to swap information with Murphy and her colleagues. With a remit spanning from the Victorian border to Batemans Bay, she spends hours on the road trying to help individuals and communities. Atkinson admits the sheer volume of work is overwhelming, even two years on. “I feel like I let people down, I feel guilty when I take time off,” she says, her voice wavering with emotion. “We’ve got a long way to go.” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityIt was Jane Birkin’s mother who suggested: “When you’ve got nothing left, all you can do is get into silk underwear and start reading Proust.” It’s a sentiment that rings true after 18 months of stay-at-home orders, though I’m sure I’m not the only one who could replace silk underwear with soft-waisted pants and Proust with, well, news headlines. Either way, silk underwear, delicate bras and lingerie need to be cared for, so here is some expert advice on how to look after them. Wash frequently – ideally by hand Araks Yeramyan, the creative director of the lingerie brand Araks, recommends taking your bra and underwear into the shower with you at the end of the day. “Rinsing your bra after every use lengthens the longevity as the salt in your sweat can break down the elastic over time,” she says. She suggests using a natural shampoo or soap like Dr Bronner’s lavender soap (which is suitable for people as well as undergarments), before rinsing and gently squeezing out the water. Belinda Everingham, chief executive of the cleaning product company Bondi Wash, also recommends handwashing delicates but her advice is more conventional. She says to fill a bucket or sink with warm water and add detergent while the tap is running. Then, drop your delicates into the soapy water and swish them about for a few minutes before rinsing them under a cold tap and gently squeezing out excess water, taking care not to pull the fabric. If handwashing is not an option, Everingham says you can wash them on a delicate cycle and use a laundry bag to prevent hooks from bras catching on other items in the machine. Detergent choice is important as delicate fabrics contain sensitive fibres that can be damaged, she says. “Avoid detergents with synthetic enzymes or optical brighteners,” she says – opt instead for a liquid detergent that is pH neutral and labelled for delicate fabrics. Never put them in the dryer Bras and underwear should never be put in the dryer. Kate Nixon, the creative director behind Kat the label, recommends laying a towel down somewhere in the shade and placing each piece flat on top of it. “This will ensure the longevity of trims or elastics last in your garment,” she says. “For less delicate items like a cotton brief, you can hang on a clothes horse in the shade.” The right fit can help bras last longer “Bras that are designed with a non-stretch centre gore – the piece between the cups – generally have the best fit,” Yeramyan says. She advises that you look for high-quality materials that have a bit of stretch so the bra can mould to your body, give you the right support and enhance the fit. The type of stitching used can also be a sign of quality – “what’s best is a zig-zag stitch”. When figuring out the fit, Yeramyan recommends trying on a bra with a T-shirt to make sure you like the look. In addition to this, she says, you should never be falling out of the cups and the band across your back should be straight and parallel to the floor – even when you lift your arms. Adjust the straps so you can slide two fingers underneath them – otherwise they are probably too tight. Change it up Nixon recommends mixing up the lingerie and underwear in your collection, so you don’t have to be handwashing all the time. She says to have “a mixture of the pretty lace bras that are more delicate as well as the more simple cotton-style bras or underwear that you can throw in the wash again and again”. Everingham suggests opting for a range of natural fibres, like cotton, linen or silk, that will be longer lasting if cared for properly. She says stains come out of these fibres more easily, and they are less likely to go yellow with age. Most women I know wear their favourite bra for days in a row, but Yeramyan says this is ill advised. She says bras should be worn on rotation because “the elastic needs time to relax between wears. In general, no matter what you do, elastic has a shelf life, but the better you take care of your pieces, the longer it will last.” Don’t leave them lying around Although it’s tempting to leave pretty bras hanging on door knobs or chairs, be sure to carefully put them away. According to Nixon, storage is something easily overlooked: “The way you store your delicate lace bras in your drawer is really important.” Before you put the item away, do up the bra clasps and, if you have one, place the item in a mesh laundry bag within the drawer. “This means no other bra clasp can hook on to the delicate fabric and rip when you’re searching for a specific item.”John Oliver delved into the beleaguered US power grid on Sunday’s Last Week Tonight, parsing the various strains on the system of generators that produce electricity and the vast network of wires that bring it to homes. “If it feels like there have been more outages than usual recently, that’s because there have,” said Oliver, as the number of annual blackouts in the US doubled from 2015 to 2020 owing to equipment failures and natural disasters such freezing temperatures and hurricanes. “And that is not good for numerous reasons, the most obvious one being sitting around without power for any period of time absolutely sucks,” Oliver explained. Power outages also wreak havoc on sewage treatment plants, water purification centers, and people who rely on electronic medical equipment like ventilators and powered wheelchairs. That’s on top of the imperative of renewable energy to fight climate change – to meet the goal of net zero carbon emissions by 2050, the US will probably require a 40-60% increase in electricity consumption. “The truth is, if everyone suddenly had an electric car tomorrow, that might be great for the planet, but it could push our grid to its absolute limit,” said Oliver. The host surveyed the history of the three US power grids – the eastern interconnection, the western interconnection and the Texas interconnection. “It’s basically like Major League Baseball in that there are two dominant groups and then assholes in Texas who would rather make up their own rules,” he joked, referring to the Houston Astros cheating scandal. The first US electric system was built in 1882 in New York City, and expanded by the rural electrification administration in 1935. There are now 600,000 miles of transmission lines and 5.5m miles of local distribution lines, a system of connectivity Oliver described as a “supreme engineering achievement of the 20th century”. That system is now perilously burdened by age – most power lines were built in the 1950s and 60s with a 50-year life expectancy – and the extreme weather posed by climate change. The combination of issues can be deadly: the 2018 Camp fire in California, the state’s deadliest in history, was ignited when 90-year-old hooks, ignored by Pacific Gas and Energy, gave way and caused power lines to fall on to metal equipment and shower drought-stricken land with sparks. “You can’t just keep something that old in place and expect it to keep working forever,” Oliver said. “PG&amp;E basically took the same approach to their equipment as Democrats did with Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and in both cases, it didn’t end well. “Basically, we’ve got a power grid built in the 20th century that is not equipped to deal with the needs and stresses of the 21st,” he continued. The necessary upgrades include many relatively small fixes – the installation of micro-grids, weather-proofing, better storage facilities for excess energy – but one huge one: the shift to renewable energy plants such as solar and wind farms, which can’t be built just anywhere. “The physical generation of renewable energy isn’t really the problem here,” Oliver explained. “The key issue is the transmission of it. Basically, how do you get that energy from where it’s made, like a wind farm in Wyoming, to where it is needed, which could be a thousand miles away.” The answer is transmission lines, “the absolute heart of our grid, and we’re going to need more of them”, said Oliver. But there are several difficulties to refreshed transmission lines, starting with location: building hundreds of miles of lines is a logistical nightmare, and local opposition to bigger towers can derail plans for years. The second is cost – one estimate puts decarbonizing the power grid at $2.5tn over the next decade, a difficult price tag for many lawmakers to swallow. “Set aside that blackouts can cost us a lot of money, as the people of Texas will tell you after what happened to them earlier this year,” said Oliver. “There are also many benefits here that are not purely monetary – a cleaner grid helps combat climate change, meaning that maybe your grandkids won’t die in weekly lava hurricanes, which does seem pretty worthwhile.” In other words, “framing this merely as net profit is so weird. It’s like saying ‘what’s the return on investment in funding the fire department? How much money do we make off that?” There have been some improvements, however. The infrastructure bill that passed the House this week included $65bn to improve the power grid, with a portion dedicated specifically to transmission upgrades and expansion. “It is a good start, while also being not nearly enough,” said Oliver. “But the key thing going forward here might be to start thinking about this differently than we currently are,” he added, “because for far too long, whenever we’ve experienced blackouts, we tend to think of it as the power gird ‘failing’. But the truth is, it’s not failing us; we are failing it, by asking it to do something it was not designed to do, in conditions that it was not designed to handle.” Oliver concluded with a call to “act boldly, and quickly, as if our lives and our shitty casseroles depend on it”.Barack Obama has called on world leaders to “step up and step up now” to avert climate breakdown, singling out China and Russia for being foremost among countries that are failing to cut planet-heating emissions quickly enough. Obama said that while progress has been made at the Glasgow climate talks, including significant pledges made by countries to reduce methane emissions and to end deforestation, “we are nowhere near where we need to be at” in cutting emissions and that “most nations have failed to be as ambitious as they need to be”. “It was particularly discouraging to see the leaders of two of the world’s largest emitters, China and Russia, decline to even attend the proceedings,” the former US president said in a speech to delegates at Cop26, echoing the criticism leveled at Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin by Joe Biden at the summit last week. Obama added: “Their national plans seem to reflect a dangerous lack of urgency and willingness to maintain the status quo, and that’s a shame.” In some of his most personal comments on the climate crisis, Obama said that “there are times where I feel discouraged, there are times where the future seems somewhat bleak,” adding that “images of dystopia start creeping into my dreams”. The Covid-19 pandemic, the rise of nationalism in countries such as the US and misinformation spread on social media had frayed the global effort to confront climate change, he said. But Obama added that “cynicism is the recourse for cowards and we can’t afford hopelessness” – before urging young climate activists to keep pushing politicians to do more. “If those older folks won’t listen, they need to get out of the way,” he said. “Vote like your life depends upon it, because it does.” Obama’s speech comes in the second week of a disjointed UN climate conference, where world leaders have used doom-laden rhetoric while pledging to do more, with new emissions reduction pledges pushing down expected global heating, albeit still at dangerously high levels. This has contrasted with the stance of environmental groups, indigenous leaders and young activists who have complained that Cop26 has been a disappointing parade of greenwashing and broken promises. “You can shove your climate crisis up your arse,” as Greta Thunberg, the young Swedish activist, put it. Obama sought to address this disparity, saying that “imperfect compromises” will be required to address the climate emergency. “Gird yourself for a marathon, not a sprint,” he said. “If we are going to be honest with ourselves then, yes, it’s going to be really hard. The good thing is humanity has done hard things before and I believe we will do hard things again.”DEAN AND GONE Considering his team had lost five consecutive matches by an aggregate score of 13-5, The Fiver is surprised by just how surprised it was upon hearing Dean Smith had got the old tin-tack from Aston Villa. Death, taxes and football managers who are not called Ole Gunnar Solskjær being cut loose at the first sign of a crisis are three of life’s certainties after all. As the fifth richest owners in the Premier League, Villa’s billionaire proprietors have made no secret of their plans for world domination … or at least qualification for Big Vase in the next couple of seasons. Having hosed money at the transfer market before and after staying up by the skin of their teeth the season before last, they expected more bang for their buck than back-to-back-to-back-to-back-to-back defeats against Spurs, Wolves, Arsenal, West Ham and Southampton. For all that, reaction to Smith getting the gate has been largely sympathetic, in a way one suspects it might not have been if he wasn’t such a demonstrably nice bloke who is Villa to his bones. “After a good start to last season, this year we have not seen the continuous improvement in results, performances and league position which we have all been looking for,” droned a statement from the club hierarchy. “For this reason we have decided to make a change now to allow time for a new head coach to make an impact.” Translation: “We didn’t pay a club record transfer fee for Emi Buendía to see him played out of position week in and week out, just so we can field two expensive strikers who keep getting in each other’s way. Now, do one!” Guaranteed the goodwill and gratitude of his fellow Villa fans, a multi-million pound golden boot up the jacksy and another job at a half-decent club whenever he wants one, Smith may well be relieved at being handed his P45 at a time before the atmosphere at Villa Park turned poisonous. “I respect the owners’ decision, but I felt that with important players soon returning to full fitness we would achieve a top half finish,” Smith said on Monday. “The board’s aims are to take our club back into European football and I would love nothing more than seeing the club achieve that.” Meanwhile at Carrow Road, a ground where the toxicity dial doesn’t seem to go much higher than five, Daniel Farke was also relieved of his duties on the back of one consecutive victory, his team’s first in the top flight this season. “To be questioning Daniel at this point would be incredibly unfair,” said Norwich sporting director Stuart Webber a little over a week ago. “We’re fully committed to Daniel. That’s why we gave him a four-year contract in the summer. The work he’s done at this club has been beyond incredible.” No doubt galvanised by the club hierarchy’s show of faith in his abilities, Farke rallied his troops to a stirring win over Brentford only to be shown the door. “Daniel and his staff will always be welcome back here,” said Webber in a club statement announcing he’d performed the kind of U-turn even a Tory front-bencher would find audacious. The Fiver looks forward to seeing Farke and his backroom team take this open invitation literally, by taking their seats among the fans behind the home dugout for Norwich’s game against Southampton after the international break. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Need a barber in Perth on Thursday. Only put your CV forward if you’re top level. You see the vibes, crispy clean, smooth. Top level craftsmanship, barber level on 1000 but don’t charge anywhere near that much. If you do, you are out of the running. Shaky hands, I rebuke you. Don’t bluff me. I’m gonna look on your profile” – renowned headphones salesman Daniel Sturridge needs a trim before joining up with flamin’ Perth Glory, and he has high standards. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Pod squad assemble: it’s time for Football Weekly, available here. FIVER LETTERS “Re: Neil Richardson’s return (Fivers passim). I too have just returned to subscription after a 20-year absence. I’m also less wise and living in flamin’ Australia. I feel angry I have missed out for all of these years. Then again, Arsenal were spearheaded by Thierry Henry, I had hair and someone threw an egg at John Prescott. Times were good” – Aaron Brown. “I am a regular Fiver reader from April 2002 which means that I have read at least 4,000 Fivers (I would say that the correct number is closer to 4,500). And, yes, I remember The Yen, the Fiver’s 2002 World Cup edition. Those were the days. By the way, could you bring back the Radio &amp; TV section?” – Bogdan Kotarlic [No – Fiver Ed]. “As someone who has also found themselves in Newcastle, NSW but did stay subscribed for the last 20 years, I can let Neil know what has changed. Manchester City got rich and good (in that order), Ole is still at United, Spurs are still pure comedy and the link at the bottom of the page is still to an old skool choon” – Nick Livesey. “Friday’s Fiver mentioned Xavi ‘dripping in the haughtiest of Catalan footballing pretensions’, but his appointment as Barcelona manager actually makes a lot of sense. After all, putting a playing legend in charge of the current shower has worked out spectacularly well for Manchester United” – Ed Taylor. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Bogdan Kotarlic, who frankly deserves a medal. MORE RECOMMENDED LISTENING On the Audio Long Read: David Conn on how the Hillsborough families were failed by the justice system. And on Today in Focus, Michael Safi talks to Josh Cavallo, the world’s only openly gay top‑flight men’s footballer, who says he would be scared to play at the World Cup in Qatar. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS The Northumberland FA has called for an end to the verbal abuse of youth referees after officials went on strike over the weekend. “A couple of weeks ago, we had eight referees in tears,” said Helen Beales, the local FA’s partnerships manager. Eddie Howe has been appointed as the new manager of Newcastle United. “It is a great honour to become head coach of a club with the stature and history of Newcastle. It is a very proud day for me and my family,” honked Howe. Despite the shambolic derby defeat by Manchester City, Ole Gunnar Solskjær still expects to still be at the Manchester United wheel after the international break. Five football clubs will take part in a safe standing trial from 1 January 2022, the sports minister Nigel Huddleston has confirmed. Chelsea, Spurs, Cardiff, Manchester United and City are the quintet involved. STILL WANT MORE? Fancy 10 talking points from the Premier League’s long weekend? You know where to go. Meanwhile, Sarah Rendell and Suzy Wrack look back at a big weekend in the Women’s Super League. “I have a very passionate character; when I lose it, I lose it in a dangerous way.” Arsène Wenger gets his chat on with Chris Godfrey in the G2 [Big Paper’s Small Paper? – Fiver Ed] interview. It was all happening at San Siro as Inter and Milan drew in an emotional derby – but which team is better placed to win the title, wonders Nicky Bandini. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! OLD SKOOL CHOONMinisters have bowed to pressure to hold an independent inquiry into how hospital worker David Fuller serially abused female corpses in mortuaries for over 12 years. Announcing the review, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said: “We have a responsibility to everyone affected by these shocking crimes to do right by those we’ve lost, and those still left behind in their shock and their grief.” He revealed police had so far confirmed that Fuller abused 100 corpses in Kent hospitals between 2008 and 2020, including 81 who had so far been identified. Javid apologised to the families and friends of the victims and set out tighter security arrangements for mortuaries. He said: “Even as we look into exactly what happened, as the secretary of state for health and social care, I want to apologise to the friends and families of all the victims for the crimes that were perpetrated in the care of the NHS and for the hurt and suffering they are feeling.” Tougher security in mortuaries will include hospitals ensuring they have CCTV in place and controlled access arrangements. Javid also announced a review of the punishments for abusing corpses. He said: “The justice secretary will be looking at whether the penalties that are currently available for such appalling sexual offences are appropriate.” The scale of Fuller’s offences began to emerge last week after he pleaded guilty to sexually assaulting and murdering Wendy Knell and Caroline Pierce in Tunbridge Wells in 1987. Ahead of his trial, he had pleaded guilty to 51 mortuary offences in two hospitals where he worked as an electrician. They were Kent and Sussex hospital and its replacement, Tunbridge Wells hospital. Kent police confirmed that there had been 403 calls by Monday morning to a phone line set up for people with information about the investigation. Fuller’s abuse of corpses prompted the Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells NHS trust to commission an independent investigation. Last Friday, the prime minister’s spokesperson refused to commit to a full inquiry and said they would wait for the NHS trust inquiry to conclude. The government changed tack after local MPs including the former minister Greg Clark, Kent’s police commissioner, Matthew Scott, and families of the victims backed calls for an independent investigation. Javid said: “Given the scale and the nature of these sexual offences, I believe that we must go further. And so today I can announce that I am replacing the trust investigation with an independent inquiry. “The inquiry will look into the circumstances surrounding the offences committed at the hospital and then national implications. It will help us understand how these offences took place without detection in the trust; identify any areas where early action by this trust was necessary; and then consider wider national issues, including for the NHS.” The inquiry will be chaired by Sir Jonathan Michael, a former hospital chief executive, who had been chairing the trust’s inquiry. Michael has been asked to report its interim findings in the new year. Javid said a second, final report would look at the broader national picture and the wider lessons for the NHS and for other settings. Labour welcomed the review. The shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, called for the families affected to be able to access to all the psychological counselling and support they need. Ashworth offered cross-party cooperation on the inquiry. He said: “When our loved ones are admitted into the hands of medical care, it’s done so on the basis of a bond of trust that our loved ones will be cared for when sick and will be accorded dignity in death. That bond of trust was callously ripped apart here. So can I offer to work with the secretary of state to ensure something so sickening as this never happens again.” Clark, the MP for Tunbridge Wells, praised Javid for responding to his call for a public inquiry. He said: “It does go beyond the local. In the last four years, there have been over 30 incidents of unauthorised people entering mortuaries in NHS hospitals.” The inquiry was also welcomed by Centre for Women’s Justice, which is supporting Nevres Kemal, whose daughter Azra, 24, died in July 2020 and whose body was repeatedly raped by Fuller in Tunbridge Wells mortuary. In a statement it said: “We also welcome the proposed review of sentencing for necrophilia. We applaud the courage of Nevres Kemal who spoke out after she was provided with the horrific news of her daughter, Azra’s bodily violation. We hope that the families of the identified victims will be given adequate opportunity to input into the inquiry announced and receive any answers they are looking for.”Police investigating allegations that Portuguese troops stationed with a UN peacekeeping force in Central African Republic used military planes to smuggle diamonds, drugs and gold back into Europe have executed 100 search warrants and raided scores of addresses across Portugal. Monday’s operation, which involved 320 officers from the country’s judicial police, came almost two years after a commander was tipped off about the alleged smuggling network. The military has also stepped up checks and inspections of military flights from CAR. “What we are looking into now is the possibility that some soldiers taking part in the national detached force in CAR were used as couriers in the trafficking of diamonds, gold and drugs,” the army said in a statement. The judicial police served 10 arrest warrants as they raided properties in Lisbon, Funchal, Bragança, Porto de Mós, Entroncamento, Setúbal, Beja and Faro. “A criminal network with international connections is under investigation, which is dedicated to obtaining illicit profits through diamond and gold smuggling, drug trafficking, counterfeiting and passing of counterfeit currency,” the force said in a statement. Officers are also examining allegations of computer fraud and money laundering. Portugal’s foreign minister, Augusto Santos Silva, said that while alleged offences should never have been committed, Portugal continued to make an important and “well-recognised” contribution to international security. Santos Silva, who has also served as defence minister, said the investigation should not damage the Portuguese military’s international standing. “Whether as defence minister or foreign minister, the only thing I’ve heard about Portuguese forces deployed on international peace missions is requests for us to continue and strengthen our presence,” he said. A total of 180 Portuguese soldiers are deployed in CAR as peacekeepers. The UN mission there is known by its French acronym, Minusca. Central African Republic is rich in gold, diamonds and other minerals, but beset by poverty, conflict and sectarian violence. The alleged smuggling ring is not the only scandal to hit the Portuguese military in recent years. In 2018, the country’s defence minister, Jose Azeredo Lopes, resigned but denied any wrongdoing amid an investigation into a suspected army cover-up of a huge weapons theft the previous year. In July 2017, investigators discovered that hand grenades, anti-tank grenades, plastic explosives and more than 1,400 rounds of ammunition had been stolen from the Tancos military complex, 60 miles (100km) north-east of Lisbon. Prosecutors initially suspected that international arms traffickers and terrorist groups had stolen the weapons and taken them out of the country, but military police recovered them a few months later. Associated Press, Agence France-Presse and Reuters contributed to this reportThere was so much chaos and violence in Nicola Adams’s life as a young girl that, for her, boxing offered a refuge. The ring felt like a safe place where she could discover bravery and resolve deep within herself even when she felt lost and frightened. “I was beaten by my dad and it wasn’t until my mum, my brother and I left, and I started boxing, that things changed,” Adams says all these years later. She is a double Olympic champion, having won gold at London 2012 and then again four years later in Rio, but it is only now that Adams can reveal that she told her mother that they should murder her father to end their distress. Her mum had other relationships with violent men in later years and Adams says she slept with a hammer under her bed as a way of fighting back. “Boxing gave me that courage and it made me think that if anything happened again I’d be able to protect myself and my family. Boxing also became my safe space because there was a coach I saw every day. It was like I had a second family and somebody I could talk to. Once you got into the gym you could put everything aside and be yourself.” Boxing is a dirty and dangerous business but it offers much more light than darkness. “It really does,” Adams says softly. “Boxing gave me a career, an opportunity to protect myself, to get me and my family out of poverty. If it wasn’t for boxing I don’t know where I’d be now.” A powerful new 90-minute documentary about Adams, directed with sensitivity and compassion by Helena Coan, takes us into the dark heart of her story. The film strips bare the violence Adams says she witnessed and suffered, and also shows the staggering inequality and sexism she overcame in boxing. In giving space to other female fighters, such as the pioneering Jane Couch, Amanda Coulson and Savannah Marshall, Coan highlights their immense battle to become boxers and how Adams’s Olympic success transformed the sport for women in the UK. But her personal story drives the narrative. “It was almost like having therapy,” Adams says. “I was going through memories I thought I’d forgotten about and they were coming back to life. When I watched the documentary I was like: ‘Whoa, I’ve actually gone through a lot and achieved a lot.’ But at some points it was really painful because I was bringing up old feelings I haven’t talked about since I was really young.” When she was five years old, “my mum and dad were fighting and I tried to step in and protect my mum. I tried to hit my dad with a little plastic sword, and I was just pushed out of the way.” Was she frightened for many years? “Yeah, because I couldn’t tell anybody what was really going on. So it was quite a scary time.” She eventually told her mum that she thought she had found a way out – after watching a soap opera in which a violent husband and father is murdered by his family. “I’d been watching this TV show, I think it was Brookside, and they were going through the same situation. I saw my mum on the steps crying and I went up to her and said: ‘It’s OK, I’ve got a plan. I’ve seen a TV show and I know how to get rid of my dad.’ I just didn’t know where we were going to bury him, because in the programme they had a back garden. We had a garden but it was paved with cement. I said to my mum I didn’t know where we’d get rid of the body and that was when she said: ‘No, I need to change. We need to move.’” Adams’s father did not accept a written offer from the film-makers to meet with them to discuss her allegations. But they include a note at the end of the documentary which says: “Nicola’s father maintains he was never violent towards Nicola or her mother. He says the allegations are false.” So how did she feel when her dad suddenly popped up again alongside her after she had won gold at London 2012? “It was a strange feeling but I didn’t want to ruin the moment. I wanted everybody to just enjoy me winning a gold medal and making history [as the first British woman to become an Olympic boxing champion]. But, yeah, it was odd. I just didn’t want that moment to be destroyed.” She called him a few months later. “I wanted to speak to my dad and confront him about what he did to me and my mum. I just wanted an apology so I could move past it and maybe we could build a relationship again. He said I was crazy and none of it ever happened. I was like: ‘What?’ We haven’t spoken since. I was in complete shock. But, even now, if he got in contact and apologised for what he’d done then I’d forgive him.” When asked to comment for a previous Guardian interview with Adams in 2017, Innocent Adams confirmed he had refused to apologise to his daughter and ex-wife, because he didn’t feel he had anything to apologise for. “The allegations made are completely false,” he said. “I have never been violent towards my ex-wife or Nicola. This is just a defamation of my good character.” Adams says another man was “quite violent and aggressive as well, and it was at the point where I was sleeping with a hammer under my bed – in case I needed to help my mum. I couldn’t understand why, after all the abuse and everything we’d suffered with my dad, it was happening again. I came back from school one day and this man was taking loads of furniture out of the house. My mum was shouting and I got the hammer from under my bed and said that he had to leave the house. I was going to use it. Luckily he went without me having to use the hammer.” In the film she talks about throwing a brick through the back window of another man’s car after he had been violent towards her mother. “It was a vicious cycle,” she says. Adams feels no bitterness towards men despite her upsetting childhood. “I don’t judge everybody from one person’s wrongdoing. If there’s anything I could change it would have been to have therapy when I was much younger. I only had trauma therapy after 2016. It was a real eye-opening experience for me. I still speak to a therapist now and it really helps.” *** She needed such positivity in the face of great obstacles in boxing. Her first competitive fight was at the age of 12 and it took four years before her next opponent could be found. That was a sign of how rare it was for girls to be allowed to box in the 1990s – at a time when women were banned from boxing professionally in Britain. In 2003, aged 20, she won her first international tournament in Hungary. She and Coulson “had to fund all our trips. I was nervous but really excited. I wanted to see how I’d fare because some of the boxers were European champions. I’d had about 10 fights and some of them had had 60 fights. But I boxed four times and won the gold medal. I was like: ‘Wow, this is the first medal we’ve won as women in a multination tournament.’ I couldn’t wait to go to more countries and see what I could do.” Nothing changed. “It was really frustrating because they’d dangle the carrot: ‘Go away and win medals at tournaments. Do that and you’ll have more funding.’ But about 10 of us girls would get to a major tournament, like the European Championships, on our own. We had to share somebody else’s sweaty kit when they’d just come out of the ring. It was shocking. You’d think we’d at least be able to give us our own kit – especially when the guys had absolutely everything: nutritionists, physios, doctors.” In 2008, Adams still had to pay her own way to fight in the world championships in China. She couldn’t afford time to acclimatise. “I remember being on the coach on the way to the venue for the first match and I had to drink two cans of energy drink to stay awake,” she says. “I still managed to win a silver medal.” By the time women’s boxing was finally allowed into the Olympics at London 2012, Adams was driven and relentless. She won gold at her home Games. “It was like: ‘Wow, you’ve made history.’ I just didn’t realise how much my life had changed. People were coming up to me, asking for photographs, and I was going to film premieres and award shows. It was all so different.” Adams successfully defended her Olympic title in 2016 but her transition into professional boxing was another painful experience. “I was shocked at how far behind professional boxing was for women [when Adams turned pro in 2017]. There had been so many positive changes in amateur boxing which hadn’t happened on the professional side. I wanted to improve women’s boxing in the pros as well.” She had just six fights, winning her first five and becoming the WBO flyweight champion. Her last bout, against Maria Salinas, ended in a draw at the Royal Albert Hall in September 2019. “I had to lose over a stone in weight in 24 hours before the weigh-in,” she remembers. “My nutritionist and coaches advised me not to box and it was the hardest fight I’ve ever had. In the first round my opponent accidentally caught me with her thumb in my eye and it tore my pupil in two places. I spent the rest of the fight seeing two people in the ring while dealing with the fact I hadn’t eaten properly for a few weeks.” After doctors advised her that she risked going blind in that damaged eye if she continued to box, Adams retired in November 2019. She is happy that women’s boxing, in both the amateurs and the pros, “is a totally different place now. It’s really good to see. But women’s boxing should be like MMA in the UFC where women get the exact same pay, treatment and publicity as the men. I want boxing to be in that same space.” Where is her “safe space” now she longer turns to the ring? “It is with my family, with Ella [her partner] and with my dog. I have my therapist and my team around me. I just love the space that I’m in. I have my acting to focus on. I’m getting training on that and I always like to learn something new so I can improve. There are endless possibilities for me to explore now. In boxing you have to be very poker-faced and unemotional whereas, with acting, I’m learning how to express my emotions, from pain to happiness.” Adams pauses when I ask what advice she would give to her younger self when life was full of trauma and pain? “I’d just say: ‘Stick at what you’re doing. You’re doing really well. I know times are really hard right now but you will get through it and you’re going to become a legend, a two-time Olympic champion, world champion as a professional boxer. Just don’t let things get you too down.’” • Lioness – The Nicola Adams Story launches on Prime Video on 12 November • In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.orgDenise Bryer, who has died aged 93, was an actor whose voice, rather than face, was known to several generations of young television viewers. She brought to life animated characters such as Noddy, Kiki the frog in Hector’s House and the villainous Zelda in the producer Gerry Anderson’s sci-fi series Terrahawks. Bryer always said she was happier behind a microphone than in front of a camera. From 1947, she was in scores of plays with BBC radio’s drama company, displaying a special talent for playing old ladies and young boys. It was no surprise when she was picked to voice the title character in The Adventures of Noddy (1955-56), a puppet series – and the first to feature Enid Blyton’s character, taken by the friendly gnome Big Ears to live in Toyland. The “parp-parp” sound of the horn from Noddy’s little car announced his arrival, along with the jingle of the bell on his hat. Anderson and the director of photography Arthur Provis were among the owners of Pentagon Films, which then hired Bryer to voice a 1956 Kellogg’s Sugar Ricicles commercial featuring Noddy. When the pair formed AP Films, its first production was the 52-episode marionette series The Adventures of Twizzle (1957-58), created by Roberta Leigh. Bryer was cast as the feline friend of the title character, voiced by Nancy Nevinson. “I’ve got such big paws that I’m always falling over them – that’s why I’m called Footso,” she tells Twizzle, and together they build Stray Town as a haven for other toys. She was back with Anderson for his western saga Four Feather Falls (1959-60). Her then husband, Nicholas Parsons, played Sheriff Tex Tucker, who had a talking dog and horse, and she voiced several characters – Martha “Ma” Jones, the store owner, Little Jake, the town’s only child, and Makooya, a little boy. Although Bryer never worked on any of Anderson’s hugely popular 1960s puppet series, such as Stingray, Captain Scarlet and Joe 90, she was voice-tested for the role of Lady Penelope in Thunderbirds. The role eventually went to Sylvia Anderson, his wife and co-producer, who became the main female voice actor on their productions during that era. Two decades later, by which time Gerry and Sylvia had divorced, Bryer returned to the Anderson fold in Terrahawks (1983-86) to voice the shrieking, witch-like Zelda, leader of the androids threatening a taskforce defending Earth from alien invasion. Alongside Zelda, Bryer played Captain Mary Falconer, the Terrahawks’ second-in-command and pilot of Battlehawk, a carrier aircraft – unusually, using her own voice – as well as several other characters. Completing 60 years on Anderson projects – making her his longest-running female voice artist – she reprised Zelda for three Terrahawks audio drama series between 2015 and 2017, shortly after his death. Her other best-remembered TV role was in the much-loved Hector’s House (1968-70), the dubbed version of a French puppet series. Bryer voiced Kiki, a giggling frog clad in gingham overalls, the next-door neighbour who spies on the sad-eyed dog Hector and his friend Zsazsa the cat. Advertising executives targeted the nostalgia market in 2003 when they revived the characters, including Bryer as Kiki, for Virgin bank commercials promoting its One account. Denise was born in Kensington, west London, the youngest of seven children of Susie (nee Mott), an aspiring actor who forsook the stage for motherhood, and Claude Bryer, a jeweller in his family’s business. Her eldest sister, Vera, was a professional actor who danced with Fred Astaire. Encouraged to perform, Denise appeared at the age of nine in the film A Romance in Flanders (1937), a first world war drama starring Alastair Sim. Then, during the second world war, she was evacuated to Buckinghamshire, where she attended school, before training at Rada in London. Although she did little theatre work and was rarely seen on television, Bryer’s radio career encompassed half a century (1947-96) and she narrated children’s stories in the Tale Spinners for Children series of records in the early 1960s. On screen, she also voiced Billina the chicken in the live-action Disney movie Return to Oz (1985) and the devious Junk Lady in the film fantasy Labyrinth, directed by Jim Henson (1986), as well as being heard in Gulliver’s Travels (1977), starring Richard Harris. Bryer dubbed the voices of Impedimenta in The Twelve Tasks of Asterix (1976), a Belgian-French cartoon film, the sorceress Circe in Hercules (1983) and Commander Makara in Star Fleet (1982-83), an English-language version of the Japanese TV sci-fi puppet series X Bomber, which attempted to blend the styles of Thunderbirds and Star Wars. Doctor Who aficionados will recall her as Dominique van Gysegham in the 2006 audio adventure The Reaping. Among many commercials, for products ranging from Cadbury’s chocolate to Colgate toothpaste, she voiced a French monkey in a 1971 PG Tips spoof on the Tour de France. “I love your PG Tips, Mr!” she says in French to a male cyclist, who responds in English: “Can you ride tandem?” Bryer’s 1954 marriage to Parsons was dissolved in 1989. She is survived by their children, Suzy and Justin. • Denise Pauline Rosalie Bryer, actor and voice artist, born 5 January 1928; died 16 October 2021The rumbling controversy about the refurbishment of Boris Johnson’s official Downing Street flat is once again in the news. Here’s what we know about it so far – and what could happen next. What’s the background to the row? It is not uncommon for prime ministers to revamp their flat above Downing Street but there were reports that Johnson, who lives in the bigger flat above 11 Downing Street, rather than No 10, had spent significantly more than the £30,000 that PM’s can claim – maybe even as much as £200,000. Other reports said a Tory peer and donor, Lord Brownlow, had funded part of the excess, and that Johnson had investigated setting up a charitable trust to pay for renovations. What actually happened? In May, the delayed register of ministerial interests showed one bill was initially met by the Cabinet Office, which was reimbursed by the Conservative party, and that Brownlow settled another invoice. A parallel report by the independent adviser on ministers’ interests, Lord Christopher Geidt, found there had been confusion, with Johnson wanting the work to be funded from the blind trust. This turned out to be legally complex to set up and as the bills arrived the Covid pandemic was raging and Johnson was, for a period, seriously ill, so others stepped in. Geidt found Johnson had not broken any rules but criticised the lack of “rigorous project management”, and said Johnson had “unwisely” let the refurbishment begin without properly knowing how it would be paid for. What is happening now? The Electoral Commission began an investigation in April after saying there were “reasonable grounds” to suspect several offences may have been committed. This is now understood to have been completed, with a draft of the report seen by Downing Street, although it is not yet known what it says. What is Kathryn Stone’s role? Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary standards commissioner, has said she will not decide on her own investigation until she knows what is happening with the Electoral Commission. This is in part because the commission has the power to begin prosecutions in cases where there is wrongdoing. What has Downing Street said about Stone’s role? Pre-emptively, No 10 argued on Monday that Stone, whose remit covers MPs, should not investigate the circumstances of the flat renovation, as this was something connected entirely to Johnson’s role as PM and was thus only covered by the separate ministerial code. Officials say that, as Geidt has formally cleared Johnson of wrongdoing under this, the issue is closed. Why does this matter? There is a sense that Downing Street, which is known to be seriously worried about what may emerge from any formal investigation into the renovation, not least the calling of witnesses such as Dominic Cummings, is trying to hobble Stone’s role. Last week Johnson said he would not declare the cost of a free holiday in Spain at a luxury villa owned by the family of Zac Goldsmith, the former Tory MP whom Johnson made a peer and junior minister. Johnson listed the near week-long stay in the Marbella property in October in the register of ministerial interests. But on Friday No 10 said that, as the villa was provided by another minister, he did not also need to declare it in the separate register of MPs’ interests. In retrospect, this looks like it could have been an attempt to set a precedent when it comes to deciding Stone’s role in examining the flat works.Portuguese police are investigating a suspected murder-suicide after the remains of a three-year-old British-German boy were found in a burned-out car close to the body of his father, who is thought to have shot himself. According to local media, the bodies were discovered on Sunday afternoon in mountains near the village of Santa Margarida da Serra, 100km (60 miles) south-east of Lisbon, in the Grândola municipality. The pair are understood to have been reported missing a week ago after the father, who was German, picked his son up from his British mother, from whom he was separated. The UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office confirmed the boy’s death in a statement, adding: “Our consular staff have been in regular contact with the child’s family and local authorities since they were first reported to be missing, and we will continue to support them at this very difficult time.” It offered no further details. Reuters contributed to this report In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 and the domestic abuse helpline is 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14 and the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the suicide prevention lifeline is 1-800-273-8255 and the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found via www.befrienders.orgAs Eddie Howe arrived on Tyneside to start work as Newcastle United’s new manager on Monday, it emerged that Michael Emenalo could soon be joining him at St James’ Park. After finally confirming Howe’s appointment, Newcastle are keen to recruit a director of football and Emenalo, the former Nigeria international who previously filled that role at Chelsea and, more recently, at Monaco is now the front-runner after being interviewed by the club’s Saudi Arabian majority shareholders in Jeddah last week. More immediately, Howe is anxious to get started on the training pitch before Brentford’s visit on Saturday week. With his new team second bottom of the Premier League and without a win in any competition all season, the former Bournemouth manager knows he needs to hit the ground running. “This is a wonderful opportunity but there is also a lot of work ahead of us and I’m eager to get onto the training ground to begin working with the players,” said the 43-year-old, who has agreed a two-and-a-half year contract. “It’s a great honour to become head coach of a club with the stature and history of Newcastle United. It’s a very proud day for me and my family. “I would like to thank the club’s owners for this opportunity and thank the club’s supporters for the incredible welcome they’ve already given me. I am very excited to begin our journey together.” Amanda Staveley, Newcastle’s co-owner, spearheaded Howe’s recruitment after Villarreal’s Unai Emery changed his mind about moving to St James’ Park last week, and expressed confidence that the man who led Bournemouth from League Two to the Premier League possesses the necessary transformative powers. “We have been incredibly impressed by Eddie through what has been a rigorous recruitment process,” said Staveley. “As well as his obvious achievements with Bournemouth, where he had a transformational impact, he is a passionate and dynamic coach who has clear ideas about taking this team and club forward. “He is a great fit for what we are trying to build here. We are delighted to welcome Eddie and his staff to St James’ Park and very much look forward to working together towards our collective ambitions.” Given that Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund are worth around £700bn and own 80% of Newcastle those ambitions are stratospheric but, before Europe can be conquered, relegation must be avoided. Although there could, conceivably, be as much as £200m to spend in the January transfer window, Howe needs to reach the new year in a position to attract players of the calibre of Atlético Madrid’s England defender Kieran Trippier and will be looking to secure maximum points from forthcoming home games against not only Brentford but Norwich and Burnley. His appointment was delayed slightly as negotiations over the composition of the club’s backroom staff were finalised. The exact lineup has not yet been revealed but Howe is expected to be joined by his former Bournemouth coaches Jason Tindall, Stephen Purches and Simon Weatherstone on Tyneside with a role also reserved for Steve Bruce’s former assistant, Graeme Jones. Howe is understood to have impressed Newcastle’s owners immensely by offering a detailed manifesto for change during interviews in which he explained the need to improve the team’s organisation, fitness levels and ability to retain possession.A police chief in Virginia made an emotional call for action against the gun violence epidemic in the United States, after three women were killed and two injured in a shooting last week. “I am so sick and tired of saying the same old, same old,” said Larry Boone, the Norfolk police chief who has previously sought to address gun violence nationwide, in comments that were widely shared online. Saying he was intentionally using the term “mass shooting” to describe the incident as a way to draw attention, Boone said: “If this was a tragic event involving officers, this whole damn street would be packed. And it should be, it should be. But this should be too.” Among campaigners against gun violence and for gun control reform, the term “mass shooting” is generally held to refer to any incident in which four people, excluding the shooter, are killed. Debate continues into whether such a definition is helpful. In 2019, Marisa Booty, a research analyst for the Center for Gun Policy and Research and Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, told the Guardian: “We hear about high-profile mass shootings that are happening at schools and in churches but a lot of violence in neighborhoods isn’t being as heavily weighted. “Regardless of the circumstances of the incident, multiple people are being shot and potentially killed, and people are suffering lifelong consequences.” The shooting in Norfolk in which three women were killed and two injured was being treated as a suspected domestic violence incident. A 19-year-old man shot and injured a 19-year-old woman, an eye witness said. When the woman’s mother and a friend came to help, the man shot and killed them both. Another neighbor was killed while another person who responded to the shooting was injured. “Nothing they could do,” a neighbor who witnessed the shooting but who asked to stay anonymous told WAVY, a local NBC affiliate. “They were shot execution-style. They had just come home from work.” The three women who were killed were identified as Detra R Brown, 42; Nicole Lovewine, 45; and Sara E Costine, 44. Ziontay Brian Ricardo Palmer was charged with three counts of second-degree murder, one count of malicious wounding and four counts of use of a firearm in the commission of a felony. He was held with no bond. On Thursday, Boone spoke near the scene of the shooting. Referring to children who witnessed it, he said: “It breaks my heart to look at those young kids … trying to process what they’re looking at. I’m a grown man with 30 years of police experience and it shook me to my core. I can only imagine what it did to those kids.” Addressing dozens of people, Boone asked: “How long are we going to be performative and say pretty words? Where’s the action?”Emile Smith Rowe has been rewarded for his impressive Arsenal form with a first call-up to the England senior squad after the withdrawals of Marcus Rashford and James Ward-Prowse. The 21-year-old was initially overlooked by Gareth Southgate for the World Cup qualifiers against Albania and San Marino, and had been due to join Lee Carsley’s under-21s for Thursday’s European Championship qualifier against the Czech Republic at Turf Moor. But the midfielder was promoted by Southgate on Monday and has reported for international duty at St George’s Park. Smith Rowe has been instrumental in Arsenal’s recovery this season and his winner against Watford on Sunday, which elevated Mikel Arteta’s team to fifth in the Premier League, was his fifth goal in his last eight appearances. The midfielder’s call-up came after Ward-Prowse withdrew from the squad with illness. Rashford is also out of the double-header after it was decided the Manchester United forward should concentrate on regaining full fitness at his club having missed the start of the season as a result of shoulder surgery. The 24-year-old, who is yet to complete a full 90 minutes since his return, also missed two days of training last week through illness although appeared as a substitute in the derby defeat by Manchester City. It is understood England and United agreed it would be more beneficial for Rashford to work on his recovery at Carrington. The United left-back Luke Shaw could not report for international duty on Monday as he is following concussion protocols after suffering a head injury in the derby at Old Trafford. The Chelsea midfielder Mason Mount was also absent as a result of dental surgery although he and Shaw may join the squad later this week. England host Albania on Friday and visit San Marino on Monday needing four points to guarantee qualification for next year’s World Cup in Qatar.At last, the time was right and the place was too. Xavi Hernández returned to Barcelona as manager and revealed that not only had he twice turned the job down previously – first because he didn’t feel ready and then because he didn’t trust the previous administration or the chaotic situation in which the club found itself – but that he had also passed up the opportunity to work with the Brazilian national team under Tite in order to head home. That, he said, was what moved him. “It’s the moment,” Xavi said, but he knows it is not an easy one. A total of 9,422 people turned out to see him take charge of a club that is ninth in La Liga, 11 points off the top, 10 points behind rivals Real Madrid, and level with city neighbours Espanyol, the club against whom he will make his managerial debut and one that have never finished above Barcelona. A club that is on the edge of European elimination, and this at a club where he said that “a draw is a defeat” and “a 1-0 win in the 90th minute isn’t acceptable.” “Everyone has done their bit,” said the Barcelona president, Joan Laporta, repeatedly sidestepping questions about who had paid Xavi’s release clause at Al Sadd. “This is the moment in which Barcelona most needed him. I would have liked to have offered him a club where things were easier but he knows he will be given room to work and that he will have all our support and trust.” Xavi, though, talked in tones of optimism, not least when asked about Ousmane Dembélé who he said could become one of the best players in the world. The fans, meanwhile, they came in hope, handed flags as they made their way into the Camp Nou, seeing in him a new incarnation of Pep Guardiola, the line of Cruyffian succession re-established. “If they compare me with him, I’m already winning,” Xavi said, perhaps because he has lived with that particular parallel ever since he was a player and he knows the Manchester City manager better than anyone. He has “fed off” Guardiola, he said. When another comparison was drawn to club idols returning to the bench at the places they played, the examples of Ole Gunnar Solskjær, Frank Lampard and Andrea Pirlo explicitly offered up as cases where it didn’t always go to plan, he said that knowing the club is a huge advantage and shot back: “I prefer to be in the Guardiola, Zidane group than the other one.” Xavi was there when Guardiola took over in 2008, and he recalled being immediately convinced. Not so much because of the ideas but the obsessiveness. “When they signed him I said: ‘Madre mía, we’re going to be flying,’” he recalled. “I swear it. He’s a perfectionist. If Pep decided to be a musician, he would be a good musician. If he wanted to be a psychologist, he would be a good psychologist. He is obsessive; he would keep going until he got it right. He demands so much from himself. And that pressure that he puts on himself, those demands are contagious – it spreads to everyone. He wants everything to be perfect. He is a pesado.” Pesado means heavy. Hard-working. Intense. It is Xavi’s calling card too. If there was a recurring theme at his presentation, it was the demands he will make of his players. He is an ideologue and, yes, there was talk of philosophy and style – possession, pressure and a determination to attack – but the lasting impression was of a man who knows that there are practicalities to address first. One who suspects that some of the basic rules have been broken. Indeed, he talked explicitly of rules, and repeatedly. “It’s not a case of being hard on them; it’s a question of order,” he said. “You have to have rules. When there have been rules things have gone well; when there haven’t been, things have gone badly. It’s crystal clear. At the start it is important we talk about work, values, respect, attitude, effort. If we don’t have those values we don’t have a team. We need that, then we can talk about the model. In my opinion, the most important thing is the rules first and then we will decide how we play. I have had a good teacher in Guardiola, of course.” Xavi also has good players, or so he said. And while he did not hide from the fact Barcelona will be alert in the winter transfer market, he distanced himself from the discourse offered by Ronald Koeman, who offered up a realism that bordered on fatalism. He spoke warmly of the new “extraordinary” generation of players coming through, saying that it was “hard to understand” how a 17-year-old like Gavi would perform at the level he has shown so far while also noting: “Here you need excellence in every game. They’re a very, very good generation but a very young one so we have to help them.” Asked if he would miss Lionel Messi, he shot back: “Yeah, and Samuel Eto’o and Ronaldinho.” The Argentinian had messaged him, he said, but he also said that Barcelona “cannot think about players that are not here”. One who is, and who he intends to keep, is Dembélé, in negotiations over a contract extension. Asked if the Frenchman was a priority despite a Camp Nou career punctuated by injury and with too few standout moments, he replied: “Right now, yes, yes.” “For me, Dembélé, in his right position, worked on well, can be the best in the world. He has spectacular qualities. He can make the difference. It depends on him and we have to look after him and help him. His renewal is a priority.” Sitting next to him, Laporta grinned. “Understood,” he said. “There are always injuries,” Xavi continued. “But there are too many right now. There is prevention work, gym work, you can train well, maybe better – I don’t know how they have been training [before].” If all that sounded good, and Xavi was convincing, his message clear and direct, there was one question: why didn’t all this happen sooner? Laporta explained, again, that he felt Ronald Koeman, another club legend, scorer of the winning goal at the 1992 European Cup final, had deserved time and their trust until the situation had become “unsustainable”. He had already said that he may have waited too long for his moment, on he was now keen to make the most of. As for Xavi, he explained why it hadn’t happened under the previous regime – one in which, while he was careful not to say so explicitly, he had little faith. “The two times Barcelona came – and they did even though they said they didn’t …” Xavi began. “The first time, in January [2020], I didn’t feel it. At a personal level and a footballing one I thought it was too early and I have to be honest with myself. In the summer [of 2021], I thought it wasn’t the right moment. There were elections coming, it wasn’t the right time, there was lots of uncertainty. But now with Jan [Joan Laporta] there’s a good relationship, there has been all my life – he’s the best president this club has had. He does not have two faces and there’s a good synergy. He called me, and I had no doubt.”My father, Peter Pharoah, who has died aged 87 from dementia, was a professor of public health whose work eradicated iodine deficiency in Papua New Guinea and furthered understanding of the causes of cerebral palsy and perinatal death. Peter was son of two teachers, Phyllis (nee Gahan) and Oswald Pharoah. Born in Ranchi, India, he attended schools in Lovedale and Sanawar. After the death of his father when Peter was seven, he came to Britain with his mother and brother in 1948. He attended Palmer’s school in Grays, Essex, and St Mary’s hospital medical school, London, where he met his future wife, Margaret McMinn, also training as a doctor, and ran in a team with Sir Roger Bannister. Peter held junior doctor posts in London hospitals from 1958 and maintained the NHS’s founding values throughout his career. He married in 1960 and in 1963 he moved to Papua New Guinea with his young family to become the medical officer in Rabaul and subsequently district medical officer in Mount Hagen, Wewak and Goroka. In an remote highland region, the Jimi valley, Peter found the arrival of administrators in the late 1950s coincided with the onset of endemic cretinism, a condition of severe nervous system abnormalities. The administrators paid villagers with salt and villagers stopped trekking to remote pools to make naturally iodised salt. Peter believed the resulting iodine deficiency might cause the cretinism. He ran a clinical trial, rare at the time, particularly in such difficult terrain, and injected iodised oil into women of child-bearing age. The results were clear – endemic cretinism was caused by iodine deficiency during pregnancy. Legislation ensued ensuring only iodised salt was imported – and the disease was eradicated. Peter studied the children born during the trial over the next 20 years, accompanied by a succession of students and doctors on unforgettable patrols in a region barely touched by westerners. In 1972 he returned to the UK to study and lecture at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. He became professor of public health at the University of Liverpool in 1979. He initiated a major study into the causes of perinatal mortality and published widely on the long-term outcomes for children with cerebral palsy. During this time, Peter used his database to forecast the life expectancy of children with cerebral palsy in many legal cases. He also edited the International Journal of Epidemiology from 1991 to 1999. He retired in 1997. Peter loved photography and physical activity. He won squash matches against undergraduates in his 60s, cycled from Land’s End to John O’Groats for his 64th birthday and climbed Scafell Pike with his family in his mid-70s. In 2020, Margaret died. He is survived by their four children, Fiona, Mark, Timothy and me, and by 12 grandchildren.Mercedes believe they still have a chance of securing Lewis Hamilton’s eighth world championship and have vowed to keep fighting. The team principal, Toto Wolff, said the title can still be won despite Hamilton’s rival Max Verstappen opening a significant lead after his win at the Mexican Grand Prix on Sunday. Red Bull’s Verstappen dominated completely at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez, winning by 16 seconds and solidly beating Hamilton into second place. In doing so, the Dutchman extended his lead in the championship to 19 points with just four races remaining. Hamilton conceded afterwards that Mercedes could not match the pace of the Red Bull and stressed that they had to find more speed if he was to have any chance of narrowing the gap. Wolff remains convinced the title race is far from over. “I’m a pretty realistic person, but I love motor racing, because anything can happen,” he said. “None of us are ever going to leave this circuit with the mentality of this is going away from us. There’s four races to go, four wins to take, four DNFs to suffer. And we will just continue fighting.” Hamilton has only five wins to Verstappen’s nine this season and last won at the Russian GP, four races ago. Mercedes had expected to be outpaced by Red Bull in Mexico, but ominously Verstappen was also quicker at the previous round, the US GP, a race Mercedes have dominated in the past. In the last two races Mercedes’ lead in the constructors’ championship has been cut from 36 points to one, but Wolff still believes their car has the potential to take the title to the wire through the remaining four races in Brazil, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi. “We know we have a great team. Our car was exceptionally good in Turkey. And I think we have all to win,” he said. “But when you look at the mathematical probability, obviously I’d rather be 19 points ahead than behind.” Red Bull have shown strong form in Brazil previously, and a win there for Verstappen would leave Hamilton with a mountain to climb but their team principal Christian Horner is taking nothing for granted after Mexico. “There are still 107 points available,” he said “So there’s a long way to go. Reliability is going to play a crucial role, maximising every weekend, strategy and pitstops.”Time to wrap up..... with today’s main stories: Goodnight. GW The Bank of England will have to act if it sees expectations of higher inflation pushing up wages, BoE Governor Andrew Bailey has said this afternoon. Days after the BoE surprised the markets by leaving interest rates on hold, Bailey told an online Q&amp;A session that the Bank doesn’t want the recent increase in inflation to become “generalised in the economy.” He also pointed to the risk of more bottlenecks in the economy, especially in demand for labour which could fuel expectations of higher inflation. “And that’s why we would, and will, have to act on interest rates if we see that evidence becoming clear.” More here. Last week, Bailey explained that the Bank wants to see more data showing how ending the UK’s furlough scheme has affected unemployment, and insisted the bank wouldn’t ‘bottle’ a rate rise. Our transport correspondent Gwyn Topham has been speaking to some of the passengers travelling to the US on BA flight 001 from Heathrow today. Here’s a flavour: Jemmi Fajer, 22, an easyJet flight attendant from Lyon, had planned trips to visit friends in New York city three times during the pandemic in the hope that the rules would change, but had to cancel each time. She said: “I’m so excited to be finally going – just to see old friends, stroll around, see all my favourite neighbourhoods. Jean Berrigan, 72, a retired nurse from Suffolk, described herself as a solo traveller – frustrated during the pandemic – and was heading out for a four-night stay in the US, where she used to work. “I was watching and thought as soon as it opens up, I’m going. I’m so pleased it’s opened up for everyone, families reuniting.” A ticket for the first flight cost more but, she said: “I just thought I’m going regardless – I booked the first flight I could.” More stories here, including Bhavna and Bindiya Patel from south Croydon who were flying to reunite with family, and businessman Nigel Scorey who says technology such as Zoom means he won’t need to travel as much. After a day lacking in drama, the UK stock market has closed with the FTSE 100 down just 3.5 points, or 0.05%, at 7,300 points. Germany’s DAX also dipped a little, while France’s CAC inched up. Spain’s IBEX lost 0.6%, after solid gains on Friday, with hotel groups and banks dropping. David Madden, market analyst at Equiti Capital says: It has been a quiet start to the week following the exciting moves seen in the markets last week. The actions of the Federal Reserve and Bank of England pushed up stocks, and Friday’s US non-farm payrolls report was the icing on the cake. Today, the European session is lacklustre, which is why the DAX, and the FTSE are showing modest gains. BP and Royal Dutch Shell are higher on account of the rally in oil, and that is helping the British market. The Dow Jones has posted a new record high as the House of Representatives passed a $1 trillion infrastructure spending bill, the S&amp;P 500 is up on the session but the sell off in Tesla shares is holding back the index slightly. In other takeover news, cyber security software company McAfee has agreed to be taken over for $14bn by a consortium of investors led by private equity firms Advent International and Permira Advisers. It’s one of the largest leveraged buyouts of the year, and the Financial Times have more details: The takeover consortium, which also includes minority investors made up of private equity firm Crosspoint Capital Partners, the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board (CPPIB), Singaporean sovereign wealth fund GIC and the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority, will pay McAfee shareholders $26 a share, a 21 per cent premium to its market price on November 4. As IT departments move on to cloud networks, cyber security companies have grown and received heavy investment from private equity firms with specialist practices dedicated to the technology. If completed as expected in the second half of 2022, the deal will end McAfee’s brief run on public stock markets after private equity owners TPG and Thoma Bravo listed it in October 2020. More here: The British satellite communications company Inmarsat has agreed a $7.3bn (£5.4bn) takeover by the California-based Viasat, becoming the latest UK tech firm to be taken over by a foreign rival. The deal is the latest in which a UK company that plays a key role in Britain’s economy and national security is to be taken over by foreign rivals or private equity firms. Inmarsat was listed on the London Stock Exchange before being taken private two years ago by a consortium including the private equity firm Apax. Viasat, which described the deal as “transformative” for the global communications industry, said it intended to work with the government to continue to invest and grow Inmarsat’s presence in the UK. More here: Back in monetary policy...one Federal Reserve policymaker has suggested today that America’s central bank could lift interest rates twice next year - while another was more dovish. St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank president James Bullard said he expects the Fed to raise interest rates twice in 2022 after it wraps up its bond-buying programme by the middle of next year. Bullard, who is generally a hawkish voice, also suggested the Fed could speed up its tapering if needed (it has begun cutting $15bn per month off its $120bn/month bond-buying stimulus, which would see it end next June). He told Fox Business Network: “If inflation is more persistent than we are saying right now, then I think we may have to take a little sooner action in order to keep inflation under control. Asked if the Fed could then raise rates three or four times next year, Bullard said “That is not my base case right now.” Federal Reserve vice chair Richard Clarida took a more cautious approach today, suggesting that the “necessary conditions” to raise the U.S. central bank’s benchmark lending rate from near-zero will probably be in place at the end of next year. Clarida told a symposium on monetary policy that the Fed was “clearly a ways away from considering raising interest rates”. Given the progress it is seeking towards mximum employment and price stability, he added: “I believe that these three necessary conditions for raising the target range for the federal funds rate will have been met by year-end 2022,” Airline pilot Scott Bateman, who founded the Pilots Together charity, has some interesting observations on today’s flights: The British Airways and Virgin Atlantic A350-1000s which left London together this morning after the US lifted their ban on fully vaccinated international visitors have both now landed in New York. The trip took just over 7 hours, according to FlightRadar24 data, which shows Virgin’s VS3 landing at JFK at 10.51am local time (3.51pm in the UK) and British Airways’ BA001 at 11am EST (4pm UK). Shares in Tesla dropped in early trading in New York, after millions of Twitter users polled by chief executive Elon Musk voted he should sell 10 per cent of his stake in the electric carmaker. But Musk’s unorthodox poll hasn’t caused a rout. After dropping at the open, Tesla’s shares are now down just 2.7% at $1,190, from Friday’s closing price of $1,221, as traders anticipate future stock sales. That would knock around $30bn off Tesla’s market capitalisation (which broke through the $1 trillion mark last month). But it only takes the stock back to levels seen last week, when it hit fresh record highs after surging more than 44% during October. Musk, who is sitting on a paper fortune of more than $338bn in Tesla and Space-X shares, proposed selling 10% of his Tesla shares in order to generate enough money to pay a proposed “billionaires tax” on “unrealised capital gains”. But... Musk did flag back in September that he’d soon have to sell a huge block of options before they expired -- so there are suggestions that the Twitter poll could provide a handy smokescreen. And the whole episode has been criticised by senator Ron Wyden, who is pushing for a billionaires tax. Wyden, an Oregon Democrat and chair of the Senate finance committee, said yesterday: “Whether or not the world’s wealthiest man pays any taxes at all shouldn’t depend on the results of a Twitter poll. It’s time for the billionaires income tax.” In New York, the Dow Jones industrial average has hit a fresh record high at the start of trading. The Dow jumped by 188 points, or 0.5%, to 36,516 points at the open. The rally is led by construction equipment maker Caterpillar (+3.8%), financial services groups American Express (+2%) and Visa (+1.5%), chemicals firm Dow Inc (+2%) and chipmaker Intel (+1.6%). Materials, energy, financial stocks and industrials are the best-performing sectors across the market. Investors are in upbeat mood after the US economy added more jobs than expected in last Friday’s non-farm payroll report, and the House of Representatives finally passed a $1tn bill to rebuild the nation’s infrastructure. Tightening monetary policy now to fight the surge in inflation across the eurozone would be counterproductive, European Central Bank chief economist Philip Lane has warned today. Lane pushed back against pressure to take action, after consumer prices inflation hit 4.1% last month - more than double the ECB’s target. In a speech to the ECB Conference on Money Markets, Lane said three temporary factors were pushing up inflation today but are projected to fade over the course of next year. First, the pandemic initially exerted powerful downward pressure on inflation, hitting activity and leading to temporary tax cuts (such as VAT in Germany) which are now being reversed Second, the unexpectedly-strong European and global recovery from the pandemic shock has caused bottlenecks, and mismatches between supply and demand of commodities and manufactured goods Third, energy prices have been the largest single contributor to the currently-high inflation rate. And as Europe is a net importer of energy, that actually pushes down underlying inflation as it depressing the net revenues of European firms and the disposable income of European households. As such, Lane argues there are “solid reasons” to expect inflation to decline through the course of next year. And as it takes time for monetary policy to affect the inflation rate, tightening too early would hurt the economy. As Lane puts it: In particular, an abrupt tightening of monetary policy today would not lower the currently-high inflation rates but would serve to slow down the economy and reduce employment over the next couple of years and thereby reduce medium-term inflation pressure. Given our assessment that the medium-term inflation trajectory remains below our two per cent target, it would be counter-productive to tighten monetary policy at the current juncture. Lane added that it will be crucial to watch wage growth, to deduce the path of underlying inflation. But he also signalled that a one-off jump in pay might not show that inflation was taking off. In particular, a one-off shift in the level of wages as part of the adjustment to a transitory unexpected increase in the price level does not imply a trend shift in the path of underlying inflation. Back in Heathrow, travellers excited to see family and friends for the first time since the COVID-19 pandemic began have been arriving to fly to the US. Months of pent-up demand triggered a major spike in bookings on Monday, with travellers only required to show official proof of vaccination and a recent, negative viral test. Alice Keane, travelling to Miami to see her sister, told Reuters at London’s Heathrow airport that the resumption of flights was very exciting. I mean, I was meant to go just before Covid happened, and obviously it’s been delayed this long, so it’s really exciting to finally be able to go.” More here. Heads-up: It was UK business output growth that slowed again in October (see earlier post, now updated). Sorry for the confusion, and thanks to kind readers for flagging. Gambling companies are among the heaviest advertisers on radio during “school run” hours when millions of children are in the car, according to research that prompted warnings about their exposure to promotions for the national lottery, online casinos and sports betting. Data shows gambling came second in a list of industries that spend the most to appear on commercial radio between 7am and 8am and from 3pm to 4pm, according to an analysis for the Guardian by market analysis firm Nielsen. The analysts found that gambling accounted for 5% of all spending during school-run hours, with about 1,200 hours of ads airing during those times over the past 12 months. The amount spent on gambling ads was exceeded only by government communications – including Covid-19 messages – and motor supplies. Nielsen does not disclose the actual spending figures because it is commercially sensitive data. Here’s the full story. Workers at two Weetabix factories are launching four-day strikes from today in a dispute over pay and conditions. Members of Unite at the company’s Kettering and Corby factories have been on strike every Tuesday and Wednesday since September over proposed changes to working practices that they claim could leave them up to £5,000 a year worse off. The union claims engineers face cuts to their pay, terms and conditions, describing it as an example of a “fire and rehire” policy and Weetbix’s “corporate greed”, which the company denies. In an escalation of the dispute, strikes are to take place every Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. More here: A spokesperson for Weetabix Food Company says the group has plans to mitigate shortages: “We are working hard to minimise disruptions to our operations. We have a naturally resilient supply chain and have robust planning in place to help mitigate any shortages as a result of the strikes,” There could be shortages in the snacks aisle too, after a botched computer upgrade disrupted the world’s biggest crisp factory. Walkers has been forced to prioritise its most popular varieties – including cheese and onion, ready salted and salt and vinegar, as well as Quavers and Wotsits – after the glitch forced it to slow production. A spokesperson said “more niche” varieties had been slowed, explaining: “A recent IT system upgrade has disrupted the supply of some of our products. Our sites are still making crisps and snacks but at a reduced scale. “We’re doing everything we can to increase production and get people’s favourites back on shelves. We’re very sorry for the inconvenience caused.” There’s not much drama in the City so far today, with the FTSE 100 flat and the pound slightly higher after last week’s losses. Cyber-security firm Darktrace is doing its best to provide some excitement, surging 10% this morning after analysts at Berenberg reiterated its ‘buy’ stance after a visit to its headquarters last week. Darktrace had tumbled last week, as the lock-up on insiders selling shares expired. Asset manager Abrdn have jumped 3.4%, after it confirmed it’s in talks to potentially buy Interactive Investor, the UK’s second-largest fund supermarket. A deal could value II at over £1.5bn. It would boost Abrdn’s direct-to-consumer offering, and derail II’s plans to float on the stock market. Travel and hospitality stocks are having a weaker day, though, having surged on Friday after Pfizer announced that its experimental antiviral pill, paxlovid, had cut hospitalisations and deaths from Covid by nearly 90% in a large trial. British Airways parent company IAG is down 2.3%, despite the reopening of the US borders, alongside broadcaster ITV (+2.3%), conference organiser Informa and property developer British Land. Rolls-Royce is expected to announce a major investment this week in its plans to develop small-scale modular nuclear reactors to rival the floundering multi-billion plans for large-scale nuclear plants. The company is expected to confirm that a consortium of investors has agreed to back plans for an initial four Small Modular Reactors (SMR) based on the same nuclear technology which propels submarines. The imminent announcement, which was first reported by the BBC, comes after the UK government promised to provide £210m in funding to SMR developers if they could match the funds with private capital as part of the Prime Minister’s ten point Green Plan. Small modular reactors have emerged as an alternative to building large-scale nuclear power plants - such as the 3,200MW Hinkley Point C project - which face enormous construction risks, and are prone to spiralling costs and delays. Rolls’ SMRs are expected to have a generation capacity of 500MW and cost around £2bn each, meaning they should cost less than a tenth of the £20bn each of EDF’s Hinkley project, and its successor plant at Sizewell in Suffolk. Here are more details from last month: Here’s the scene at Heathrow airport as the US reopens its borders: Here’s our news story on the resumption of UK flights to the US this morning, as a 20-month ban was lifted. Robert Courts, under-secretary of state for transport, has told the PA news agency that today is a ‘massive moment for the aviation sector’. “It’s about people fundamentally, it’s about getting families back together... “That’s particularly important with Thanksgiving and Christmas coming up. “That’s on top of the massive economic benefit that there is from having the United States and Great Britain - these great friends and allies, countries that have so much in common - back in regular contact with each other again.” Hotel group Hilton has seen a jump in bookings since the US announced it would lift travel restrictions for fully vaccinated arrivals today. Simon Vincent, EVP &amp; President, Europe, Middle East &amp; Africa at Hilton, says: “Since news broke of the planned reopening of US borders, we’ve seen a surge of interest from European and UK guests planning to visit our US hotels. Hilton search data reveals the extent of that demand, with a 63% increase in digital reservations in the five weeks following the news of plans to ease restrictions. We’ve seen similar trends across Europe, with inbound demand from US guests growing as travel rules have lifted. The reopening of the US border signals the next important phase of recovery for the industry, and we look forward to welcoming a new dawn of international travel.” Today’s report shows that people’s confidence in their household finances is deteriorating, says Victoria Scholar, head of investment at Interactive Investor. Airlines may be in celebratory mood today, but UK consumers are feeling less optimistic. Pessimism about household finances have dragged down consumer confidence for the third month running, as people judge that their financial situation has deteriorated - and is going to get worse. This follows rising inflation, surging gas prices, looming tax increases, growing supply chain problems, and the recent fuel shortages. The latest poll from YouGov and the Centre for Economics and Business Research found that consumer confidence is the lowest since the last Covid-19 lockdown ended this spring. Confidence about household finances over the next year has taken a sharp dive. The survey, conducted during October, shows: Consumer confidence has fallen to its lowest level since March 2021, down -1.3 points to 109.2 Outlook on household finances continued its five-month freefall, dropping 9.7 points October’s household finances fell by 5.0 points for the second month Expectations for business activity continued to worsen for the second month in a row But business activity reported for October saw largest leap since March 2021 For the second consecutive month, Britons reported a decline in their household finances over the past month. This measure dropped by 5.0 points to 84.6. People are also more pessimistic about their economic outlook. The outlook on household finances slumped to 81.1 – a decline of 9.7 points and the third-largest fall on record. Darren Yaxley, direct of reputation research at YouGov, says there’s a mood of ‘general pessimism’. “October’s index confirms that consumer confidence is on a downwards trajectory, largely propelled by Britons’ concern for their personal finances. The decreases seen for household financial situation over the past 30 days and the coming 12 months are the largest since the start of the pandemic. “While three metrics saw improvements - October’s business activity, and job security for the past month and coming year - the remaining metrics decreased indicating this month’s index is one of general pessimism. This indicates that the last few months of fuel and food shortages paired with rising bills and prices have led Britons to be concerned for the future.” There is one bright note: Despite the end of the government furlough scheme, workers feel more optimistic about their job security in the next 12 months than they did in September. But generally, families are worried about living standards. Kay Neufeld, Head of Forecasting and Thought Leadership, says: “The slump in consumer confidence continued in October, meaning that the YouGov/Cebr Index has erased the gains made since March 2021, when strict lockdown measures were still in place. Consumers judge their financial situation to have deteriorated in October and show even greater pessimism for the year ahead. With inflation expected to exceed 4% before the end of the year and steeply rising energy prices, households are understandably worried about the impact on living standards. On a more positive note, increases in the two job security measures highlight the ongoing resilience of the UK labour market that seems to have coped well with the end of the furlough scheme. However, ongoing shortages of inputs could lead some firms to scale back production in coming months, which would reduce labour demand.” Tesla’s Frankfurt-listed shares are down nearly 6% this morning as investors prepared for the chief executive Elon Musk’s proposed sale of about a tenth of his holdings in the electric carmaker after his Twitter poll. Musk, the world’s richest person, tweeted on Saturday that he would offload 10% of his stock if users of the social media network approved the proposal. The poll attracted more than 3.5m votes and 57.9% of people voted “yes”. Musk had said previously he would have to exercise a large number of stock options in the next three months, which would create a big tax bill. Selling some of his stock could free up funds to pay the taxes. “I was prepared to accept either outcome,” Musk said, after the voting ended. Market participants expected speculators would try to front-run his selling. Tesla’s stock is currently down over 5% in pre-market trading in New York (although only to its lowest level in a week). British businesses’ output growth has fallen for the sixth month in a row amid a supply chain crisis, energy price rises and a shortages of workers, according to a closely watched survey of big employers [updated]. UK business output growth hit its lowest level since March (during the last national coronavirus lockdown), according to the accountancy firm BDO. Its measure fell from 105.23 points in September to 103.35 points in October. BDO’s manufacturing index dropped two points to 97, nearing the 95 mark, which indicates declining output, while staff shortages prompted a slowdown in growth in the services sector, which dominates the UK economy. “Businesses are facing an increasingly difficult winter,” said Kaley Crossthwaite, a BDO partner, adding: “Between rising inflation and a lack of staff, 2022 could be a difficult year for companies who have been forced to prioritise short-term problems over long-term growth. At the same time, consumers are beginning to see the impact of these shortages, with rising fuel and energy prices, which may in turn lead to cutbacks in discretionary spending. “In the final months of the year, businesses and consumers alike will be hoping that the economy can find some Christmas spirit over November and December and help take us into the new year on a high.” Shai Weiss, Virgin Atlantic chief executive, has told Sky News that it’s a big, dramatic day, and a fantastic one for aviation and his own company. But he’s also suggested that travellers may need to rethink behaviour such as day trips abroad, due to the impact on the climate. It’s really lovely to see families reuniting, grandparents meeting grandchildren, people belatedly going on honeymoon, says Weiss, speaking from Heathrow as transatlantic leisure flights resume after 600 days of the US border being shut down for UK nationals. Weiss says this morning’s parallel takeoff with British Airways at 8.50am took a lot of organising. And in a nod to concerns over environmental impact of transatlantic flights, Weiss says both airlines are using A350-1000s, the most fuel-efficient planes in their fleets. The competition will not be who gets their quickest, but rather who gets there on time with the most efficient use of fuel. Looking ahead, Weiss says that demand will be unpredictable for a bit, but Virgin Atlantic is already seeing very strong demand for Christmas, Easter, and next summer. And this week is ‘absolutely full’. Business travel will follow, he insists, despite the boom in video-conferencing tools since the move to homeworking, with signs that small and medium-sized firms are travelling again. Q: But what about the climate damage caused by international travel? Two A350s just took off simultaneously to take passengers to the US, in the middle of the Cop26 talks in Glasgow. What can passengers do to be more environmentally aware? Weiss says aviation ‘needs to do its part’. Airlines have committed to become net-zero by 2050, -- but he admits that’s a long way away. So Virgin is taking steps like using younger planes (68% of its fleets are next-generation jets which are more fuel-efficient). And Weiss suggests that travellers need to be conscious about the issue too, saying: The day trip to Brussels, the day trip to New York may be not the best use of time. But combining leisure and business into a longer trip is the thing to do. And on the pandemic, Weiss says that the successful vaccination development, high vaccination rates and new treatments coming online gives him confidence that we are moving forwards not backwards. It’s a testament to scientists, governments, and the NHS that we are in this position now. There were clear skies and a bright new dawn at London Heathrow for its biggest customers, British Airways and Virgin Atlantic, who took off simultaneously in a show of extraordinary solidarity on Monday morning, flying west with planes fully loaded with passengers and revenues rolling in as the US finally opened its borders to foreign visitors again. Our transport correspondent Gwyn Topham, who is aboard BA’s flight, reports. For both airlines, US markets constitute the biggest part of their business – almost 40% for BA, with six flights scheduled today to New York JFK, alone while 10 of 21 Virgin flights taking off today are for America. A few Americans have travelled the transatlantic throughout, and more since August when the UK and EU relaxed restrictions for incoming, quarantined visitors. But it is more than 600 days since the airlines have been able to sell into their biggest market, crucial as they seek to recover from the pandemic. Speaking before the flight, Virgin chief executive Shai Weiss described it as “a tipping point”. Plenty of other flights were taking off from Heathrow Terminal 5 – if roughly half the number of two years ago - but there was only one destination in town. To underline the significance for anyone who missed it, the BA check-in, the cabins and even the air bridge from the gate to the plane festooned with American flags. The planes took to the skies just after 8.50am – using their most fuel-efficient models, A350s, after both airlines having retired their famous 747 jumbos early as a cost-saving measure during the pandemic. BA flight 001 took off on the northern runway, with Virgin flight VS3 rising into the air exactly in parallel. BA chief executive Sean Doyle told passengers over the tannoy: “This is a real moment of celebration. I know how much today means to you – some have not seen your loved ones for two years, others have not been able to do business.” He also told them that flight BA001 was powered by a blend of 35% sustainable aviation fuel [SAF] – the largest mix used yet on a commercial flight, while remaining emissions would be offset, via wind and solar power projects. “In the years ahead,” Doyle said, “we envisage all our long haul flights will be powered by SAFs.” It was a reminder that aviation still has plenty of challenges ahead. For now, though, some optimism has returned. Friends and family were some of the first to book to fill planes this week, the airlines said, with planes across Virgin’s US departures 98% full till Wednesday. Doyle said there had been a significant bookings too from corporate customers and small businesses, giving lie to the idea that business travel was dead. Bankers in particular had booked to fly back, boosting the revenues from premium cabins. But holidaymakers have also filled the front ends of the planes, according to BA Holidays managing director Claire Bentley: “People are upgrading, treating themselves.” City breaks had generally not been sought after during the pandemic, for those who did try to get away despite the testing requirements and travel restrictions, she said. The US east coast’s biggest city has long been its best seller though and is coming back fast: “New York is in a category of its own.” Here’s a picture of the parallel takeoff, via Twitter user Andrew McConnell: And they’re off! The first British Airways and Virgin Atlantic transatlantic flights carrying leisure travellers to the US since the border closures of March 2020 have taken off. As planned, they left Heathrow in a simultaneous departure from parallel runways, heading for New York’s JFK airport. Here’s a video feed from Heathrow of the takeoff.....starting right now.... BA and Virgin’s jets are lined up, ready for their simultaneous takeoff to New York... There are expected to be few if any empty seats on many of the international flights to the US from London, Paris and elsewhere on Monday, and passenger volume is expected to remain high in the coming weeks, Reuters predicts. Bindiya Patel was one of those intending to be on the first New York-bound BA flight leaving Heathrow this morning. Patel, from south London, was so excited at the prospect of being able to finally meet her nephew in New York that she could not sleep. “I think we might just start crying,” she told Reuters on Monday. Airlines, which have warned there will likely be long queues at first, will check vaccination documentation for international travellers as they currently do for COVID-19 test results. Delta said that in the six weeks since the U.S reopening was announced it had seen a 450% increase in international point-of-sale bookings versus the six weeks prior to the announcement, though most experts believe that corporate travel will lag the recovery in leisure travel. More here: Reuters: Travellers head to the United States as flights reopen Sean Doyle, BA’s chief executive, and Shai Weiss, Virgin Atlantic’s chief executive, have put aside their usual rivalry to pose for the cameras at Heathrow today, before their joint take-off. Before today’s flights, both CEOs have spoken about how the resumption of flights was a moment to celebrate. Sean Doyle, BA’s chief executive, said: “We’re setting aside rivalry and for the first time ever, British Airways and Virgin Atlantic aircraft will be seen taking off together to mark the vital importance of the transatlantic corridor. “Transatlantic connectivity is vital for the UK’s economic recovery, which is why we’ve been calling for the safe reopening of the UK-US travel corridor for such a long time. We must now look forward with optimism, get trade and tourism back on track, and allow friends and families to connect once again.” Shai Weiss, Virgin Atlantic’s chief executive, said: “Today is a time for celebration, not rivalry. The US has been our heartland for more than 37 years and we are simply not Virgin without the Atlantic.” The restrictions lifting today have effectively halted tourism and non-essential travel from 33 countries, including the UK, most of Europe and China, Kevin T. Dugan writes. They separated families and loved ones, with thousands missing out on birthdays, holidays – and in the case of the British tennis star Emma Raducanu’s parents – a US Open final. Now all visitors with a WHO-approved vaccination (which includes AstraZeneca) will be allowed to visit the US. Visitors with passports from any country where fewer than 10% of the country’s population has been vaccinated will also be allowed. Virgin Atlantic say bookings to the US, largely to New York, have surged 600% since the announcement was made. Delta Air Lines’ CEO, Ed Bastian, has predicted an “onslaught of travel all at once”, in November with queues likely at airports. Hotel prices in New York are also returning to normal levels after a summer where discounts abounded. Tourism industry experts expect this surge to last for a while. Tim Hentschel, HotelPlanner’s co-founder and CEO, told the Guardian. “The pent-up demand from overseas to visit the US will remain strong for at least several years.” Some form of travel ban has been in place since the start of 2020, Donald Trump issued the first proclamation that stopped most travellers from China visiting the US – with the list of banned countries quickly expanding. Land crossings from Mexico and Canada were also banned, although there were exemptions for green cards and some work visas. For many, that ban has only worsened the toll of the pandemic, further isolating people as family members fell ill or life teetered on the edge of what was manageable... Here’s the full story. Meanwhile in the cryptocurrency world, bitcoin rallied toward its all-time high on Monday and ether has climbed to a fresh record. Bitcoin is over 6% overnight to reach $66,357, approaching the previous record around $67,000 set on October 20. Ether - which underpins the ethereum network - has risen to a fresh record at a record top of $4,767.55 on Coindesk. Reuters says that “momentum, flows, favourable news and inflation fears” are all lifting crypto assets: Ether is up around 59% since the start of October and bitcoin about 51% as investors have cheered last month’s launch of a U.S. futures-based bitcoin exchange-traded fund and sought exposure to an asset class sometimes regarded as an inflation hedge. Falling real yields, as traders brace for inflation, adds to the attractiveness of assets such as gold and cryptocurrencies which do not pay a coupon, said Kyle Rodda, analyst at broker IG Markets, adding that the mood in the sector has also been good. “Financial institutions want to be a part of it, regulators don’t want to clamp down on it too much,” he said. “We’re almost past the inflection point, where it’s part of the system and its going to be very, very hard to extricate it.” In recent weeks, Australia’s biggest bank has said it will offer crypto trading to retail customers, Singaporean authorities have sounded positive on the asset class and spillover from a positive mood in stocks has also lent support. More here: Here’s what you’ll need to know before travelling: The Telegraph’s Chris Leadbeater reports that it’s pretty busy at Heathrow’s Terminal 3: Airlines have ramped up their UK-US flight schedules to meet the increased demand for travel, now fully-vaccinated passengers can travel to America: PA Media has the details: A total of 3,688 flights are scheduled to operate between the countries this month, according to travel data firm Cirium. That is up 21% compared with October, but remains 49% down on the pre-pandemic levels of November 2019. Around 3.8 million British nationals visited the US every year prior to the pandemic, according to the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office. A survey of 2,000 UK consumers commissioned by travel trade organisation Abta suggested that the US is only behind Spain in the foreign destinations that holidaymakers say they plan to visit. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. After more than 600 days, flights from the UK to the US are resuming today as the White House lifted its travel restrictions for fully vaccinated international air and land border travelers. In a major boost to the travel sector, thousands of travellers will set off on transatlantic flights from Britain, many for long-awaited reunions with family and friends that haven’t been possible since the pandemic began. To mark the occasion, rival airlines British Airways and Virgin Atlantic will operate a synchronised departure from Heathrow this morning to celebrate the end of the travel ban. Their aircraft will take off from parallel runways at the west London airport at 8.30am before flying to New York JFK, where there could be emotional scenes as people are reunited. Fully vaccinated travellers from dozens of other countries such as Ireland, the 26 Schengen nations in Europe, China, India and South Africa can also enter the US from Monday. The bosses of Virgin and BA said it was a “pivotal moment” for the battered industry, with both airlines having registered enormous losses and shed thousands of staff during 20 months of restricted travel. My colleague Gwyn Topham explains: The transatlantic corridor has in recent years accounted for the majority of Virgin and BA profits, and the airlines said the reopening of the US borders to foreign travellers, announced in late September by the Biden administration, would be a significant boost for the industry. Before the pandemic, 22 million people a year travelled between the two countries, along with 900,000 tonnes of cargo. Vaccinated US visitors have been able to travel to Britain since the summer, when the UK lifted quarantine restrictions, boosting passenger numbers, but the airlines are now increasing schedules and there are full planes this week for the first time. With both airlines deeply damaged by the pandemic – BA’s owner, IAG, is expecting losses of €7.3bn over 2020 and 2021, and Virgin has been on the brink of collapse – the pair will put on a rare show of unity after decades of bitter rivalry. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said it was a “historic event” and “marks a significant moment for the aviation sector”. The agenda 8.30am GMT: British Airways and Virgin Atlantic operate a synchronised departure from Heathrow 11am GMT: Ireland’s industrial production data for September 3.30pm GMTL Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell speaks at the Gender and the Economy Conference 5pm GMT: Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey speaks at a BoE Citizens’ ForumA cabinet minister has expressed regret and admitted it was a mistake to try to spare a Tory MP from suspension by ripping up the standards system in a move that sparked a huge backlash from colleagues and the public. Steve Barclay, the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, avoided directly apologising, but sought to heal the huge rift between Downing Street and both backbench Conservatives and senior ministers, who are still furious at the government’s actions last week. After being hauled to the Commons to speak in an emergency debate called by the Liberal Democrats over the prime minister’s bid to protect Owen Paterson, Barclay conceded it was wrong to try to change the standards process at the same time. He admitted: “While sincerely held concerns clearly warrant further attention, the manner in which the government approached last week conflated them with the response to an individual case.” Boris Johnson avoided the debate, leading opposition MPs to accuse the prime minister of “adding insult to injury”. Tory MPs were also indignant that he avoided facing their wrath, after directing them to back an amendment to Paterson’s suspension that many thought was wrong but which narrowly passed by 18 votes. The government made a U-turn the following day and committed to rescinding the amendment. But it is being urged to bring back the original motion to endorse the report on Paterson, who has since stood down as an MP. Earlier, the Commons Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, admitted Johnson’s bid to spare Paterson showed parliament at its worst. He said the Commons “needs to find a different way forward”, after opposition parties vowed to boycott the new committee chaired by a Tory MP created to review the standards processes. “If the house wishes to review the system, it must do so on a cross-party basis,” Hoyle said. He said: “I don’t think the house has been its best in the way it handled the standards issues over the last week,” adding that the public had “certainly seen it at its worst”. Johnson was branded a “tinpot dictator” who was “mired in sleaze” by Labour MP Tanmanjeet Singh Dhesi MP, while the Lib Dems’ Wendy Chamberlain, who led the debate, said the government had “attempted to rig the system to cover their own backs”. She added that the prime minister “thinks the rules don’t apply to him” and that he had “tarnished this house’s reputation”. Barclay did not commit to the government rescinding its plans for reforming the standards system and endorsing the standards committee’s report into Paterson before the Commons breaks up for recess on Wednesday. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, accused Johnson of having “damaged our democracy” and tried to paint his denigration of probity in public life as a “pattern of behaviour”. “When the prime minister gives the green light to corruption, he corrodes that trust,” Starmer said. “Rather than repairing the damage he’s done, the prime minister is running scared; when required to lead, he’s chosen to hide. His strategy is to devalue the rules so they don’t matter to anyone any more and to go after those charged with enforcing the rules, so that breaking the rules has less consequence.” Starmer said he was willing to work cross-party to reform the standards system, but insisted: “We are not willing to work with the government on their plan to weaken standards.” Labour has long called for MPs to be banned from taking paid directorships and consultancy roles, Starmer said, and added: “It’s time to put that right.” He also called the business appointments committee “too weak” to clamp down on the “revolving door” that means ministers can move from regulating a company to working for the firm once they have left office. Starmer took aim at Johnson’s absence from the debate, saying: “If there’s an apology to be made, that apology should come from the top, just as the direction came from the top last week to engage in this business in the first place.” He also said it was “completely unacceptable” that Tory MP Rob Roberts escaped facing a possible byelection, despite having been found to have sexually harassed a member of staff. Starmer urged the government to close the “loophole” in the rules so that a recall petition could be launched against Roberts.You report that the parliamentary watchdog is looking at the rules governing MPs’ second jobs (MPs could be barred from consultancy roles in sleaze clampdown, 7 November). How about capping any income from these jobs at an hourly rate that more realistically reflects the expertise offered? I would suggest the current minimum wage. Alex Heaton Yarwell, Northamptonshire • A relaxation of rules to allow more zebra crossings cannot come soon enough (Charities call for easing of zebra crossing rules to promote walking, 7 November). I live between two small towns, Wigton and Cockermouth. For me, Wigton is particularly dangerous, with only two traditional crossings. Marvejols in France (population 4,700), twinned with Cockermouth, has 37 crossings. Janet Mansfield Aspatria, Cumbria • Regarding British Airways’ owner, IAG, you say that “An annual loss of €3bn would be lower than the €4.3bn deficit reported in 2020” (BA owner says US flights nearly full but warns of €3bn loss, 5 November). It is several years since I retired from the profession, so I am reassured to find that at least one fundamental principle of accountancy remains unchanged. Michael Robinson Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire • Is it a coincidence that the clue for 11 across in the Quick Crossword was “excessive maleness” on the same day that the Wordsearch in your print edition contained 15 poets and they were all white men (G2, 8 November)? Emma Baines Rugby, Warwickshire • How I smiled when I read that M&amp;S has already run out of 12-month-matured Christmas puddings (M&amp;S Christmas ‘food to order’ service sells out of dozens of item, 5 November). We always have these, bought the previous January when reduced. Linda Gresham Birmingham • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Jude Rogers is a little harsh in her review of Abba’s new album, Voyage (No thank you for the music, 5 November). Musically the songs are as skilful as ever: beautiful harmonies that build each song to their big-hook choruses, but Rogers’ criticisms focus on lyrics. Björn Ulvaeus has always worked to turn the prosaic into epiphany, and this collection is no exception, though it now deals with co-parenting, recovered love and subjects you might expect from an older lyricist. The painfully earnest lyrics do become a little gawky in the weaker songs, but sometimes those who deploy the word “cheesy” are saying more about their own cynicism and discomfort with the unrepentantly joyous. Artistic depth is not owned by the dark side. Neil Barber Edinburgh • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Auditors like PwC, KPMG, Deloitte and EY are paid to check that company accounts are accurate. If most energy intensive businesses and fossil fuel producers consistently overvalue fossil fuel assets on their balance sheets and in their business plans (Half world’s fossil fuel assets could become worthless by 2036 in net zero transition, 4 November), those auditors clearly are not doing their jobs. ClientEarth found that 90% of financial accounts and audit reports for the 250 largest UK listed companies made no reference to the financial implications of climate change. This failure increases the risks of the economic impacts of climate change for pension fund members, institutional investors and the wider economy, as well as huge impacts on vulnerable communities and global biodiversity. To reduce this risk and to ensure fossil fuel assets are valued properly, the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, must strengthen his audit reform proposals to require companies and auditors to integrate climate change assessments into their financial accounts. Charlie Kronick Senior programme adviser, Greenpeace UK • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Lobbying maternity organisations have convinced the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) to remove the choice for patients to consider induction of labour from 39 weeks gestation. Nice has also downgraded an offer to induce labour at 41 weeks gestation to a “discussion” (Watchdog U-turns on recommendation to induce pregnant women at 41 weeks, 4 November). This is deeply concerning. The evidence shows that inducing labour at 39 weeks gestation reduces the chance of a caesarean birth and may lead to an easier birth (Arrive trial). There is also evidence that stillbirth increases after 41 weeks of gestation (Swepis and Index trials). The possibility of inducing labour at 39 weeks is now only available on request, for those in the know. And will a discussion balancing the risks of stillbirth with concerns about the “birth experience” at 41 weeks convey the information parents need about prolonged pregnancy to make informed decisions about their care? Organisations such as the NCT and Birthrights, which celebrated the changes, are neither clinical organisations nor service user groups. They should not be viewed as the voice of parents, nor be deemed qualified to comment on clinical matters. By not insisting that parents are informed of all birth options and by bowing to the agenda of maternity activists, Nice has failed parents. Catherine Roy, Susanna Haddon and Dr Ruth-Ann Harpur • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A Conservative peer was chosen to be an “independent” recruiter for a major public appointment, in a move set to increase concern at ministerial attempts to politicise the selection of regulators and chairs of public bodies. Ministers chose the Tory politician to be a “senior independent panel member” overseeing the selection process despite a governance code that requires they “should not be currently politically active”, it has emerged. The move was revealed by Peter Riddell, who stepped down last month as the commissioner of public appointments after five and half years. He declined to name the peer or the job in question, but said: “I had a conversation with the permanent secretary and said ‘come off it’.” The appointment was changed. It came as Labour and the Liberal Democrats called for tougher laws to police public appointments after the Guardian revealed Riddell had to prevent ministers breaching a strict code on political neutrality and independence during the search for new chairs for the BBC, the British Film Institute and the Office for Students. The government is currently rerunning the competition to find a chair for the broadcast regulator Ofcom after the original selection panel deemed the former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre, a favourite government choice, “unappointable”. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner MP, on Monday alleged ministers were trying to “install their stooges” to do their bidding in selecting candidates for high profile regulatory and oversight roles across British life from the arts to utilities. “Whether it is public appointments or anti-corruption standards, the attitude of Boris Johnson and his ministers is always the same,” Rayner said. “The Conservatives ignore the rules, break the rules and then simply try to change the rules and override any independent scrutiny or accountability to serve their interests.” Jamie Stone MP, Liberal Democrat spokesperson on culture, media and sport, said: “Boris Johnson should stop worrying about putting his elite friends in public bodies and start appointing people from the communities they serve. It appears that once again the only way to protect the integrity of these appointments is to place them on a statutory footing.” A civil servant appointed to find a new social housing regulator, a post-Grenfell body intended to give tenants greater voice, was recently replaced with a Tory politician, Lord Porter. A selection panel for the new chair of the Charity Commission, includes, John Booth as an “independent” member. He has declared that he has donated a sum of money to the Conservatives in 2017. A government spokesperson said: “Just 2% of all appointments and reappointments in the last year declared significant political activity relating to the Conservative party. Public appointments are made in line with the governance code for public appointments and the commissioner is properly consulted by ministers as required by the code.” Under the Cabinet Office’s code, panels selecting possible candidates for significant appointments must include an independent panellist, who is not politically active. The panels produce a shortlist of appointable candidates for ministers to choose from. Last week, Jonathan Evans, chair of the committee on standards in public life (CSPL), cited concerns about ministers “seeking to pack assessment panels with majorities of political affiliates” and called for the commissioner for public appointments to be consulted on all panellist choices. “Candidates, the public and the government all need to trust the process,” said Dr Matthew Gill, senior fellow at the Institute for Government. “Panel independence is key to this, and the CSPL is right to recommend clarification of the commissioner’s role in reviewing the composition and conduct of panels.”I was surprised that even the Guardian’s extensive coverage of the racism allegations at Yorkshire County Cricket Club (Yorkshire suspended from hosting Tests as ECB weighs in on Rafiq case, 4 November) has not contrasted prevailing attitudes there with those on the other side of the Headingley stand, where rugby league is played. League, of course, for very many years, welcomed black players facing discrimination in rugby union, and the first black British professional coach in any sport, Roy Francis, had considerable success with the Leeds club at Headingley. While the England and Wales Cricket Board’s antecedent, the MCC, and the Rugby Football Union, were giving comfort to apartheid South Africa, Clive Sullivan became the first black captain of any British national sports team in the 1972 Rugby League World Cup. And in 1994, Leeds-born Ellery Hanley, who played at Headingley for a number of years, was the first black player to coach a major international team in Great Britain. League has embraced inclusivity since the breach with rugby union in 1895; if Yorkshire CCC genuinely seeks radical reform, it doesn’t have far to go for some sound advice. David Hinchliffe Hade Edge, West Yorkshire • I read with interest the excellent article by Barney Ronay (When it comes to racism in cricket, the ECB is the accused not the judge, 5 November). Few people will be surprised by what has emerged about the culture at Yorkshire CCC, but it is the culture in cricket that Barney rightly identifies: a culture that the England and Wales Cricket Board has done nothing to address. I hope that the ECB is invited to meet the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport select committee alongside Yorkshire. Both the governing body of cricket and one of its most influential counties must be held to account. Hospitals and schools that fail are put into “special measures”, and an interim governing body put in place where the existing governors have failed. The same should happen with the ECB. I fear that without Test matches and sponsorship, Yorkshire will struggle to survive. Chris Waterman Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire • Who will be most affected by taking international fixtures away from Yorkshire? Fans and members like myself who have already bought tickets for 2022, but have had no part in the scandal engulfing the club. Surely the ECB should be seeking to identify those individuals who have been responsible for racism, together with those who have not taken it seriously, and looking for ways to sanction them. The matches could go ahead, with all the proceeds taken by the ECB and used to fund appropriate measures to address the issue of racism in English cricket. Michael Sanderson Elsecar, South Yorkshire • On 8 March 2021 a small number of MPs including Diane Abbott, John McDonnell and Jeremy Corbyn supported an early day motion in the Commons raising the issue of racism in domestic cricket and the lack of senior black and minority ethnic people at all levels of the game. Nothing was done, and Yorkshire CCC continued to cover up an investigation into racism at the club. That has now caused a reputational crisis for English cricket. What many anti-racist cricket fans, myself included, want to know, is what is actually going to be done about the matter beyond just words and gestures. Keith Flett Tottenham, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.That’s me done for today! Here is the evening summary of today’s events: The legitimacy of the Cop26 climate summit was called into question by a number of organisations who said restrictions on access to negotiations were unprecedented. The fossil fuel industry has the largest delegation at Cop26, according to campaigners, who say the sector has more people attending than any other country. Analysis of the UN’s provisional list of attendees suggests that 503 delegates have affiliations to oil gas or coal firms. Barack Obama called on world leaders to “step up now” and criticised China and Russia for a “dangerous absence of urgency” on the climate crisis. But China is doing more for the climate than it’s given credit for, according to a senior Beijing adviser who said the country already has concrete actions in place, not distant targets like other countries. Meanwhile, protesters gathered in Glasgow for the Scientist Rebellion protest. One academic said that not acting on the climate crisis “might just be the worst crime in human history”. Police broke into a building providing shelter for climate activists and delegates in the early hours of this morning, occupants say. Survivors of extreme weather associated with the climate crisis have been speaking out at Cop26 on the day the summit focuses on “loss and damage”. Rich countries’ refusal to discuss loss and damage is “diplomatic bullying”, says Bolivia’s chief negotiator, Diego Pacheco Balanza. Rich countries must also come up with emissions reduction plans and money to help developing nations deal with the climate emergency, says the European Commission vice-president Frans Timmermans. Finally, African nations want to start open discussions at Cop26 about channeling $700bn (£520bn) every year from 2025 to help them deal with the climate crisis. I leave you with the news that Glenfiddich distillery has created a limited-edition 26-year-old whisky to commemorate Cop26. There will be a charity auction later this month, with all proceeds going to Stop Climate Chaos Scotland. Have a great evening. Phoebe African nations want Cop26 to open discussions this week on a mega-financing deal that would channel $700bn (£520bn) every year from 2025 to help developing nations adapt to the climate crisis. Tanguy Gahouma-Bekale, the chair of the African Group of Negotiators on climate change, said the increased finance was needed for the accelerated phase of decarbonisation required to hold global heating to 1.5C. He said: “The work on this needs to start now ... Talks about finance take time so we need to have a roadmap now with clear milestones on how to achieve targets after 2025 to ensure the money flows every year.” Read the full story here: The European Union’s most senior climate envoy has called on other rich countries to come up with emissions reduction plans and money to help developing nations deal with the climate emergency. The European Commission vice-president Frans Timmermans said he hoped to convince other major emitters “not just to declare a date for carbon neutrality or climate neutrality” but come forward with policies to achieve it. Since the EU agreed its net zero goal in 2019, it has proposed a vast set of legal proposals to transform the European economy, although the measures are yet to be agreed by the EU member states and European parliament. Timmermans said: “If we don’t make a success of this Cop, it’s difficult to see how we can reduce [in] half the emissions in less than ten years. It needs to happen right now.” Earlier in the day, the veteran Dutch MEP Bas Eickhout sounded a note of caution on climate pledges unveiled last week, which suggested the world could restrict global heating to below 2C. “We all have to acknowledge there is a huge difference in the value of these pledges,” he said “Some pledges are really serious, for example the EU with its Fit for 55 package. But for example the pledge of Australia is literally a brochure.” Timmermans, a former Dutch foreign minister, also called on wealthy countries to close the gap in fulfilling a long-standing promise to mobilise $100bn a year to help developed countries deal with the climate crisis. “We have been doing our share as the EU … I am not complacent at all but I am just saying to the other developed countries if we can do our share I am sure you can do your share,” he said. We all have to acknowledge there is a huge difference in the value of these pledges. Some pledges are really serious, for example the EU with its Fit for 55 package. But for example the pledge of Australia is literally a brochure. Timmermans didn’t name names, but it’s no secret that the EU expects the United States to go far beyond Joe Biden’s recent goal to aim for an $11.4bn contribution by 2024. But the EC vice president was also challenged on the EU’s own leadership credentials, when the Guardian’s Fiona Harvey asked him about countries such as Poland and Germany that planned to keep coal in their energy mix for some years to come. Timmermans conceded that coal was a big challenge, but insisted the EU was making progress, citing ongoing talks in Germany to form a governing coalition that could speed up the coal phase out, as well as changes in Poland’s stance on energy. “Things are speeding up for political reasons, for climate reasons but also simply because coal doesn’t have a future,” he said. Youth climate activists: Can Cop26 save the world? Guardian Live is holding a special live stream event with young climate activists from around the world on Wednesday 10 November 2021, 8pm GMT. It will be hosted by the film director Franny Armstrong. Tickets are available here In an interview with the Guardian, Bolivia’s chief negotiator, Diego Pacheco Balanza, blasted the refusal by rich countries to discuss loss and damage or compensation at Cop26 as evidence of “diplomatic bullying”. “There’s been a systematic attempt by developed countries to remove all discussion about responsibility, compensation and direct climate finance from the negotiations, it’s shameful,” he said. “Instead, they want us to focus on carbon markets and their 2050 net zero narrative which is completely meaningless. The net zero narrative is a big lie. We need to eliminate greenhouse gasses now, not in 30 years.” Net zero has been condemned by the vast majority of civil society groups, social movements and indigenous people as climate denialism as it allows polluting countries and corporations to offset carbon emissions rather than stop emitting them. Pacheco added: “We reject the narrative that the market is the solution. We want to focus on strengthening direct cooperation from developed countries to developing countries. They only want to talk about loans, but we want direct aid and the transfer of knowledge and technologies. They don’t want to discuss loss and damage, only mitigation through forests which will serve as an instrument for carbon credits.” In response to the first draft of the Glasgow decision text, published today, which contains no mention of phasing out fossil fuels, Pacheco said: “It shows how developed countries are trying to impose the net zero and carbon markets narrative, it’s a form of diplomatic bullying. They are always trying to destroy what’s been achieved at previous climate negotiations and start again, so we never move forward.” It should be noted that the governing party has been previously criticised by activists for passing legislation that incentivised farmers to burn forests in order to open up new land to farming and cattle. Here is George Monbiot’s take on this: Survivors of the extreme weather impacts of the climate crisis have been speaking out at Cop26 on the day the summit focuses on “loss and damage” – the phrase used for the unavoidable and increasing harm from global heating. “When the death toll reached 6,300 they stopped counting,” said Marinel Ubaido, the Philippines and a survivor of super typhoon Haiyan, which hit eight years ago today. “There are still 1,600 plus dead bodies missing.” “Today we’re still shouting for justice for our friends and families who have lost their lives,” she said. “We are fighting for a future that is not riddled with anxiety and fear that another Haiyan might come anytime. We do not deserve to live in fear. We deserve a hopeful future. We demand urgent action.” Many people remain in the same vulnerable places, Ubaido said, as their livelihoods are there. “I feel so tired of just fleeing and evacuating and then I don’t even know if we will have a house to go back to.” Jo Dodds, from the small coastal town of Tarthra, in New South Wales, Australia, said 69 of its 400 homes have been destroyed by wildfires since 2018: “Since then, I have lived in fear. It’s destroying our communities, it’s killing our people. “People talk about bushfire being a normal aspect of Australian climates, but I can tell you these are not,” she said. “There is nobody who isn’t extremely alarmed at the catastrophic heat and speed and unpredictability of these fires. We’ve had fires during the winter with snow on the hills behind us that went on for seven weeks.” Dodds said: “Australia should be stepping up to help developing countries who are feeling the impact of climate change even more profoundly than we are. But it’s not even helping its own people.” It’s destroying our communities, it’s killing our people. Sven Harmeling, at the NGO Care, said loss and damage has been part of Cop discussions for at least eight years, but was not getting the serious attention it needs: “Developing countries still need to fight over whether to [even] have an agenda item or not. “There must be clear progress on loss and damage and identifying new sources of finance,” he said. “Without that, this Cop cannot be a successful response to climate injustice. This is absolutely required to help stop this climate madness.” Yamide Dagnet, at the World Resources Institute, said: “The ostrich policy, from developed countries who hide behind the fear of liability and compensation, has not worked and is not working.” She noted that Tuvalu and Antigua and Barbuda have said they may sue to get the money. Lisa Plattner, at WWF-Austria said the economic impacts of global heating are estimated at $290bn to $580bn a year up to 2030. She said it was down to Alok Sharma and the UK presidency to make progress happen this week: “This is the time of the presidency.” The occupants of a squatted building in Glasgow, which was occupied to provide emergency accommodation for climate activists and delegates, have accused police of trying to break into their site with a battering ram early on Monday morning. The activists at Baile Hoose, a derelict homeless shelter in the Tradeston district, said up to 20 officers from the Metropolitan police and Welsh forces mounted the raid at 3am, claiming to be acting under the orders of the Scottish police. The activists said Police Scotland officers arrived before those involved in the raid entered the squatted parts of the complex and “calmed the situation. [It] was only then that the Met and Welsh police backed off”. One occupant said: “Baile Hoose has provided a safe home and meals for hundreds of activists during this summit. There have been a lot of people who have travelled here from all over the world and the country, and quite often people from marginalised communities are not getting their voices heard.” Glasgow city council, which owns the building, asked the activists to leave last week, warning its water supply could be unsafe, and the building could contain asbestos. A police spokesperson said: “Around 3am on Monday 8 November, officers attended at a property on Centre Street, Glasgow, following concerns for the safety and security of those using the building. Officers will continue to engage with those currently in the property.” Just as Obama finishes his speech in the blue zone, a large crowd has gathered on the south side of King George V bridge in Glasgow for a Scientist Rebellion protest. The group has been banned from the city centre after blocking the bridge over the weekend, when 21 activists were arrested. “It was the first mass arrest of scientists over the climate crisis in history,” said theoretical physicist Mike Lynch-White, one of those arrested. He said the protest was the first disruptive action during the summit that wasn’t preemptively stopped by the police. “We were banned from the centre of Glasgow even though all we were trying to do is non-violently disobey and prevent climate collapse. It’s not proportionate, it’s not reasonable,” he said. “There are people all over Glasgow right now making choices which are going to lead to enormous human suffering but it’s the people who are trying to highlight that facing restrictions and loss of freedom,” said astrophysicist Dr Tim Hewlett. “On an individual level the police have been quite decent to us, but I’m sure that’s mainly because we are wearing white [lab] coats.” He said his profession gives him a unique perspective, adding the climate crisis “might not just be the worst crime in human history, it could be the worst crime in the galaxy.” Obama enters the final stanza of his speech by saying that averting disastrous global hearing “will not be easy, it is going to be hard”, citing slow-moving governments, cynical businesses and misinformation spread on social media. “Getting people to work together on a global scale takes time and right now that’s time we don’t have,” he said. He then launches into a plea to work with those who are indifferent to the climate crisis, or who are affected by the transition to clean energy, and asks those in the room to prepare for messy compromises. “Gird yourself for a marathon, not a sprint,” he says, before quoting Shakespeare’s Othello: “What wound did ever heal but by degrees? “Our planet has been wounded by our actions, those wounds won’t be healed today or tomorrow [but] I believe we can secure a better future,” he says. “We have to. “To all the young people out there, as well as those who consider yourself young at heart, I want you to stay angry. I want you to stay frustrated. But challenge that anger and harness that frustration. Keep pushing harder and harder for more and more – because that is what is required to meet this challenge.” Obama finishes by saying: “I’m ready for the long haul if you are, so let’s get to work.” There is rapturous applause from the audience. “It is going to be hard,” Obama says about keeping temperatures to below 1.5C. “International co-operation has always been difficult, it is made more difficult by misinformation and propaganda that comes out of social media these days. “Getting people to work together on a global scale takes time, and that’s time we don’t have ... If we work hard enough for long enough, those partial victories add up.” Obama tells Cop26 delegates we won’t have more ambitious climate plans without pressure from voters. “It will not be enough to simply mobilise the converted, it will not be enough to preach to the choir … Protests are necessary to raise awareness, hashtag campaigns can spread awareness,” he said. He is encouraging young people to speak to their families about climate change because they will listen, saying it’s important to convert people who do not agree, or are indifferent to the issue. “We have to do a little more listening – we can’t just yell at them or say they’re ignorant, or tweet at them,” he said. “The most important energy in this movement is coming from young people,” says Obama, who references his two daughters, both in their early 20s. “The reason is simple – they have more stake in this fight than anyone else. That is why I want to spend the rest of my time today talking to young people. “If those older people won’t listen, they need to get out the way,” he said. One youth activist, Alexandria Villaseñor, said lots of young people hadn’t been able to get into the room to hear Obama speak. Barack Obama is currently addressing a very full room, opening with a cheery ‘Hello, Glasgow!’ The former US president, tieless and looking relaxed, says that he doesn’t need to attend such conferences anymore but “you will have a hard time keeping me away” when it comes to the future of the planet. Obama says that “meaningful progress” has been made since the Paris climate accords, which he helped to strike, but acknowledges that more needs to be done. “What is also true, collectively and individually we are still falling short,” he says. “We have not done nearly enough to address this crisis, we will need to do more.” Obama admits that “some progress stalled” when Donald Trump withdrew the US from the Paris deal. “I wasn’t real happy about that,” he adds, but says the “US is back” under Joe Biden’s leadership. He also believes that, despite opposition within the Democratic party, some version of Biden’s ambitious $555bn climate package will pass in Congress in the coming weeks. “It will set the United States on course to meet its new climate targets,” he says. In 2015, rapport between Obama administration negotiators and their Chinese counterparts was seen as paving the way to the global Paris accord. Obama criticised Chinese President Xi Jinping and Russian President Vladimir Putin for not joining other global leaders at the climate talks in Glasgow, saying he found it “particularly disappointing” that their leaders haven’t shown up to Cop26. He blames the pandemic and the rise of nationalism for a breakdown in international relations that has affected dealing with the climate crisis. He also has a dig at Republicans back home for showing “active hostility” to climate science.” “One thing should transcend day to day politics and geopolitics and that’s climate change,” Obama says. “The world has to step up and it has to step up now.” The 44th US president admits that sometimes he feels “bleak” about the future of humanity and that “images of dystopia start creeping into my dreams”. But he called on leaders and activists not to give in to cynicism and praised the work of young climate campaigners, which provokes the first round of applause during his speech. As Obama appeals for more help for those on the frontline of the climate crisis and calls to end years of deadlock over cash for climate-linked damages and losses, here is a message from a climate activist, Vanessa Nakate - Hello! Phoebe Weston here, I’m taking over the live blog this afternoon, if you have any questions/tips/comments please get in touch: phoebe.weston@guardian.co.uk That is all from me. I am handing over to my colleague Phoebe Weston who will update you on developments at COP26 this afternoon. Follow her on Twitter at @phoeb0. If you are looking for a change of pace, the world champion poet Emi Mahmoud has released a poem about the impacts that climate change is having on displaced people around the world. Here is an extract from Di Baladna: If you are reading this, I forgive you. You have grown far from the heart of me, my child have lost the familiar love we held for one another in your first years of life. When you were young, you marvelled at the plants and critters that ran across my bosom, you worshiped the water, swam up and down my rivers, drank from my rain, laughed at each first snow, begged for sun on the cloudy days. Watch Mahmoud perform the poem in full here. Greenpeace has been reacting to the first draft of the Glasgow final decision text which countries are working to agree at Cop26. They describe it as “exceptionally weak” and point out that it fails to mention phasing out fossil fuels. Greenpeace says the first draft of a Cop text is usually relatively ambitious before it is negotiated down by countries for a final agreement. “For the first draft to be so weak does not bode well,” the group says. Jennifer Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International, says: “To keep 1.5 alive, four words must be added: ‘fossil fuels phase out’, and countries must come back next year to close the gap.” The former US president has been speaking for the first time at Cop26 at an event with leaders of island states threatened by rising oceans. He tells the event he is “an island kid”, describing islands as the “canary in the coalmine” for action on the climate. Obama says “our islands are threatened more than ever” and praises the current US president Joe Biden for giving them the attention they deserve. He says wealthy nations “have an added burden to make sure we are working with and helping and assisting those who are less responsible and less able but more vulnerable to this oncoming crisis”. He concludes his remarks with a Hawaiian proverb: “Unite to move forward.” Obama says: “It’s a reminder that if you all want to paddle a canoe you better all be rowing in the same direction and at the same time, every oar has to move in unison, that’s the only way that you move forward.” He says he defends US negotiators, saying they stick up for island nations in domestic politics. The former US president has arrived in the blue zone. Here are some photos of his arrival alongside the US climate envoy John Kerry. My colleague Jonathan Watts, the Guardian’s global environment editor, has been speaking with Chinese negotiators about their thoughts on progress so far in Glasgow. Chinese officials are sceptical of claims that Cop26 commitments will keep global heating below 2C, and want other countries to focus on concrete actions rather than distant targets in the final week of the talks, he reports. They feel that China, the world’s biggest emitter, is doing more than it is given credit for, including plans to peak coal consumption by 2025 and add more wind and solar power capacity by 2030 than the entire installed electricity system of the US. “There has been a lot of criticism of China’s attitude in the media, but many of them are based on incomprehension or misunderstanding,” said Wang Yi, a senior adviser to the Chinese delegation. Read the full story below. Lee White, Gabon’s environment minister, is giving an update on behalf of the Africa group in the plenary. Carbon Brief’s Simon Evans has the key technical points covered. Outside of the plenary, the world’s media is waiting for the arrival of Barack Obama. The BBC’s science editor, David Shukman, has posted a picture from inside the blue zone. The fossil fuel industry has hundreds of people accredited to the key climate talks in Glasgow - giving the sector a bigger delegation than any country, campaigners have claimed. Analysis of the UN’s provisional list of named attendees suggests 503 delegates at Cop26 who are either directly affiliated with fossil fuel companies or are part of country delegations but are affiliated to oil, gas or coal firms, PA reports. That means fossil fuel representation outstrips the largest single country delegation by around two dozen people, according to the assessment by campaigners at Corporate Accountability, Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO), Glasgow Calls Out Polluters and Global Witness. Fossil fuel lobbyists far outweigh the delegations of some of the most vulnerable countries at the conference, which has also faced criticism for a lack of access for at-risk countries and communities because of travel restrictions and a lack of vaccines in developing nations due to the pandemic. The groups said their analysis showed that more than 100 fossil fuel companies are represented at the climate talks, where countries are under pressure to cut emissions that mostly come from oil, gas and coal to curb dangerous warming, as well as 30 trade bodies and member organisations. 27 official country delegations registered fossil fuel lobbyists, including Canada, Russia and Brazil, the campaigners said. Murray Worthy, gas campaign leader at Global Witness, said: “With the world quickly running out of time to avert climate disaster, this Cop absolutely must be a success. “The case for meaningful global action must not be diverted by a festival of polluters and their mouthpieces, who have no interest in seeing the changes we need to protect people and the planet. “The presence of hundreds of those being paid to push the toxic interests of polluting fossil fuel companies will only increase the scepticism of climate activists who see these talks as more evidence of global leaders’ dithering and delaying.” The negotiator for Guinea is giving an update from the G77+ China group in the plenary. His assessment is much less positive. He expresses his disappointment that wealthy countries have been unwilling to discuss progress on the $100bn [about £74bn] climate finance goal, describing it as “an empty commitment”. Carbon Brief’s deputy editor and policy whizz Simon Evans is posting a thread of technical updates from the G77+ China group. Alok Sharma and the heads of the UN subsidiary bodies have been addressing the plenary about the progress of negotiations at Cop26. The updates are largely technical and amount to a lengthy to-do list for ministers, who have arrived in Glasgow to try to thrash out details that technical teams have not been able to reconcile. Today’s first big event at the People’s Summit is calling out nature based solutions (NBS) – a buzz phrase at Cop26 pushed as the silver bullet to solving the climate crisis and biodiversity crisis with little pain for people in the global north. NBS include the massive forestation commitments, which made headlines at Cop last week, and the expansion of hydroelectric power – both of which activists here say will have devastating impacts on biodiversity, food sovereignty and human rights. Sophie Grig, from Survival International, said the 30 by 30 pledge – 30% of the planet’s land and oceans to be given protected status by 2030 – will lead to a huge increase in abuses against people in the global south who’ve contributed least to the climate crisis, but have been impacted the most. Grig said: “30 by 30 is the biggest land grab in history and will lead to more forced evictions, rapes and murder of indigenous and vulnerable people who rely on forests and grasslands to survive.” The panelists from India, Kenya, Germany, Chile and the Klamath &amp; Modoc tribal nation described the 30 x 30 pledge as a false solution, originally proposed by large conservation NGOs and now supported by rich and polluting countries and corporations keen to offset carbon emissions rather than cut them. Paul Robert Wolf Wilson, a youth activist from the Klamath tribes confederation based in Southern Oregon and Northern California, spoke about the Klamath dam, which has had a devastating impact on salmon runs relied upon by the tribes for thousands of years, and is scheduled for removal in 2023. “It’s taken more than a hundred years of struggle by my people to remove the Klamath dam and recuperate a river that has sustained my people since time memorial,” he said. “False solutions allow polluters to keep polluting. False solutions are killing us. Carbon market trading programmes are arms of genocide.” The People’s Summit continues with about 200 virtual and in-person events across the city taking place through until Wednesday. It’s time for news of an elaborate Monday morning practical joke. The Yes Men, a group of activist pranksters, claimed to have had a fake company accepted as an official member of UN net zero initiatives at Cop26. It later transpired the company, Yasava, is real. Alongside Maersk, Halliburton, Delta, United, American, Heathrow, Edelman, BAE Systems and many others, the Yes Men claimed they had managed to get Yasava, “the world’s leading designer of bespoke couture interiors for private jets”, accepted to two official Cop26 initiatives: the Race to Zero campaign and the Science-Based Targets Initiative (SBTI). The company is listed as part of the Race to Zero campaign but is not part of the SBTI. Check out Yasava’s website here. It appears to have been made on WordPress and includes phrases like “an aircraft does not simply accommodate you: you wear it”. Campaigners say it raises serious concerns about corporate greenwashing at Cop26 Alan Bell, of Glasgow Calls Out Polluters, said: “This should be a moment of profound embarrassment for Cop26 and the corporate hype around net zero. If the most ridiculous company imaginable can meet the flagship net-zero standard, then we should not take the concept of net zero seriously at all.” This entry was updated on 10 November 2021 after it became clear that Yasava is a real company. They are listed as part of the Race to Zero campaign, but are not part of the SBTI. Chevron and JP Morgan, who were originally listed in this post, are also not part of the SBTI. The EU’s Earth observation programme Copernicus has found that October 2021 was the third warmest in recorded history, with temperatures 0.42C higher than the 1991 to 2020 average. Last month was only marginally cooler than October 2015 and 2019. Northern Canada, northern Russia and eastern Antarctica all experienced much warmer months than average, while southern Africa, southern Australia and western Antarctica experienced cooler conditions. The legitimacy of the Cop26 climate summit has been called into question by civil society participants who say restrictions on access to negotiations are unprecedented and unjust, Nina Lakhani reports. As the Glasgow summit enters its second week, observers representing hundreds of environmental, academic, climate justice, indigenous and women’s rights organisations say excluding them from negotiating areas and speaking to negotiators could have dire consequences for millions of people. Observers act as informal watchdogs of the summit – the eyes and ears of the public during negotiations to ensure proceedings are transparent and reflect the concerns of communities and groups most likely to be affected by decisions. But their ability to observe, interact and intervene in negotiations on carbon markets, loss and damage and climate financing has been obstructed during the first week, the Guardian has been told. Read the full report here. On Sunday, a counter climate summit organised by a coalition of civil society groups kicked off in Glasgow offering a grassroots alternative to what’s happening inside the Cop26 negotiating rooms. The People’s Summit for Climate Justice has brought together movements and communities from across the world to amplify voices, ideas and solutions organisers say are largely absent from talks in Glasgow – including the global green new deal, polluters’ liability, indigenous ecological knowledge and the gulf between net zero and real zero emissions. It’s organised by the Cop26 Coalition, the same folks behind Saturday’s global day of action for climate justice which saw around 200 protests worldwide, including more than 100,000 people take to the streets of Glasgow. The summit opened on Sunday with a People’s Tribunal in which the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was found guilty of failing to effectively and equitably deal with the climate crisis and declared that the body has breached the UN charter. Activists and experts from across the world including former Cop negotiators, gave testimony over four hours against the tribunal organised by Global Justice Now. Presenting the verdict, Vijay Prashad, executive director of the Tricontinental Institute for Social Research, said: “We, the jury, find that the UNFCCC has violated the UN Charter … It has forged an intimate partnership with the very corporations that have created the climate crisis. It has refused to listen to those on the frontlines of the crisis, the one billion youth from the 33 high-risk countries, to listen to those indigenous communities and formerly colonised countries who bear the brunt of a crisis that they did not produce.” Prashad added: “The developed countries pledged to provide $100 billion per year for the climate fund. They have not provided that money, neglecting their own commitments.” If you wanted to catch up on what happened in the first week of Cop26, our global environment editor, Jonathan Watts, has written a comprehensive account of everything you need to know. What’s next? Fiona Harvey has it covered. Good morning! I hope you are feeling well-rested and ready for week two of Cop26. It is adaption, loss and damage day in Glasgow and, as you might have noticed, there is no headline-grabbing commitment on the front pages this morning orchestrated by the UK presidency. The failure of rich countries to meet the $100bn finance target looms large over a day dedicated to highlighting the damage caused by a growing number of wildfires, droughts and other of climate-related disasters. We will be covering the latest news and analysis from Glasgow throughout the day, including from former US president Barack Obama, who will speak in the blue zone this afternoon. Tweet any questions you have to @pgreenfielduk.The Vancouver Whitecaps, Major League Soccer and Canada Soccer must take “appropriate action” against any individual who failed to address serious allegations against former coaches Bob Birarda and Hubert Busby Jr. The statement was released on Monday by Professional Footballers Association Canada (PFACan), on behalf of former Whitecaps women’s team players. It says previous attempts by players to highlight allegations of abuse and inappropriate behavior by coaches at the Whitecaps and within Canada’s youth national teams were mishandled. The statement also calls for Concacaf president and Fifa vice-president Victor Montagliani to cooperate fully with a newly-proposed joint investigation by Canada Soccer and MLS into the allegations against Birarda and Busby. Montagliani was a non-executive board member with Canada Soccer at the time of the allegations against Birarda and involved in the running of the national teams. The demands in the statement are a “moral obligation” for the three organizations involved, according to the players’ union. “We want to trust the MLS investigation but we are scarred from the dishonest process and silencing we’ve endured for the last decade from the Whitecaps and Canada Soccer,” Ciara McCormack, a former Whitecaps player, told the Guardian. The statement was released in response to an announcement by MLS it will launch an investigation after the Guardian last month detailed allegations that Busby tried to solicit sex from a player when he was coach of the Whitecaps’ women’s team in 2010 and 2011. Players say Whitecaps management then tried to cover up the allegations after Busby left the club. Busby denies the allegations. Last month, the Whitecaps admitted that “our communication with players, staff and the soccer community as to the reasons for Busby’s departure was … inadequate. We should have done better, and for that we are deeply sorry.” The Whitecaps say they have placed several executives on leave in response to the Guardian report. The MLS inquiry is to be managed by Rubin Thomlinson, a Toronto-based legal firm that specializes in workplace abuse. The statement calls for the firm to take over a previously announced investigation by Canada Soccer into the process behind the controversial dismissal of Birarda. Birarda was allowed to coach female youth players after leaving his role with the Whitecaps and Canada in 2008 after internal investigations into his conduct. Birada was last year arrested in Vancouver charged with six counts of sexual exploitation, two counts of sexual assault, and one count of child luring over a 20-year period between 1988 and 2008. The charges against Birarda are understood to involve at least three former soccer players. He is currently out on bail and has yet to enter a plea. Fifa knows about the allegations against Busby, who has been suspended as the head coach of the Jamaica national women’s team, after the Guardian’s report was published. Fifa says it “will decide on appropriate next steps”. “Anyone who has been found to be involved in the decision making around the public misrepresentation of why these coaches were fired or not handling the investigations properly, should face termination from their position or be forced to sell their team,” said Malloree Enoch, the former Whitecaps player who made the allegations against Busby. The PFACan statement says the Whitecaps and Canada Soccer did nothing to let other teams know why Birarda and Busby were released from their coaching duties, despite the allegations against them. “After we went to the same Vancouver Whitecaps leadership and ownership for help, their response was to silence us, quietly investigate without even speaking to the victims, and fire the coaches without any flag or warning for other clubs,” the statement reads. “Canada Soccer was also involved in the secret investigation of Bob Birarda and took no action to prevent him from coaching other players. As a result, these individuals returned to coaching vulnerable athletes for a good part of the last decade. “The reality is that a pattern of negligent leadership at both Canada Soccer and the Whitecaps left athletes unsafe, and both organizations failed to take steps to flag the misconduct to other clubs.” The seven-point statement calls for Canada Soccer and MLS to commit to making any report stemming from the investigation public. PFACan wants the Whitecaps and Canada Soccer to provide funding for mental health services that any former player of Birarda or Busby may require. “Having these stories told again is important but it is a heavy emotional burden and revives a lot of very bad memories for the players,” said Paul Champ, PFACan legal counsel. “No one has offered mental health support to the players in the past.” A Concacaf spokesperson said Montagliani had no direct oversight of the Canada national teams at the time of the alleged events despite being a vice-president, national teams, of Canada Soccer when they occurred. According to the spokesperson, Montagliani’s role was fiduciary oversight. Concacaf and Montagliani have said they welcome a review into 2008 investigation of Birarda. “There is no legal obligation to meet any of these demands, but we strongly believe there is a moral obligation,” said Champ. “Again and again there have been decisions made without considering the input of the players. No one can be truly sorry if you don’t listen to the players who were so seriously impacted.”Sir Michael Rutter, who has died aged 88, was often described as the father of modern child psychiatry. Through incorporating rigorous scientific methods, he revolutionised his field, and laid the foundations for current understanding of normal and abnormal child developmental psychology. In the early 1960s, child psychiatry was a comparatively new discipline, heavily dependent on clinical opinion and strongly influenced by psychoanalytic theory. Michael, in his role as the first chair of child psychiatry at the Institute of Psychiatry, London, from 1973, played a huge role in changing all of that. Using objective research methods from areas such as epidemiology, developmental psychology and genetics, Michael led breakthroughs in such areas as our understanding of autism and in challenging the long-held belief, from theories first proposed in the late 40s by the psychoanalyst John Bowlby, that lack of a secure early attachment to a mother would almost inevitably result in later psychological impairment. In fact, Michael pointed out, maternal deprivation was best viewed as a vulnerability factor rather than a causative one for later psychological problems. Such discoveries came from Michael’s talent for spotting opportunities for “natural experiments”, that is, studies of children exposed to differing conditions. One such natural experiment, published in 1977, looked at twins. Identical twins share all of their genes, whereas non-identical twins share only half. With Susan Folstein, a visiting fellow from Johns Hopkins University, Michael performed a study showing that there was increased prevalence of autism in the identical co-twins of children diagnosed with autism but not in non-identical co-twins. The paper, in the journal Nature, caused a controversy. The implication that autism has a strong genetic component was criticised not just by family theorists, who held that autism resulted from an emotionally cool upbringing by “refrigerator parents”, but also by some geneticists on methodological grounds. Nevertheless, the findings were subsequently upheld by other family and twin studies as well as by much more recent molecular genetic studies, and it is now accepted that autism is a highly heritable condition, the causes of which are beginning to be understood at a genomic level. Another set of natural experiments was epidemiological studies from the 60s onwards of the wellbeing and educational attainment of primary school children raised in contrasting urban and rural environments – the inner south London borough of Camberwell and the Isle of Wight. Among the many findings were that behavioural deviance, psychiatric disorder and specific reading retardation were all twice as common in London as in those living on the Isle of Wight. However, once measures of family disadvantage were taken into account, these differences largely disappeared. The studies also showed that wellbeing and attainment differed hugely between schools, with the implication that schooling quality helps shape child development. A book based on a collaboration between researchers and teachers of secondary-aged children in inner London, Fifteen Thousand Hours (1979), reached similar conclusions. Following the collapse of Romania’s communist regime in the early 90s, one of the striking media stories was of the horrifying conditions endured by children incarcerated in its orphanages. Such coverage resulted in many Romanian orphans being adopted by families in the UK. Michael followed them up and found encouraging outcomes. Despite early severe deprivation, the majority of children achieved marked physical and psychological improvements following their transfer into more caring and nurturing environments. Such good outcomes contradicted Bowlby’s established theories. Michael had earlier written a book-long critique of Bowlby, Maternal Deprivation Reassessed (1972), in which he argued that Bowlby’s theories were at best only partially correct and even then not always for the correct reasons. Now, in the Romanian adoptee study results, here was tangible evidence that even the effects of the most extreme varieties of early deprivation could be ameliorated by caring parenting. The oldest son of Winifred (nee Barber) and Llewellyn Rutter, Michael was born in Lebanon, where his father was working as a doctor. The family moved back to the UK soon after, where Llewellyn became a GP, like his father before him. The family were Quakers and, after a period of evacuation to the US during the second world war, Michael was educated at Wolverhampton grammar school and, as a boarder, at Bootham school, a Quaker school in York. After graduating from Birmingham University medical school in 1956, Michael trained in neurology and paediatrics before moving to the Maudsley hospital and the Institute of Psychiatry, London, to complete his clinical training. His career rise there was rapid. In 1984 he was appointed to the directorship of the Medical Research Council (MRC) child psychiatry unit based at the institute. The unit soon became world renowned for its leadership in advancing child psychiatry research. In 1994 the Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP) Centre was set up, as a partnership between the Institute and the MRC, with Michael as director. The SGDP Centre was the joint brainchild of Michael, David Goldberg, the head of the institute’s psychiatry department, and George Radda, the CEO of the MRC. All three wanted to further the study of environmental factors in psychiatry alongside the rapid recent advances in genetic and developmental research. The SGDP became a model for other multidisciplinary MRC-university centre partnerships throughout the UK. Michael married Marjorie Heys, a nurse, in 1958. They had three children, after which Marjorie returned to work as a clinical nurse specialist. She and Michael co-authored Developing Minds (1993), a well-received book for the general reader. Michael received many awards, including a knighthood in 1992. He was elected as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1984, at that time the only psychiatrist to be so honoured, and was a founding fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences. He stepped down as director of the MRC SGDP Centre in 1998. I succeeded him, but most mornings thereafter he was in the building well ahead of me and he only fully retired this year. In the edition of the BBC Radio 4 programme The Life Scientific that featured Michael in his 82nd year, he described his days as working “part-time” from “about 8.30 in the morning until 4 in the afternoon”. He is survived by Marjorie, their children, Sheila, Stephen and Christine, and seven grandchildren. • Michael Rutter, child psychiatrist, born 15 August 1933; died 23 October 2021Historic England has sounded an alarm. A cottage William Blake once lived in, in Felpham, West Sussex, is at risk of collapse. The poet and artist lived there for only three years, from 1800 to 1803, but during that time began his epic poem Milton; its preface includes the stanzas which, being set to music by Hubert Parry, became the hymn Jerusalem: “And did those feet in ancient time / Walk upon England’s mountains green?” Anyone who has seen the low ceilings and slate floors of Dove Cottage, the home of Dorothy and William Wordsworth perched on a hillside in the Lake District, or wondered how Jane Austen could produce anything from her tiny desk in a corner of the sitting room of her house in Chawton, Hampshire, or admired the painted furnishings in Charleston, Duncan Grant and Vanessa Bell’s home in Sussex, knows there is nothing incidental about a house. True, preservation can be carried out in a spirit of twee or ideological nostalgia. (A Victorian push to save Dove Cottage insisted on it as an apex of “plain living and high thinking”, for instance, where we might be more likely, now, to wonder at the physical work Wordsworth’s female relatives had to do to enable the high thinking to happen.) They can be the focus of a kind of secular pilgrimage, treated as shrines. But “how a house is lived in can tell you everything you need to know about people”, argues the biographer Hermione Lee, in the book Lives of Houses. Autobiographies often start, she notes, with the memory of a house: “The life of a house is … the story of time.” It is also the story of the art produced in it, and how the lack of space, the glorious view or the cold bled into the work’s preoccupations. A house may appear in art as itself, as Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s cottage at Clevedon, Somerset, did (“Low was our pretty Cot: Our tallest Rose / Peep’d at the chamber-window”), or indeed Blake’s cottage, which he wrote into Milton (“He set me down in Felpham’s Vale &amp; prepar’d a beautiful / Cottage for me, that in three years I might write all these Visions, / To display Nature’s cruel holiness”). Seeing the place does not deflate the achievement: Frost at Midnight, arguably Coleridge’s most moving poem, is an evocation of a small plain room that you can still stand in, at Nether Stowey – the discrepancy between place and poem only underlines the poet’s mastery. Frost at Midnight is also a conversation poem and, in its dismissal of the high bombast of much previous poetry, part of a revolution in English literature, romanticism – which took off in an age of enforced domestic tourism (due to the tumult in revolutionary France). Houses are records of socioeconomic realities, records of privilege, of lack, or of tensions between the two. At their best and most sympathetically presented, including historical context, however uncomfortable, preserved houses are a visceral link to those who came before us; they provide concrete information and an understanding that bypasses research and intellectualisation. They must not be lost.The decision by the Conservative MP Philip Dunne to support the government’s version of an amendment on tackling sewage, in preference to one put forward by the Duke of Wellington and voted for by peers, means that ministers have succeeded in blocking a revolt that had already caused them embarrassment. Since the government’s amendment is weaker than the House of Lords’ one, this is an unsatisfactory ending to a row that had been bubbling up for years, before erupting last month when the Lords decided to impose a new legal duty on water companies to reduce raw sewage discharges, in an amendment to the environment bill. Mr Dunne’s move is significant because it was his private member’s bill, last year, that dramatically raised the temperature on an issue that has long troubled surfers, anglers and environmental groups – but rarely featured in headlines or in parliamentary debates until the Guardian began highlighting the scale of raw sewage discharges. That has now changed, hopefully for good. Thanks in part to smart campaigning, including the release of drone footage showing sewage being pumped into Langstone Harbour, a conservation area in Hampshire, huge numbers of people are now aware that there were 400,000 sewage discharges by water companies in England last year. The public reaction, which in many cases has been communicated to MPs, is anger and disgust. The problem is not new. Failures by the water companies, their regulator Ofwat, and the government bodies including the Environment Agency that bear ultimate responsibility for the water system, date back many years. But the fact that the situation is getting worse rather than better, at a time when increased numbers of people are using rivers and waterways for swimming and other leisure pursuits, makes it unsurprising that patience has run out. By instructing MPs to vote down the Lords’ amendment, just days before the opening of the Cop26 summit in Glasgow, ministers signalled to those watching that their concerns, which include excessive profits, were not being taken seriously. The concession that has been won by the combined efforts of dissident MPs, the House of Lords and civil society groups is worth having, in spite of shortcomings including the exclusion of sewage treatment plants. Against their wishes, ministers have been forced to accept that a “progressive reduction” in sewage outflows must take place. But we are an extremely long way from seeing the pollution stop. This will require substantial investment in infrastructure that has been neglected for decades – in spite of knowledge of climate change effects, including heavier rainfall. New legislation, on its own, is not enough. The law already states that raw sewage should only be discharged in “exceptional” circumstances. Water companies take no notice. Southern Water, which was fined £90m this summer, had committed 168 previous offences and was criticised by a judge for “persistent pollution”. In future, regulators must become less reactive. The regime of permits overseen by the Environment Agency needs tightening, while Ofwat requires a reset. Inflated salaries and dividends paid in the water sector must be challenged. But the regulator must also broaden its role to take in environmental stewardship, recruiting experts where they are needed. When new housing is proposed, the impact on the local water supply and waste infrastructure must be addressed. Starting now, the most serious discharges must be proactively investigated. Clean water campaigners have lined up their next target: the strategic policy statement that functions as a five-year plan for Ofwat. They want nature to be placed front and centre, and rightly point out that this is consistent with ministers’ own repeated promises with regard to the environment. Vast amounts of filth remain to be cleaned up.The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, summoned senior generals to a rare special meeting of the army’s management board in London on Monday morning amid growing unhappiness about the service’s response to a series of scandals. Allies of the minister said he had become exasperated after a series of bullying and harassment scandals, as well as allegations that a Kenyan woman was killed in 2012 by a British soldier whose identity is known to several colleagues. The MoD said the hour-long meeting in Whitehall had been “full and frank” and that recent events had “brought to light important issues that require all our people to play their part in resolving”. It added: “The British army is only as good as the people who serve in it.” Insiders said the tone of the meeting – attended by ministers and two-, three- and four-star generals – was largely constructive, and that the senior officers present had agreed with Wallace to address what the MoD described as “core and cultural issues” affecting the army. No specific actions were cited, however, and the post-meeting statement also said the army would set out “exciting new plans for its future structure and deployments” later this month. Two-thirds of women in the armed forces have experienced bullying, sexual harassment and discrimination during their career, a parliamentary report concluded this summer, warning also that the military is “failing to protect” female recruits. It cited reports of gang-rape, sex for promotion and trophies or contests to “bag the women” on camp. Some women said they were bullied for refusing sexual advances, or had witnessed friends being attacked by groups of men but were too afraid to report it. Since September, new army recruits have had to participate in sexual consent training provided by the Royal Military Police. But that requirement does not apply to existing soldiers, defence sources added. On Monday night Sir Mark Carleton Smith, the head of the service, also announced the army would hold an independent audit of army culture to “reinforce the best and weed out the worst” as well as ensure better training and pastoral support. In the past month, the army’s reputation has been damaged further after a press investigation into the unresolved 2012 killing of the 21-year-old Agnes Wanjiru, a Kenyan hairdresser who had turned to sex work to support her family. The young woman was found dead in a septic tank near a British army based in the east African country, where she may have been dumped while still alive, after last being seen walking out of a hotel bar accompanied by a soldier in uniform. A soldier confessed to her murder to colleagues, and his identity has been an open secret within the Duke of Lancaster’s regiment for years. But an investigation was only reopened by Kenyan and British military police in the last week. Emma Norton, the director of the Centre for Military Justice, said the MoD needed to go further in dealing with bullying and harassment and allow civil authorities to take over all rape and sexual assault allegations, as well as introducing a central complaints team independent of each armed service to deal with serious harassment cases. “They know what they need to do, but they do not get on and do it,” she said. The meeting also heard ministerial complaints about the ongoing noise and vibration problems with the next generation Ajax armoured fighting vehicle, which the MoD has expected to start taking delivery of this summer, but has now been indefinitely delayed amid accusations that its problems have been understated. Further misconduct allegations will be aired in the high court on Tuesday, relating to the killing of four members of one Afghan family in 2011 in an SAS night-time raid. The deaths, described in one internal email as “the latest massacre!”, are among 33 suspicious killings involving the special forces in Afghanistan in 2011.Nearly 20 months after the US introduced a travel ban, British travellers were allowed into the country on Monday. The UK was one of more than 30 countries, including Mexico and Canada, that saw an easing of the travel restrictions that have kept families apart for nearly two years. At Heathrow airport, the first British Airways and Virgin Atlantic transatlantic flights since March 2020 departed simultaneously from parallel runways, destined for New York JFK airport. Onboard BA flight 001, there was a sense of anticipation among passengers who were looking forward to being reunited with family and friends, heading on holiday, or taking a business trip. Bhavna Patel, 59, from south Croydon, accompanied by her daughter Bindiya, 31, was travelling to see her grandson, who was born more than a year ago. The first member of the next generation in her family, she has seen him online but never in person. “I can’t wait to hold him,” she said onboard the flight. Her son had married an American and eventually settled in Manhattan: “Usually they spend every Christmas with us, but we last saw them in 2019.” Since then, her grandson, Kai, had come along in October 2020. “When my brother found out they had opened up to airlines, he was like: you’re coming,” said Bindiya. Since then, they had answered a callout on social media by BA to help reunite families, and been given tickets for the first flight, ready to be reunited at JFK airport. Jemmi Fajer, 22, an easyJet flight attendant from Lyon, had planned trips to visit friends in New York City three times during the pandemic in the hope that the rules would change, but had to cancel each time. “I’m so excited to be finally going – just to see old friends, stroll around,” she said. Jean Berrigan, 72, a retired nurse from Suffolk, described herself as a solo traveller – frustrated during the pandemic – and was heading out for a four-night stay in the US, where she used to work. “I was watching and thought as soon as it opens up, I’m going. I’m so pleased it’s opened up for everyone, families reuniting.” A ticket for the first flight cost more but, she said: “I just thought I’m going regardless – I booked the first flight I could.” While some on the plane were celebrating, it was far from a complete return to normality. Rules have eased but masks onboard are compulsory throughout, apart from at mealtimes, and passengers must still have pre-departure Covid tests and proof of full vaccination. Although BA said corporate travel was returning, few suits or laptops were visible onboard. Nigel Scorey, 55, was one of the few passengers in the main cabin working on a laptop – and said he had found himself on the first flight by accident, having secured a rare exemption to travel to the US once already during the pandemic as the director of a small supply-chain business, Procure4, based in Leamington Spa. The US was his only destination for international business travel, he said, as a customer of 30 years with British Airways, but he added: “One of the challenges for companies like BA is that we have proven to ourselves that we don’t have to do this, with Zoom calls. I certainly won’t travel as much as before.” While he waited at Heathrow to travel to Las Vegas, Peter Short, 75, alluded to the increased administrative tasks placed on those looking to travel when he said: “If I’d known how much trouble it was to get to the states, I wouldn’t have booked it. You have to do all of the tests – and when you come back. I wouldn’t do it.” Arriving at JFK airport in New York to claps and red, white and blue balloons, passengers coming off the first BA plane said the flight had a party atmosphere. Charlene Prempeh, arriving in New York for the first time in 18 months, said: “It feels great to be back – like returning to a long-lost love.” She added that on the flight, the BA chief executive, Sean Doyle, had addressed passengers on sustainability and the airline’s plans to reach net zero emissions. “It felt a bit odd, frankly,” Prempeh added, laughing. “Everything seemed a bit weird on this flight, but in the context of the general madness, it felt fine.” Katie Mydlarz, waiting outside Terminal 7 after the BA flight, said: “I’m here to see my grandson: this is my first meeting. I’m really excited. It’s been a long time. We’ve FaceTimed but it’s not the same without the cuddles and cooing. I can’t wait to see who he reminds me of.” Another passenger, Mainda Kiwelu, said she had flown over for a conference. “It’s my first time here and my first flight since Covid so I was a bit apprehensive,” she said. “I’m excited to be in America. I’ve missed the freedom and missed travelling in general. I got out of practice. It’s a bit of a logistical exercise to get lined up – the apps, the paperwork, the different check-in times – but once that’s all done it’s nice.” Meanwhile, back at Heathrow, others were waiting to board later transatlantic flights. Jack Olivarius-McAllister, 27, said he was looking forward to seeing his extended family again, many of whom live in the US. “I’m really excited,” he said. “I think it will be really nice to catch up with friends as well. I used to go twice a year. Usually once with family then once again to see friends for myself … [but] I have not been since March 2019.”Wales have handed a lifetime stadium ban to the supporter who ran on to the pitch during last Saturday’s defeat by South Africa. The incident occurred in the 63rd minute of Wales’s 23-18 defeat by the Springboks, with the score tied at 15-15. The invader made his way on to the Principality Stadium pitch just before Johnny McNicholl had passed to Liam Williams in what was a promising move for Wales. The supporter was quickly tackled to the ground by security staff but Williams was forced to evade the intruder and Wales ultimately failed to score what could have been a crucial try. Asked if it cost his side a try, the Wales head coach, Wayne Pivac, said: “I don’t know. You don’t want to see that in the game. It’s very disappointing that happened, but there was nothing the officials could do. At the time, I thought, ‘here we go’. We had a one-man advantage. They might have been distracted, but there wasn’t much more the officials could have done.” The supporter reportedly went on to the pitch as part of a £20 bet and as he was escorted away he was drenched in beer by furious Wales fans. Mark Williams, the Principality Stadium manager, said: “Working collaboratively with South Wales police we were able to identify the pitch invader. The WRU, Principality Stadium and South Wales police condemns any behaviour of this kind, and the individual will be issued with a lifetime ban from buying any tickets from the WRU for rugby events held at Principality Stadium in future.” The statement continued: “It’s extremely disappointing to think that by recent events the traditional game day experience is under threat and that we might be forced to look at additional measures that will impact on the fan experience in future. We were deeply disappointed to discover the individual is a registered player and member of a rugby club; the WRU are currently investigating this as a code of conduct breach.” Meanwhile, the WRU has also confirmed that the hooker Ken Owens will miss the remaining autumn matches against Fiji and Australia with a back injury. The 34-year-old has not been able to feature against either New Zealand or South Africa and has now been released back to the Scarlets.The head of Canada’s largest airline is facing public outrage and calls for his resignation after giving a speech in English to business leaders in Quebec – a misstep that has inflamed longstanding grievances over linguistic rights and and protections in the lone province where French is the only official language. The row began last week, when in his first major public appearance as head of Air Canada, Michael Rousseau chose to address the city’s chamber of commerce without speaking French. Rousseau’s gaffe comes as the Quebec government attempts to dramatically strengthen protections for the French language amid fears English is overtaking it, especially in large cities. After his speech, Rousseau told reporters that despite having lived in Montreal for 14 years, he had not learned Quebec’s official language – and dodged questions posed to him in French. “I’ve been able to live in Montreal without speaking French, and I think that’s a testament to the city of Montreal,” he said, adding that his schedule did not allow him time to take French courses. Local outlets have reported that the company, which is headquartered in Montreal, was warned in advance by both the province’s premier and the federal language commissioner that an English-only speech could prompt backlash. But despite a quick apology – and pledge from Rousseau to immediately learn French – the incident has reignited resentments over language rights. For many, the incident evoked the 1950s, when company bosses would speak only English to their workers – and often refuse to allow French to be spoken. Those dynamics helped spark the Quiet Revolution – the bloodless overthrow of Catholicism and the anglophone ruling classes in the province – and a Quebecers separatist movement. “The big boss of Air Canada expresses everything we rejected decades ago: contempt for our language and our culture at home in Quebec. These words are beneath the job he holds,” tweeted Simon Jolin-Barrette, the province’s minister responsible for the French language. Others expressed disbelief that Rousseau, whose mother and wife both speak French, had somehow avoided picking up a conversational ability after more than a decade in the city. “It is possible, but very, very, very difficult to live in Montreal for 15 years and not be able to understand that question. You really have to be actively trying not to pick up a single thing,” tweeted one citizen. Justin Trudeau, the prime minister, called the situation “unacceptable” and various political figures have called for Rousseau to step down. On Monday, Chrystia Freeland wrote to Air Canada’s board, calling the remarks “utterly inconsistent” with the company’s pledge to language diversity after the airline – which was once operated by the government – went private. In the letter shared with the Guardian, the deputy prime minister and finance minister noted that the government still owns 6% of the company’s stock, and called for a “significant” improvement to Rousseau’s French – and for his language skills to be tied to his annual performance review. Canada’s language commissioner usually receives 100 complaints about the airline per year – but since Wednesday, the office has received more than 1,000 complaints, a spokesperson said. The language row also comes under the shadow of legislation pushed by the provincial government that would significantly strengthen language laws. Bill 96 would change the country’s constitution to define Quebec as a nation, with its official and common leagues being French. It would also require all provincial communication with immigrants to be in French, starting six months after they arrive in Quebec. The bill would create a French language ministry and give new powers to the French-language watchdog.Stephen Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, has expressed regret and admitted it was a mistake to try to spare a Tory MP from suspension by ripping up the standards system in a move that sparked a huge backlash from colleagues and the public. He was speaking at the start of a three-hour emergency debate on sleaze and corruption in parliament in which Keir Starmer accused Boris Johnson of giving “the green light to corruption”. (See 4.44m.) Opposition MPs, and even a former Tory chief whip, also criticised Johnson for not being in the Commons himself for the debate; he had an engagement in Northumberland, and No 10 said he could not get back in time because he was travelling by train. Johnson did give a media interview during his visit, but in it he refused point blank to apologise for the Paterson vote last week - even in the mild terms (“regret”, not “apologise”) used by Barclay. (See 1.36pm.) The former health minister James Bethell has conceded that WhatsApp messages he sent at the height of the Covid crisis may have been deleted as he tried to free up memory on his phone. Downing Street has argued that Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, should not investigate who paid for the renovation of Boris Johnson’s flat, in the latest apparent attempt to exert pressure on the independent regulator. Kevin Brennan (Lab) intervenes on a point of order to say Boris Johnson arrived back in London from the north-east at 5pm. He suggests Johnson should come to the Commons now to apologise. In the debate Liz Saville Roberts, the Plaid Cymru leader at Westminster, says she and Adam Price, the party leader, are also writing to the Met police asking for an investigation into whether the Tories have broken the law banning the sale of honours. Mark Harper, the Conservative former chief whip, says that the report into Owen Paterson was clear and unambiguous, and that he thinks the government should schedule a vote of the kind proposed by Chris Bryant. (See 5.54pm.) He says last week’s vote should not have been whipped. Politics is a team game, he says. He says if the team captain expects loyalty, the decisions they take should be sound one. And if the captain gets it wrong, should apologise. That would demonstrate leadership, he says. Harper says Stephen Barclay’s apology (see 3.30pm) was welcome, but his comments made it clear he thinks Boris Johnson should have apologised in person himself. Mark Fletcher (Con), another member of the standards committee, says he thinks Owen Paterson would have been found to have broken the rules whatever the process set up. All the points raised by Paterson and his allies were considered by the committee, he says. Jess Phillips (Lab) says she tells her children, when they have to apologise, that sorry is just a word. She says the real test of an apology is whether it leads to a change in behaviour. And on the issue of the Randox contracts (see 5.03pm), she says she was amazed how easily it was for firms to win contacts during Covid which had not gone out for tender. She says she is speaking as someone who has had to fill in detailed tender process documents, for sums as small as £25,000. Andy Carter, a Conservative member of the standards committee, told MPs in his speech that the committee could reject the findings of the parliamentary commissioner for standards, because that is what happened in the last inquiry into Boris Johnson. He also said the statements from the 17 witnesses offered by Owen Paterson were read and considered carefully. One of the main arguments from Paterson and his allies was that, because the 17 witnesses did not testify in person, their evidence had not been taken seriously. Bryant says there is a need to “tidy up what happened last week”. He says ministers should disband the committee it was going to set up. And, even though Owen Paterson has left the Commons, he says the vote last week left the report into him “hanging in the air”. He reads out the wording for a motion that he would like the Commons to vote on. It would rescind the vote last week, approve the standards committee report, and note that Paterson has been disqualified as an MP. Bob Seely (Con) asks if Bryant thinks the system is fine as it is, or if he thinks it could be improved. Bryant says he thinks Owen Paterson was given a very fair hearing. He says the committee is reviewing the code of conduct. It is meant to do this every parliament, but did not after 2015 and 2017 because they kept holding elections. He says he thinks there is a case for allowing an appeal against the sanction proposed. Craig Mackinlay (Con) asks Bryant to accept that there is a big difference between suspending an MP for 11 days (which could trigger a recall election) and a suspension for nine days (which doesn’t). Bryant accepts the point. But he says sanctions are based on precedent, and if he suggests that if the appeal body considered precedent too, it would probably propose a similar sanction. Bryant says it is claimed there is no right of appeal in the system. But there is, he says. MPs appeal to the committee, which considers whether or not the report from the parliamentary commissioner for standards is right. Sir Bill Cash (Con) says in the Owen Paterson case an investigatory panel should have been set up to resolve the facts. This is a process allowed under the rules (but normally not used). Bryant says those panels are only meant to be used when there are disputed facts. But in this case there were no disputed facts, he says. Chris Bryant, the Labour chair of the standards committee, is speaking now. He says Alberto Costa has often raised process issues in the committee. But often the legal advice given to the committee very strongly disagreed with what he was saying. He says some argue that voters do not care about standards. But even if people don’t care, MPs should, he says. He says in the past MPs have tried to lobby him, as committee chair, over cases. That is wrong, he says. He says the committee is not meant to be a court of law. If it were, MPs would need legal representation. And some of the matters it deals with are too trivial for judges. Alberto Costa (Con), a member of the standards committee, is giving his speech now, and he says the current system is flawed. He says none of the members of the committee are required to have legal training. And he says there is a conflict of interest. The committee has to consider reports from the parliamentary commissioner for standards, and to consider whether to accept or reject them. But the commissioner is also the principle adviser to the committee, he says. He says judges should be involved. And he says the committee, with 14 members, is too large to deal with disciplinary cases. And he says the new system should include a version of the independent expert panel, the new body recently set up to consider appeals and deal with sanctions in the case of MPs accused of bullying or sexual harassment. (These cases used to be heard by the standards committee, but in the light of MeToo, it was decided that it was wrong for MPs to sit in judgment on these allegations.) Here is Pete Wishart’s letter to the Met. Pete Wishart, the SNP spokesman on House of Commons matters, has just told MPs that he has asked the Metropolitan police to investigate whether the Conservative party has broken the 1925 law banning the sale of honours. He says he was prompted by the revelations at the weekend. That is the law under which Tony Blair’s government was investigated by the Met for allegedly selling honours. The inquiry led to Lord Levy, Blair’s chief fundraiser, being arrested, but in the end no one was ever charged, and many people took the view that the Met had over-reached itself. Sir Peter Bottomley, the Conservative father of the Commons (longest-serving MP), told the chamber in the debate that he thought the current rules could and should be made to work. In his party conference speech in September Keir Starmer described Boris Johnson as not a “bad man”, but a “trivial man”. It was an interesting line of attack, counter to the moral condemnation more normally directed at Johnson at Labour conference, but perhaps more persuasive to floating voters. Starmer returned to his line in his peroration, when he said Johnson was “not a serious leader”. (See 5.06pm.) But the rest of the speech (see 4.44pm) implied that Starmer has revised his thinking quite a lot in the past few weeks; it was as if he was saying Johnson is quite a bad man after all. It was a powerful and effective speech, clear and rigorous, and it is not hard to see why Johnson decided he would rather be elsewhere. And here is Starmer’s peroration. Last week the prime minister damaged himself, he damaged his party and he damaged our democracy. He led his party through the sewers and the stench lingers. This week he had the chance to clean up, apologise to the country and finally accept the rules apply to him and his friends. But instead of stepping up he has hidden away. Instead of clearing his mess he has left his side knee deep in it. Instead of leading from the front he has cowered away. He is not a serious leader and the joke isn’t funny anymore. Starmer says the government should start with three commitments. Firstly, work with us to ensure [Rob Roberts, MP for Delyn] faces a recall petition. It is completely unacceptable for a member to be found guilty of sexually harassing junior staff yet avoid the judgment of the electorate on the basis of a loophole. The government has hidden behind that loophole. It’s time to come out of hiding. Secondly, the prime minister needs to agree that no member found guilty of egregious breaches of the MPs’ code of conduct can be recommended for a peerage. The government can’t reward bad behaviour and corruption with a job for life making the laws of the land. Finally, the prime minister must commit to a full and transparent investigation into Randox and government contracts. We know that Randox has been awarded government contracts worth over £600m without competition or tender. We know that [Owen Paterson] lobbied for Randox. We know that he sat in on a call between Randox and the minister responsible for handling health contracts. Starmer says the government keeps trying to weaken the standards system, so its own behaviour is not criticised. But it should change its behaviour instead, he says. He says the PM should have been here himself. Leadership is about taking responsibility. And if there’s an apology to be made, that apology should come from the top, just as the direction came from the top last week to engage in this business in the first place. Aaron Bell was the Conservative MP who said earlier that he had never been threatened with the loss of cash to his constituency for rebelling. (See 4.33pm.) He told Wendy Chamberlain during her speech: I would just like to make it clear that at no stage were any threats of that nature made to me when I broke the whip last week. Starmer cites the recent revelations about how being Conservative party treasurer and donating £3m to the party seems to guarantee a peerage. There is no doubt the Lords needs fundamental reform, he says. Starmer says Labour is willing to work with the government on some things. But it will not work with them “on their plans to weaken standards”. Starmer says it is time to draw a line in the sand, and say enough is enough. The case against Owen Paterson was simple, he says. All MPs have considerable sympathy with Paterson because of what happened to his wife, he says. Paterson was treated fairly, he says. The PM should have told Paterson to accept that what he did was wrong. But instead the public were let down, and Paterson himself. He was use “as a pawn in an extraordinary attack on our commissioner for standards”. Starmer goes on: Threats to have money taken away from schools, hospitals and high streets unless members voted to undermine the commissioner. Ministers sent out on the airwaves the morning after the vote, to call for her to reconsider and consider her position. And a sham committee proposed so the government can set the judge and jury for future cases. This was a deliberate course of action. But the government was caught off guard by the public outcry, and they’ve climbed down. Mr Speaker, this wasn’t a tactical mistake ... It was the prime minister’s way of doing business, a pattern of behaviour. Keir Starmer starts his speech reminding MPs that he used to face Barclay often when they both had the Brexit portfolio. He says Boris Johnson damaged himself and his party last week. He says democracy requires voters to trust politicians. He goes on: But when the prime minister gets the green light to corruption, he corrodes that trust. When he says that the rules to stop vested interest don’t apply to his friends, he corrodes that trust. And when he deliberately undermines those charged with stopping corruption, he corrodes that trust, and that is exactly what the prime minister did last week. Clive Efford (Lab) asks if the government now accepts Owen Paterson behaved badly. Barclay says Paterson has resigned, and therefore suspending him would no longer be appropriate. He ends his speech by saying the government will be listening carefully to what MPs say. Simon Hoare (Con) asks what the status of the motion passed last week is. And which committee will review procedures? Will it be the one set up last week? Barclay says the committee agreed last week will not be able to develop proposals without cross-party support. He says the government will continue discussions across the house. Chris Bryant, the Labour chair of the standards committee, asks if the government will table a motion for debate tomorrow to clear things up effectively rescinding last week’s vote, and endorsing the standards committee report. Barclay says he will listen to the house. But he says Paterson has resigned, and he says Paterson has suffered a serious personal tragedy. He says the government wants to take things forward on a cross-party basis. Peter Kyle (Lab) says Barclay should apologise to constituents living in constituencies where ministers threatened to withdraw funding if the local Tory MP rebelled. Barclay refers Kyle to a Tory MP who intervened earlier who said he received no such threat, despite being a rebel on this. UPDATE: The MP was Aaron Bell. See 4.56pm. Barclay says he wants to express his regret for the “mistake” made by the government last week, when it linked the Owen Paterson case to the issue of wider reform in general. Stephen Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, rises to open for the government. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, says Boris Johnson, and the SNP leader at Westminster, Ian Blackford, both called him earlier to explain why they would not be there. Johnson was visiting a hospital, and Blackford was at Cop26. Hoyle says MPs can make their own minds up about these reasons. But he says he does not want to hear people bringing this up all through the debate. Chamberlain says she wants to know why the Cabinet Office minister, Stephen Barclay, is replying to this debate. What does the Cabinet Office have to do with this? She says the leader of the Commons should be replying. Chamberlain says she finds it hard to believe that Owen Paterson was able to vote on his own case last week. And the votes of MPs currently under investigation were critical, she says. She says changing this must be a priority. Chamerblain says during the Covid pandemic her constituents have had to follow more rules than ever before. But we are ruled by ministers who seem to care less about the rules than any of the predecessors in living memory, she says. She says we need a public inquiry into this. The PM won’t even turn to the debate, she says. She says that is a pity because there is a lot that we do not know about his role. She says the PM has been investigated more than any other MP in recent years. So who stood to benefit from the system being undermined? She says people will draw their own conclusions. She also says the minister, in his reply, needs to specifically address claims that Tory MPs were told their constituencies would lose funding if they did not support the government. Wendy Chamberlain, the Lib Dem chief whip, is opening the debate. That is because this is not a normal debate – opened by a minister one, if it is a government one, or Labour, if it is an opposition day one – but an emergency debate under standing order 24. And Chamberlain applied for this on behalf of the Lib Dems. Chamberlain says she is horrified at the threats being directed at the parliamentary commissioner for standards. I was horrified to learn that the commissioner for standards has received death threats, that is appalling. No one should receive death threats for doing their job. The role of commissioner for standards was one of the key ways that we moved beyond previous scandals. The role is not political, the commissioner was appointed by this House to do a job and that is what she has done and continues to do. The actions of the government last week have tarnished this house’s reputation. Labour’s Tan Dhesi intervenes, describing Boris Johnson as a “tin pot dictator” who is “mired in sleaze”. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, objects. His appeal for MPs to avoid party-political sniping (see 4.11pm) is being ignored already. Hoyle says he granted today’s debate because he thought it was the best way to sort out the mess they were in. I granted this debate today because I thought it was essential to sort out the mess we’re in. We can start to do that today but it requires two things for us all – to tone down the party political sniping and focus calmly on making sure the system is as effective as it can be, and for everyone to recognise if we’re going to achieve progress we’ll only do so on a cross-party basis. And he says MPs should not make allegations of impropriety against each other unless they are doing so on a substantive motion. Hoyle says MPs should not criticise Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, “that we have appointed”. Hoyle says he is required to maintain strict neutrality. That means allowing amendments that have significant support, whatever he thinks about them. He says Owen Paterson has resigned as an MP. But he says the house has not reached a decision on the standards committee report into Paterson. A new standards committee report on the standards system is due soon. He says, if the Commons wants to review the system, opposition parties must participate. That means the committee MPs voted to set up last week, chaired by John Whittingdale, cannot operate. Sir Lindsay Hoyle is now making a short statement ahead of the sleaze debate. Yesterday the Sunday Times reported that Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Commons Speaker, was expected to announce today plans for an independent review of the Commons standards regime. It was a surprising claim, given that the Commons standards committee is close to publishing its own report on this very topic, which MPs are expected to debate in the new year. But the Speaker’s office did not deny the story, which suggests it was well founded. Now, according to Tom Newton Dunn of Times Radio, if Hoyle was planning a review of his own, he has had second thoughts. There have been 114 Covid cases in parliament in the last month, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reports. That won’t just be among MPs. There are 650 MPs, but several thousand people working on the parliamentary estate. Yesterday Simon Coveney, the Irish foreign minister, became the latest figure to suggest that, if the UK triggers article 16, suspending aspects of the Northern Ireland protocol, the EU could retaliate by suspending its entire free trade deal with the EU. Today Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, said that he did not think the EU would take such a step. In comments reminiscent of Brexiter claims circa 2017 about the the likely influence of BMW manufacturers in the Brussels negotiations with the UK, Donaldson said: The EU does a lot of trade with the United Kingdom. Germany, the biggest trading nation in the EU, the United Kingdom is its biggest market in Europe, it’s the second biggest market for Germany in the whole world. Does anyone seriously believe that the Germans want to open a trade war with the United Kingdom? That’s not the answer here. The answer is to sit around the table and agree a solution. If the EU can’t do that, if the EU prefers instead to choose rhetoric, to choose a trade war over the need to protect the political process in Northern Ireland, then I’m sad about that. But it means the UK government then must take decisive action to restore Northern Ireland’s place within the UK internal market and respect what the Belfast Agreement says - that Northern Ireland remains an integral part of the United Kingdom, unless the people of Northern Ireland decide otherwise. But Colum Eastwood, the SDLP leader, said today he thought triggering article 16 could lead to the entire UK-EU trade deal, the trade and cooperation agreement, unravelling. He said: If you’re the European Union or any country around the world and you enter into an agreement with another country, say for example the United Kingdom, if they continue to not live up to their responsibilities around a deal we have no trust, these trade agreements need trust to be at the heart of them. What I’m really worried about is we have a reckless prime minister, we’ve Lord Frost who is absolutely ideological about this stuff, and they are not serious about doing a deal [on the protocol]. That means there’s no trust between the European Commission, European Union and the British government. How can we, on that footing, expect for things not to unravel further? The best thing to do is for people to be serious about the issues, sit down and resolve them in an adult fashion. But this kind of megaphone diplomacy threatening to trigger article 16 - what does article 16 actually do? It has a further negotiation. Why don’t we negotiate in the negotiation we’re in right now, that’s the best way to solve the problems. Ipsos Mori has released its latest political monitor (pdf), with full details of the polling in the Evening Standard today. (See 11.14am.) Here are some of the key charts. And here are some charts from Dylan Spielman, an Ipsos Mori researcher, based on the latest data. George Freeman, the science minister, has had a bad case of Covid, he says on Twitter. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Commons Speaker, has told Sky News that he hopes today’s debate will allow the Commons to move forward. He said: I don’t want another week like [last week], we’ve got to move forward, This house matters to me, the MPs matter, the people who work here matter to me, and what I don’t want is another dark week like last week. I want to make sure the public have faith in parliamentarians and faith in the House of Commons, and today’s debate will be painful, but the one thing is, it’s got to cleanse the house to move forward. This is from Keir Starmer on Boris Johnson’s failure to apologise for his handling of the Owen Paterson vote last week. (See 12.59pm.) Boris Johnson does not have the decency either to defend or apologise for his actions. Rather than repairing the damage he has done, the prime minister is running scared. When required to lead, he has chosen to hide. His concern, as always, is self-preservation not the national interest. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, and Lord Bethell, the Conservative former health minister, have been arguing on Twitter about what she has said about his involvement in the awarding of Covid contracts. Here are the highlights. A Scottish anti-independence campaign group was given £46,000 from an obscure organisation that might have breached political fundraising guidelines, my colleagues Niamh McIntyre and Severin Carrell report. Turning back to the No 10 lobby briefing, here is a full summary of what was said. The prime minister’s spokesman said Boris Johnson could not attend today’s Commons debate covering sleaze/corruption allegations because he had a “long-standing” diary commitment to be in Northumberland. The appointment was scheduled before it was known the debate was taking place today, the spokesman said. No 10 signalled that Johnson would not be able to be able to return to London in time for the debate because the rail timetable did not allow this. When it was pointed out that Johnson took a private jet last week to return to London from Glasgow for a reunion dinner with his former Daily Telegraph colleagues, the spokesman said he had given reasons for that flight last week. (The spokesman mentioned “security and time restraints” as factors last week.) When it was put to him that if Johnson really wanted to attend the debate, of course he could arrange to be there, the spokesman said: All I’m saying is ... we think the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster [Stephen Barclay], whose department has the lead in this area, is the right person to lead. The spokesman also indicated that Johnson’s travel plans meant he was unlikely to be watching the debate live on the TV in his office, as Anne-Marie Trevelyan suggested this morning he would be. (See 9.07am.) When it was put to him that, by travelling to the other end of England and not even watching the debate, Johnson was doing his best to ignore it, the spokesman said: “No, I wouldn’t accept that.” No 10 refused to back the claim by George Eustice, the environment secretary yesterday, that the row over the Paterson vote was a “storm in a teacup”. Asked about this, the spokesman said: We fully recognise the strong feeling on all sides of the House on this. The spokesman seemed to rule out the government putting forward its own plans to reform the standards regime now, saying it wanted reform to go ahead on a cross-party basis. The spokesman suggested that the parliamentary commissioner for standards would have no right to investigate the refurbishment of the PM’s Downing Street flat. Financial support with this was declared in the ministerial register. The spokesman said interests declared in the ministerial register did not need to be “double declared” in the MPs’s register too. He said this was clearly a ministerial matter, “as the PM only occupies [the flat] by virtue of his office”. The spokesman refused to say what the PM would do if the parliamentary commissioner for standards did order him to declare the flat refurbishment in the MPs’ register. That was a “large hypothetical situation which I’m not going to comment on”, the spokesman said. The spokesman did not rule out Johnson returning to Glasgow for the end of the Cop26 conference at the end of this week. And here are full quotes from Boris Johnson’s comments to the media in Northumberland. Johnson refused to apologise for his handling of the Owen Paterson vote last week. The first time he was asked if he would apologise, he ignored the question completely. When he was asked again, he said: What we’ve got to make sure is that we take all this very, very seriously and that we get it right. And there’s a debate today - unfortunately I can’t be there because I have a long-standing engagement up here - but Labour want to focus on a particular case, a particular MP who suffered a serious personal tragedy and who’s now resigning ... Frankly, I don’t think there’s much more to be said about that particular case, I really don’t. But what we do need to do is look also at the process that is. That is what we were trying to do last week. He said he hoped the Speaker would launch an attempt to reach cross-party agreement on a way forward, “including an appeals process for very difficult and very sad cases, such as the one we’ve seen”. He said he did not accept the charge that, having been in office for more than two years, he only took an interest in changing the system when one of his MPs was under threat. He refused to say whether or not he favoured banning MPs from doing consultancy work. Asked about this proposal, he said: “All those kind of things are issues that the Speaker’s panel - whatever he is going to set up - will have a look at.” He denied being someone who thought the rules did not apply to him. Asked if he thought that, he replied: “No, of course not.” He said there has been no discussion of giving Paterson a peerage - but he would not rule out the prospect. (See 1.04pm.) Johnson refused to answer a question about why, over the past seven years, almost every Conservative party treasurer has been given a peerage. In response, he said wanted to focus on booster vaccines. He said booster jabs were necessary because “sadly” the effectiveness of vaccines does wane. He said he was encouraging people to book a booster, taking advantage of the rule change coming into force today allowing people to make the booking for a booster a month before they are actually eligible for it. The final question in the interview was about the prospect of Owen Paterson getting a peerage. Q: Can you rule out Owen Paterson getting a peerage? Johnson said: “There’s been absolutely no discussion of that.” That is a less categorical denial than government sources were giving yesterday on Johnson’s behalf. Sky News is broadcasting the interview Boris Johnson has given at a hospital in Northumberland. He starts by speaking about the booster jab programme. He is encouraging people to get one. Q: Will you apologise for what happened with the Owen Paterson vote last week? Johnson says there is a debate today. He cannot be there because he has a longstanding engagement. He says Paterson suffered a serious personal tragedy (the death of his wife by suicide last year). He says he does not think there is more to say about the case. He says he thinks the Speaker wants to have a cross-party look at how they can look at the case for appeals in difficult case. Q: So you are not going to apologise? Johnson says he wants to get this right. The government is focused on getting this right, he says. Q: How do you respond to John Major who said your handling of this case was shameful. Do the rules not not apply to you? Johnson says of course not. There is no more to say about the Paterson case, he says. Q: Over the past few years every Conservative treasurer has been given a peerage. How do you explain that? Johnson says he want to focus on booster vaccines. It has also been announced that Sajid Javid, the health secretary, will make a Commons statement on the David Fuller necrophilia case at 3.30pm. That means the debate on sleaze/standards/corruption will not start until around 4.30pm. The Speaker’s office has confirmed that Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, will make a statement ahead of the debate starting in the Commons this afternoon. Hoyle said: Last week did not show our democracy in the best light. I hope today’s debate will give members the chance to express their views and help us move forward. I also hope MPs will consider their language to get the right message across. Barack Obama, the former US president, has arrived at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow. There is more coverage on our Cop26 live blog. The Downing Street lobby briefing is over, and the prime minister’s spokesman has confirmed that Boris Johnson will not be speaking in, or attending, the sleaze/standards/corruption debate in the Commons this afternoon. And he won’t be watching it on the TV in his office afterwards; he is on a visit to a hospital in the north-east. No 10 signalled that he would not be able to be able to return to London in time for the debate because the rail timetable did not allow this. When journalists pointed out that last week Johnson took a private jet so that he could return from the Cop26 conference in Glasgow for a private reunion dinner with former Daily Telegraph leader writers, the spokesman claimed that that was different and that last week other factors applied. It is all slightly reminiscent of when Johnson, as foreign secretary, flew off to Afghanistan so that he could conveniently miss a Commons vote on the Heathrow third runway which the government was implementing but which he had always vowed to oppose. In a further effort to downgrade the significance of the debate, No 10 announced that Stephen Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, will be responding from the government. Yesterday government sources indicated it would be Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, and this morning Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the international trade secretary, also said she expected Rees-Mogg to be putting the government’s case in the debate. It is not hard to see the rationale for this. Rees-Mogg is constantly provocative, and his performance in the debate last week angered many Tories, as well as the opposition. By contrast, Barclay is the news equivalent of a fire blanket; he could make an announcement about the end of the world sound dull. If No 10 want to push the debate down the news agenda for tonight’s TV bulletins, Barclay’s the man for the job. I will post a full summary of the lobby briefing shortly. Here are two polling experts on the latest polling figures from Ipsos Mori. (See 11.14am.) These are from Matt Singh, founder of Number Cruncher Politics. MoE is margin of error. And these are from Rob Ford, a politics professor at Manchester University The Commons home affairs committee has published a report today approving the appointment of Julia Mulligan as the next chair of the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority. The Progressive Unionist party, which is politically aligned to the paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force, has declared there is “no basis” for unionists to continue to support Northern Ireland’s Good Friday peace agreement. The PUP leader, Billy Hutchinson, who was one of the negotiators central to the 1998 peace accord, described the historic deal as containing a “deceptive snare” in a six-page statement on Monday. He said the peace process flowing from the agreement had not faithfully observed the text of the accord and had instead led to an incremental weakening of the union by delivering repeated concessions to nationalists. But he pledged to “continue to work constructively with leaders of all other unionist parties” to “secure the removal of the intolerable and constitutionally damaging protocol”. He also called for the Northern Ireland Act to be strengthened to cement the country’s place in the United Kingdom. He said: It is my view that if, as is currently the case, the constitutional guarantee is not as was promised to the unionist community, then there is no basis for unionist support for the Belfast agreement. He insisted the PUP remained “firm and dedicated” supporters of peace in Northern Ireland. His statement comes after a second bus was torched in a week in Northern Ireland in what police described as a “terrifying” attack for passengers ordered off the double decker on Sunday night. New polling from Ipsos Mori suggests the Conservatives have lost their lead in the polls, the Evening Standard reports. In his story on the findings, the Standard’s Nicholas Cecil says the poll figures also show that “for the first since [Boris] Johnson gained the keys to Downing Street, a majority of adults in Britain disagree that he has what it takes to be a good prime minister”. Cecil goes on: Fifty-five per cent of adults disagree that Mr Johnson has what it take to be a good prime minister, with 34 per cent saying he does, giving him a net score of -21. This is a sharp drop from +2 in June, and the lowest score since June 2019, a month before he walked into No 10. Forty-one per cent do not believe Sir Keir has what it takes to be a good prime minister, with 25 per cent thinking he does, a net score of -16, up from -24 in June. Sixty-one per cent of people say they are dissatisfied with Mr Johnson, and 34 per satisfied, giving a net score of -27, a big drop from -12 in September. It also equals his lowest satisfaction rating as PM, which was last October. Perhaps most worryingly of all for the PM, Cecil also reports that most of the fieldwork for this poll was conducted before the Owen Paterson vote debacle. The Conservative MP Richard Graham has just told BBC News that he supports calls to change the rule that allows an MP facing a disciplinary sanction to take part in the Commons vote on whether or not that punishment should be enforced (as Owen Paterson did last week). Asked if this was right, Graham said it was an “odd” rule and he went on: “There are a number of things in the process that will need to be reviewed, and that’s certainly one of them.” This is an issue that has been highlighted in particular by the Lib Dems, who requested today’s emergency debate on standards. Wendy Chamberlain, the Lib Dem chief whip, said: It beggars belief that Owen Paterson was able to vote on his own suspension ... It’s the equivalent of defendants in a court case also taking part in the jury. Alberto Costa, a Conservative MP and a member of the Commons standards committee, told Sky News this morning that he favoured a change to the way complaints about MPs are investigated. He said he did not think MPs should sit in judgment on their colleagues, as they do now. (That’s because the standards committee recommends what should happen if MPs have broken the rules, although now half of the committee’s members are non-MPs.) He said he thought judges should take the final decision. He told Sky News: The problem lies with the Commons own rules and I’ve argued with Chris [Bryant, the standards committee chair] over many months that the rules need to change. I don’t think MPs should be adjudicating on issues against other MPs. Let the commissioner present her face to judges and let them be the ultimate arbiters. Up until recently, I was the only lawyer on that committee. The standards committee has to improve to ensure we have a much more transparent system where he adopts as much as possible to mirror a court of law. I think it’s high time Chris listens to me and we bring in judges as we have done as an independent expert panel. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, is set to meet army leaders to address culture concerns in the British military, PA Media reports. PA says: Wallace told the BBC that the concerns include the sexual harassment of women in the British army. It comes following a report into the bullying and sexual harassment of women in the armed forces led by Tory MP and former soldier Sarah Atherton. Atherton’s report found that almost two thirds of women had experienced bullying, sexual harassment and discrimination while serving in the Army. The report, made up of the findings of interviews with more than 4,000 servicewomen and female veterans, also included accounts of rape or sex for advancement. Nearly 40% of 993 women asked reported that their experience of the complaints system was “extremely poor”. Six out of 10 women said they had not reported bullying, harassment or discrimination due to a lack of faith in the system. There are more than 20,000 women currently serving in the armed forces. In a statement, the army said it was working with the defence secretary to “drive out unacceptable behaviour at all levels”. “The secretary of state is determined to work with the army’s leadership to drive out unacceptable behaviour at all levels, particularly with respect to the treatment of women,” an army spokesperson said. “The army’s core value of respect for others must underpin everything it delivers on behalf of the nation, whether in the United Kingdom or operating around the world.” And here are some more lines on the topic of sleaze/standards from Anne-Marie Trevelyan’s interview round this morning interview round. Trevelyan, the international trade secretary, implied there was a case for banning MPs from having political consultancy jobs. This is significant because the cross-party standards committee is looking at this issue, and may well recommend such a ban within weeks. It was not clear to what extent Trevelyan was putting across a government view, and to what extent she was freelancing (just giving a personal opinon), but she made the point more than once, implying this was a message she wanted to convey. She told Sky News: I think the question of whether MPs having jobs that involve lobbying, I think, perhaps should be looked at again. MPs are already supposed to be banned from paid lobbying, but there is a loophole that allows lobbying if it will expose a “serious wrong” and MPs are allowed to give consultancy advice that helps companies with their own lobbying, as long as they do not actually pick up the phone themselves. Later Trevelyan told Today: We should never rule out completely second jobs [for MPs] ... The question is, are we looking at second jobs or specifically some types of consultancy. Personally, I think we should look at that. I’m very comfortable with looking at that. She said she did not think there was a wider problem with corruption in public life. She told BBC Breakfast: The standards system that we have looks into individual situations where they come up, and those have been dealt with, and, indeed, the debate this afternoon will continue again. I don’t consider that there’s a need for an inquiry into something. Why? Because I don’t think there is a wider problem here. Trevelyan was explaining why she did not back the Lib Dem call for a public inquiry into the recent sleaze and corruption allegations. She said she did not expect Owen Paterson to get a peerage. This was the line coming out of No 10 yesterday, after the PM’s spokesperson refused to rule it out at a lobby briefing on Friday. She said she expected Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, to stay in her job. She said: “She will continue to do her job and I’m [in] no doubt she will.” Only last Thursday Trevelyan’s cabinet colleague Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, was implying Stone should resign. Trevelyan said she herself has received death threats. She was responding to a question about how Stone herself has been given extra protection because of threats she has received. She defended the way key Conservative donors have been given peerages, saying people put in the House of Lords have “usually done enormously good work”. At the weekend research was published showing that Conservative party treasurers who give at least £3m to the party seem to be guaranteed a peerage. Trevelyan said all main parties have put business donors into the Lords. She said: We have an incredible system in the UK where we don’t ask the state to fund the our political parties and if we didn’t have the private donations that come through from donors large and small - in my constituency, people donate 25 a year and donors who can provide more, do more - if we didn’t do that the taxpayer would be funding political activity. I think our UK system is uniquely well-placed to ensure that we get this broad stretch ... the unions fund a great deal of the Labour Party’s activity, again that’s from many, many small voices, and then some large ones too. It’s a mix which brings a real depth of voices to our political parties across the piste. She said she had only had a few emails from constituents about last week’s vote to shelve the proposal to suspend Paterson for breaking lobbying rules. She said: My postbag mostly reflects people who are frustrated by local issues, questions of accessing vaccines, anxieties about those sorts of issues, and indeed, local questions about how they can make progress with housing in my patch. So I’ve had a few emails with concerns about the way the debate went last week. I wasn’t there, so I wasn’t able to comment directly. Good morning. MPs will this afternoon hold a three-hour debate on sleaze, or rather on “the consequences of the decision of the house of 3 November relating to standards”, as the motion more coyly put it. Last night Labour announced that Keir Starmer would be leading for his party, and it challenged Boris Johnson to turn up to. “Boris Johnson needs to attend this debate, answer for his mistakes apologise to the country and take action to undo the damage he has done,” Starmer said, in a statement best described as an aspiration rather than an expectation. (Johnson is even more allergic to apologising than most politicians.) The Lib Dems, who called for today’s emergency debate, have also got their own improbable request; they want Johnson to launch a public inquiry into all the sleaze allegations dogging his government. Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the international trade secretary, has been doing the morning interview round and, when she was asked on Sky News if Johnson would attend the debate, she said she did not know. (Yesterday government sources were saying Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, would speak for the government, but that was before Labour said they were putting up Starmer.) Asked if Johnson should be speaking, Trevelyan replied: My opinion would be that no, he shouldn’t be there. He will no doubt, as we all do, have the House of Commons on in his office as he’s dealing with many, many other issues that only the prime minister can deal with. And he will get a briefing of the key issues raised by colleagues from across the house later. Here is the agenda for the day. 11.30am: Downing Street holds its lobby briefing. 3.15pm: The IFS and the Resolution Foundation give evidence to the Commons Treasury committee about the budget. After 3.30pm: MPs begin their emergency three-hour debate on Commons standards. 4pm: Michael Gove, the levelling up secretary, gives evidence to the Commons housing committee (it hasn’t changed its name yet to reflect the name change at Gove’s department). Johnson is also on a visit this morning, and is expected to record a broadcast interview that will be out around lunchtime. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comThe legitimacy of the Cop26 climate summit was called into question by a number of organisations that said restrictions on access to negotiations were unprecedented. Groups said that being shut out of key negotiations would have dire consequences for millions of people. October 2021 was the third warmest in recorded history, according to the EU’s Earth observation programme Copernicus, with temperatures 0.42C higher than the 1991 to 2020 average. The fossil fuel industry has the largest delegation at Cop26, according to campaigners, who say the sector has a bigger group than any other country. Analysis of the UN’s provisional list of attenders suggest 503 delegates have affiliations to oil, gas or coal firms. Barack Obama called on world leaders to “step up now” and criticised China and Russia for a “dangerous absence of urgency” on the climate crisis. He also says some version of Biden’s ambitious $555bn (£409bn) climate package will pass in Congress in the coming weeks. But China is doing more for the climate than it is given credit for, according to a senior Beijing adviser who said the country already has concrete actions in place, not distant targets like other countries. Meanwhile, protesters gathered in Glasgow for the Scientist Rebellion protest. The group has been banned from the city centre after blocking a bridge over the weekend, when 21 activists were arrested. One academic said not acting on the climate crisis “might just be the worst crime in human history”. Police broke into a building providing shelter for climate activists and delegates in the early hours of this morning, occupants say. The squatted building in Glasgow – called Baile Hoose – was providing emergency accommodation for delegates who are unable to find a place to stay for the summit. Survivors of extreme weather associated with the climate crisis have been speaking out at Cop26 on the day the summit focuses on “loss and damage”. Many people say they remain in the same vulnerable places where loved ones died and are now living in fear. Rich countries’ refusal to discuss loss and damage is “diplomatic bullying”, says Bolivia’s chief negotiator, Diego Pacheco Balanza. He said there has been a systematic attempt by developed countries to remove all discussion about compensation and direct climate finance from the negotiations. Rich countries must come up with emissions reduction plans and money to help developing nations deal with the climate emergency, says European Commission vice-president Frans Timmermans. Dutch MEP Bas Eickhout said that Australia’s climate pledge is “literally a brochure”. Finally, African nations want to start open discussions at Cop26 about channelling $700bn (£520bn) every year from 2025 to help them deal with the climate crisis.Sanjeev Gupta’s business empire is being investigated by prosecutors in Paris in another blow to the steel tycoon. GFG Alliance, an informal group of metals and energy companies including Liberty Steel, has faced a litany of challenges since the collapse in March of its key lender, Greensill Capital. The collapse triggered a scramble for a new source of financing for Gupta’s companies, as well as investigations by the UK’s Serious Fraud Office and German regulators. GFG’s interests range from Liberty, a UK steelmaker that employs 3,000 people, to aluminium, mining and energy companies as far afield as Singapore, the US and Australia. The group says it employs as many as 35,000 people worldwide with combined annual revenues of £15bn, although it does not produce consolidated accounts. The Paris prosecutor’s office on Monday confirmed it had opened its investigation into “various operations within GFG” on 23 July into allegations of “misuse of corporate assets” and “money laundering”. The investigation will be handled by France’s central office for combating corruption and tax offences, a spokesperson said. A GFG Alliance spokesperson said: “GFG is not aware of any such investigation and refutes any suggestion of wrongdoing in its French operations.” A report by British MPs last week raised a series of concerns over Gupta’s leadership of GFG, including corporate governance, unusual funding and company structures, and a series of accounting “red flags”. GFG denied Gupta had not met his obligations as a director, after the MPs said the Insolvency Service should investigate. GFG’s French assets include Europe’s largest primary aluminium smelter, situated in Dunkirk, northern France. The smelter is the subject of a legal dispute with American Industrial Partners, a US private equity firm that claimed ownership after an alleged default on debt by GFG. The Financial Times, which first reported the existence of the French investigation, said the French prosecutors were looking at a deal between GFG and FTSE 100 commodities company Glencore to refinance the smelter, as well as a government-supported loan for another plant in Poitou, central France. GFG’s spokesperson said: “There was a commercial agreement with Glencore at market rates to secure stable financing for the business. “We abided by all the rules and invested €45m [£39m] of shareholder funds into French downstream assets including Poitou while under our ownership.” Glencore said it “entered into arm’s length commercial arrangements with Dunkirk which were actively negotiated and were the subject of due diligence and review”. GFG added that there were no outstanding liabilities to a plant at Ascoval, which it sold in August to German steel company Stahl-Holding-Saar as Gupta tried to stabilise his group. The French government had in March loaned €20m to the Ascoval works.And after all that, it turned out it was Eddie Howe all along. When the Saudis took over Newcastle United on 7 October, Howe was immediately mooted as a realistic short-term appointment. He is young, likable, plays attacking football and has recent experience in the Premier League. Perhaps he wouldn’t be the ultimate long-term choice, the manager to take Newcastle to Champions League glory, but then perhaps he would. He is only 43, and there was plenty of promise in his time at Bournemouth. He would, at the very least, have been a viable short-term solution. And Howe may yet thrive. It’s absurd to dismiss him, as some have, as the man who took Bournemouth down. He was also the man who took the south-coast club from the fourth tier into the Premier League and kept them there for five years despite a limited budget, while playing football generally considered attractive. But a month later, his appointment – finally confirmed on Monday – feels troubling. It’s nothing to do with Howe, as such; more the process that has led to his arrival. Steve Bruce was not sacked immediately but stayed on for two weeks in which Newcastle played one match, the 3-2 defeat by Tottenham. After which the club cycled through a bewildering array of candidates – Lucien Favre, Paulo Fonseca, Roberto Martínez, Rafa Benítez, Brendan Rodgers and then, this week, Unai Emery – while failing to win two further games under Graeme Jones. Emery was an appointment that seemed to make sense. It would have been a risk in that his successes have all been in Spain, and stints in Russia, France and England have all in some way disappointed. He has Premier League experience and is adept at forging a hard-to-beat structure from less-than-brilliant players. Given his remarkable record in knockout competitions, he might even have made a run in the FA Cup a serious possibility. But that deal was scuppered by being briefed too early, enraging Villarreal and unsettling Emery. It highlighted a recurring theme of the past few weeks: a lack of football expertise at Newcastle. It may be that the takeover, for all that it came 18 months after it was first mooted, happened too suddenly – before anybody had a chance to lay out chains of command or sound out a director of football. Michael Emenalo, formerly of Chelsea, emerged as a contender for that post soon after Howe’s appointment. There appears to be confusion over who is leading operations – with the Reubens, the Staveleys and the Saudi majority shareholders (who reportedly interviewed Emenalo last week) at times apparently pulling in different directions – and a lack of familiarity about how football conducts its business. Is there any plan, any sense of a guiding philosophy? How do the owners want Newcastle to play? Favre has used a high press in a very structured way, while Emery prefers a low block, looking to frustrate the opposition and strike on the break. Would they favour a back four as Paulo Fonseca played at Roma and Shakhtar, or a back three as Martínez uses with Belgium? Or retaining possession as Howe tended to at Bournemouth? What were the selection criteria? It’s very hard to see a link between the proposed candidates, beyond somebody people have heard of who would actually come. So Howe takes over with everybody knowing he was not first choice, and quite possibly not even second or third. The example of Nuno Espírito Santo at Tottenham shows how dangerous that can be. But whoever had got the job would face an extremely difficult task. How, after all, do you get buy-in from players who must be aware that the likelihood is they will soon be replaced? Come on, Jonjo, give 110% so we can stay up and afford to buy somebody less prone to daft red cards. Sweat blood, Joelinton, so we can sign a forward who scores more than once every 10 games. Ho’way, Dwight, get stuck in so we can get somebody people don’t assume is still playing for West Brom. Howe represents something of a gamble in that his previous stint away from Bournemouth, at Burnley between January 2011 and October 2012, was broadly unspectacular. He left for “personal reasons” – although his last game was a 4-3 defeat at Crystal Palace that left Burnley 16th in the Championship. But having negotiated the chaos of administration in his first spell, his second stint at Bournemouth was spectacular as he led them from League One to the Premier League. Keeping a club of Bournemouth’s stature in the top flight for five seasons is an achievement however it was done, but if there was a criticism it was that they were always very open defensively. Even in 2016-17, when they finished ninth, they conceded 67 goals. Across their five-year stay in the Premier League, they let in an average of 1.74 goals per game. That is, admittedly, significantly better than the 2.3 goals per game Newcastle have been leaking this season, but it does raise questions about how well suited Howe is to the immediate task of sorting out a defence yet to keep a clean sheet this season. But then there are challenges everywhere with this Newcastle squad: they are over-reliant on Allan Saint-Maximin and the injury-prone Callum Wilson, who shone under Howe at Bournemouth. Behind them, the midfield isn’t great and none of the three goalkeepers seems capable of staying fit for more than a month at a time. Put like that, and given Newcastle are six points adrift of the last safe spot with a very tough December set of fixtures to come, perhaps the lack of philosophical vision makes sense: maybe settling for somebody who would actually sign the contract was the best they could do.Safety advice that has left thousands of households unable to sell their homes after the Grenfell Tower fire will be withdrawn by Christmas, Michael Gove has announced. The secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities told MPs the government would revoke advice that has stood since January 2020 and has led to hundreds of low-rise buildings being deemed unsafe, meaning mortgage companies refused to lend against them. The advice note introduced by the government called for building owners to check cladding systems on all blocks, regardless of their height. Previously, checks were only needed on buildings over 18 metres tall where the difficulty evacuating from a fire created a risk to life. Gove told MPs: “The government has a responsibility to make buildings safe, but we also have a responsibility to relieve some of the obligations faced by leaseholders at the moment who are innocent parties in this and in many circumstances are being asked to pay disproportionate sums when there are individuals in business, some of them still in business, who are guilty men and women.” He also announced that he had “paused” a planned scheme to lend leaseholders money to pay for repairs found to be necessary after Grenfell, saying he was unhappy with leaseholders footing the bill and that he was seeking a “polluter pays” approach for covering cladding and other fire safety costs. In evidence to the Commons select committee on levelling up, housing and communities, he also admitted that in the years before the Grenfell Tower fire, the government made mistakes on fire safety. In the coming months, the public inquiry into the disaster will examine the role of government ministers and officials in the coming months. Gove said: “The deregulation of assessment [of building materials] and the way in which it was done was mistaken, and I also think that the department itself will be seen to have, on a couple of occasions, not necessarily appreciated the importance of fire safety and not necessarily done everything in the wake of the Lakanal House tragedy [a 2009 tower block fire where six people died] that it should have done.” He admitted: “We collectively, the department, some in local government, others in the private sector, failed people at Grenfell.” But he said he wanted a better assessment of which buildings actually were at high risk of fire and he wanted to “minimise risk in lower-risk buildings without creating a situation where people can’t move and cannot access mortgage finance”. Campaigners for leaseholders affected by the building safety crisis, which has left homeowners across England facing bills totalling over £15bn according to some estimates, welcomed the decision to finally change the advice on what constitutes a risky building. “We are hopeful [it] will relieve a lot of the pressure on many of the buildings, but we need to see what replaces it, and the mortgage companies and insurers need to buy into the process,” said Giles Grover, a spokesperson for the End Our Cladding Scandal campaign. Florence Eshalomi, MP for Vauxhall, told Gove her constituents were sharing bills of £5,000 a month for waking watch patrols to check for fires, and Gove said these were “not the only rip-off in the system”. He drew a parallel between firms that were responsible for causing problems and advisers now saying leaseholders need to pay large sums to make their homes safe. He said that some companies now proposing to fix buildings, sometimes at a cost of over £100,000 per leaseholder, “have seen an opportunity to make money for themselves”.